
Rising waters have knocked out roads and several highways in northeastern Australia, trapping motorists, marooning entire towns and driving thousands from their homes as flooding stretched into its second week on Saturday. More than 200,000 people have been affected so far by the floods, local news media reported.        

The dangerous floodwaters that have spread across roughly half the state of Queensland, on the continent&rsquo;s northeastern coast, showed no sign of retreating on Saturday as river surges continued to make their way toward the sea.        

On Friday, the city of Rockhampton, near the coast, was bracing for major flooding, with officials warning that the Fitzroy River, which runs through the city&rsquo;s center, could reach levels not seen since 1918 by Tuesday. Roughly 30,000 residents in Rockhampton could be affected, officials said.        

Mayor Brad Carter urged people to evacuate, and news reports said hundreds already had.        

The flooding began last week as Cyclone Tasha crashed into the northeastern coast. While the heaviest rains have abated, wet weather continued in parts of the state on Saturday and the Australian Bureau of Meteorology forecast little reprieve. Flood warnings were in effect for a dozen rivers around the northeastern Australian state into the new year.        

&ldquo;This disaster is a long way from over,&rdquo; said Anna Bligh, the Queensland premier, as she toured flood-ravaged areas with Prime Minister Julia Gillard on Friday, The Sydney Morning Herald reported. Ms. Bligh warned that some towns could remain saturated for days and that cleanup efforts could cost billions of dollars.        

About 300,000 square miles have been affected by the flooding, officials told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.        

The government has sent Blackhawk helicopters and other military aircraft to assist in the evacuation and relief effort, dropping supplies to trapped towns, officials said.        

At an evacuation center in the town of Bundaberg, where hundreds of homes and businesses were inundated, Ms. Gillard announced disaster relief payments &mdash; $1,000 per adult and $400 per child &mdash; for families whose homes had been damaged by the floods, The Associated Press reported Friday.        

The flooding also affected Queensland&rsquo;s inland coal mines, damaging one of Australia&rsquo;s major export industries. High waters cut road and rail links and forced the mining giant Rio Tinto to declare emergency exemptions from some sales contracts.        

The heavy rain may have had its origins in colder waters gathering in the equatorial region of the Pacific Ocean, a regularly occurring event known as La Ni&ntilde;a that alters weather patterns, said Anthony J. Broccoli, a professor of climate and environmental sciences at Rutgers University. &ldquo;Northeastern Australia tends to be wetter during La Ni&ntilde;a events,&rdquo; he said.        

The disaster risked hampering New Year celebrations for thousands, and the police urged revelers to be on their best behavior.        

&ldquo;It would be a tragedy to have to divert critical resources away from the flood event to respond to irresponsible behavior,&rdquo; said Brett Pointing, assistant commissioner of the Queensland Police Service.        
