
TOBRUK, Libya &mdash; Vowing to track down and kill protesters &ldquo;house by house,&rdquo; Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya tightened his grip on the capital, Tripoli, on Tuesday, but the eastern half of the country was slipping beyond his control.        

A bloody crackdown drove protesters from the streets of Tripoli, where residents described a state of terror. After a televised speech by Colonel Qaddafi, thousands of his supporters converged in the city&rsquo;s central Green Square, wearing green bandannas and brandishing large machetes.        

Many loaded into trucks headed for the outlying areas of the city, where they occupied traffic intersections and appeared to be massing for neighborhood-to-neighborhood searches.        

&ldquo;It looks like they have been given a green light to kill these people,&rdquo; one witness said.        

Human Rights Watch said it had confirmed 62 deaths in two hospitals after a rampage on Monday night, when witnesses said groups of heavily armed militiamen and mercenaries from other African countries cruised the streets in pickup trucks, spraying crowds with machine-gun fire.        

The death toll was probably higher; one witness said militia forces appeared to be using vans to cart away bodies.        

But as they clamped down on the capital, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s security forces did not appear to make any attempt to take back the growing number of towns in the east that had in effect declared their independence and set up informal opposition governments. For now, there is little indication of what will replace the vacuum left by  Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s authority in broad parts of the country other than simmering anarchy.        

Only around the town of Ajdabiya, south of the revolt&rsquo;s center in Benghazi, were Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s security forces and militia still clashing with protesters along the road to the colonel&rsquo;s hometown, Surt.        

The widening gap between the capital and the eastern countryside underscored the radically different trajectory of the Libyan revolt from the others that recently toppled Arab autocrats on Libya&rsquo;s western and eastern borders, in Tunisia and Egypt.        

Though the Libyan revolt began with a relatively organized core of longtime government critics in Benghazi, its spread to the capital was swift and spontaneous, outracing any efforts to coordinate the protests.        

Colonel Qaddafi has lashed out with a level of violence unseen in either of the other uprisings, partly by importing foreigners without ties to the Libyan people. His four decades of idiosyncratic one-man rule have left the country without any national institutions &mdash; not even a unified or disciplined military &mdash; that could tame his retribution or provide the framework for a transitional government.        

Condemnations of his brutal crackdown mounted, from Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton to the United Nations Security Council to the Arab League, which suspended Libya as a member. High-profile aides and diplomats continued to defect, among them Libya&rsquo;s interior minister and the country&rsquo;s ambassadors to the United States, India and Bangladesh.        

In his second television appearance in two days, Colonel Qaddafi vowed on Tuesday to die as a martyr for his country. &ldquo;I will fight on to the last drop of my blood,&rdquo; he said.        

Wearing a beige robe and turban and reading at times from his manifesto, the Green Book, Colonel Qaddafi called the protesters &ldquo;cockroaches&rdquo; and attributed the unrest shaking Libya to foreigners, a small group of people distributing pills, brainwashing and young people&rsquo;s na&iuml;ve desire to imitate the uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia.        

He urged citizens to take to the streets and beat back the protesters, and he described himself in sweeping, megalomaniacal terms. &ldquo;Muammar Qaddafi is history, resistance, liberty, glory, revolution,&rdquo; he declared.        

In Tobruk, an eastern city that joined the uprising almost as soon as it began, a resident watching the speech in the main square reacted by throwing a rock at Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s face as it was broadcast on a large television. And in a cafe not far from Tobruk, Fawzi Labada, a bus driver, looked incredulously at the screen. &ldquo;He is weak now,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s a liar, a big liar. He will hang.&rdquo;        
Kareem Fahim reported from Tobruk, Libya, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Tunis. Reporting was contributed by Sharon Otterman, Mona El-Naggar, Neil MacFarquhar and Liam Stack from Cairo.
