
CHRISTCHURCH, New Zealand &mdash; Rescue workers spent a cold, rainy night pulling survivors from the wreckage caused by a powerful earthquake that struck Christchurch, New Zealand&rsquo;s second largest city, early Tuesday afternoon, killing at least 75 people.        

Some emerged unscathed from the rubble, while emergency workers had to amputate the limbs of others who were trapped, the city&rsquo;s police superintendent, Russell Gibson, told Radio New Zealand on Wednesday morning. Around midday, one woman was pulled from the wreckage of a severely damaged building after being trapped for nearly 24 hours, the police said.        

Officials said Wednesday that at least 75 people had been killed, although only 55 had been identified. The authorities have repeatedly warned that the final death toll could be significantly higher.        

Several buildings were demolished when the 6.3-magnitude earthquake struck Christchurch, a graceful 19th-century city of nearly 400,000 people, during the busy weekday lunch hour.        

Two large office towers, the Pyne Gould building and the Canterbury Television headquarters, virtually collapsed. Some cars and buses were smashed by falling debris.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve been pulling 20 or 30 people out of those buildings right throughout the night,&rdquo; Superintendent Gibson said.        

But many people did not survive, and Superintendent Gibson said the streets were littered with bodies.        

&ldquo;They are trapped in cars, crushed under rubble and, where they are clearly deceased, our focus unfortunately at this time has turned to the living,&rdquo; he told the radio network. &ldquo;We are getting texts and tapping sounds from some of these buildings, and that&rsquo;s where our focus is at the moment.&rdquo;        

Police officers were moving from building to building, calling out for survivors and listening for signs of life from heavily damaged buildings, he said.        

The police pulled emergency crews out of a large part of central Christchurch on Wednesday afternoon amid concerns that one of the city&rsquo;s tallest buildings could collapse. Officials cleared a two-block zone around the Hotel Grand Chancellor, suspending search and rescue operations on some of the city&rsquo;s most badly damaged buildings. The Canterbury Television headquarters &mdash; where dozens of people were still missing &mdash; was among them.        

As many as 24 Japanese exchange students were believed to be among the missing in the collapse of the Canterbury Television building, which housed their language school. &ldquo;We understand that a significant proportion of those that were in that building are Japanese nationals. We are working with the Japan consul around that,&rdquo; Dave Cliff, a police official, told reporters.        

Photographs and videos from the scene in the aftermath of the earthquake showed people running through the streets, and landslides pouring rocks and debris into suburban streets.        

People said they watched the spire of the landmark ChristChurch Cathedral come crashing down during an aftershock. One witness called it &ldquo;the most frightening thing of my entire life,&rdquo; and television video showed a person clinging to a window in the steeple.        

Shortly after declaring a state of emergency and ordering the evacuation of the city center on Tuesday, Christchurch&rsquo;s mayor, Bob Parker, told reporters: &ldquo;I think we need to prepare ourselves in this city for a death toll that could be significant. It&rsquo;s not going to be good news, and we need to steel ourselves to understand that.&rdquo;        

Hundreds of frightened residents crammed into temporary shelters. Food and drinking water were being brought into the city.        

The rescue mission was further complicated by repeated strong aftershocks and wet, chilly conditions overnight.        

Prime Minister John Key said that while the extent of the devastation was unknown, New Zealand had witnessed &ldquo;its darkest day,&rdquo; and one of its worst natural disasters.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s an absolute tragedy for this city, for New Zealand, for the people that we care so much about,&rdquo; he told TVNZ, the national television broadcaster. &ldquo;People are just sitting on the side of the road, their heads in their hands. This is a community that is absolutely in agony.&rdquo;        

A number of makeshift triage centers and emergency clinics were set up across the city to handle the injured. Some victims were airlifted to hospitals outside the earthquake zone.        
Erica Berenstein reported from Christchurch, and Meraiah Foley from Sydney, Australia. Kevin Drew contributed reporting from Hong Kong, Brian Knowlton from Washington, and Emma Stoney from Christchurch.
