
TOKYO &mdash; Japan&rsquo;s governing party suspended its scandal-tainted political kingmaker on Tuesday as Prime Minister Naoto Kan struggled to restore his flagging popularity ahead of a crucial budget battle.        

Mr. Kan and other leaders of the Democratic Party suspended the membership of Ichiro Ozawa, a shadowy political figure who once led the party, but who was indicted last month in a political financing case.        

Mr. Ozawa&rsquo;s recurring money scandals have dogged the Democrats since their election victory in 2009, and more recently have helped drive Mr. Kan&rsquo;s public approval ratings below 20 percent.        

The decline in public support threatens Mr. Kan&rsquo;s ambitious agenda of raising the consumption tax to rein in Japan&rsquo;s soaring budget deficits and opening the nation&rsquo;s agricultural market as part of a regional free-trade pact.        

Mr. Kan, in fact, looks increasingly at risk of becoming another short-lived Japanese prime minister. His growing unpopularity means that the fate of his eight-month-old government could rest on a potentially bruising budget contest next month.        

If he fails to win approval of a budget and related bills before the new fiscal year begins in April, Mr. Kan may be forced to resign. The opposition Liberal Democrats, who held a virtual postwar monopoly on power until the Democrats&rsquo; 2009 victory, have vowed to block the bills to force Mr. Kan to call a general election.        

Mr. Kan&rsquo;s chances of success dwindled further on Tuesday when a small leftist party, the Social Democrats, said it would oppose his budget, spurning invitations from  the Democrats to join  a coalition. His government suffered a similar blow last week when 16 Democratic lawmakers who support Mr. Ozawa announced they would oppose its bills.        

Mr. Ozawa&rsquo;s supporters call him the victim of a witch hunt against a skilled political reformer by Japan&rsquo;s bureaucratic-dominated establishment, including prosecutors. Mr. Ozawa&rsquo;s opponents say he is a throwback to an earlier era of money politics that the Democrats had pledged to discard.        

Mr. Ozawa has vowed to fight the indictment, which was made under a new system in which a panel of citizens reviews decisions by prosecutors. The panel overturned two previous rulings by Tokyo prosecutors not to press charges against Mr. Ozawa for lack of evidence.        

The panel&rsquo;s decision means that Mr. Ozawa could face trial as early as September, confronting the Democrats with the unappetizing prospect of a party leader in a high-profile court battle. Tuesday&rsquo;s suspension will last until the end of the trial, the party said.        
