
WASHINGTON &mdash; The Obama administration on Tuesday reiterated its condemnation of bloody clashes between protesters and those loyal to the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, but it stopped short of threatening concrete measures, like sanctions or a no-flight zone above Tripoli.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said the Libyan government was responsible for the bloodshed, which she called &ldquo;completely unacceptable.&rdquo; But with the United States not yet able to get its diplomats out of the country, she said, &ldquo;the safety and well-being of Americans has to be our highest priority.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We are in touch with many Libyan officials, directly and indirectly, and with other governments in the region to try to influence what is going on inside Libya,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said to reporters at the State Department.        

On Monday, the State Department ordered 35 diplomats and their dependents to leave Libya. On Tuesday, it was not able to move them because of a shortage of seats on commercial flights. It has asked commercial carriers to fly larger planes to Tripoli and has charter flights on standby, said the State Department spokesman, Philip J. Crowley.        

On Wednesday afternoon, a ferry chartered by the United States government is scheduled to leave Tripoli for Malta, the State Department announced Tuesday evening. It advised American citizens wishing to leave Libya to arrive at the dock by 10 a.m. Wednesday morning.        

Even before the violence, the United States had worried about the safety of its diplomats in Tripoli. The State Department called home its ambassador, Gene A. Cretz, after his name appeared on cables made public by WikiLeaks, which disclosed embarrassing details about the personal habits of Colonel Qaddafi.        

&ldquo;It is a totally legitimate concern, given Qaddafi&rsquo;s past behavior,&rdquo; said Tom Malinowski, head of the Washington office of Human Rights Watch. &ldquo;But the more they signal that their chief concern is for the safety of their people, the more the incentive for the Qaddafi government to hold hostages.&rdquo;        

Mr. Crowley said the Libyan government had pledged to cooperate with the United States in evacuating Americans. Assistant Secretary of State Jeffrey D. Feltman has spoken several times by telephone with Libya&rsquo;s foreign minister, Moussa Koussa.        

In addition to the embassy personnel, about 600 American citizens are registered with the embassy in Tripoli, as well as several thousand people with dual American-Libyan citizenship. Many of those work for energy companies and were also trying to get out of the country, he said.        

Mrs. Clinton said the United Nations Security Council was the proper place for further action against Libya. After a day of debate on Tuesday, the Security Council condemned the use of force against peaceful demonstrators in Libya and called for those responsible for such attacks to be held to account.        

Mrs. Clinton said the situation was still too murky to make a judgment about what to do next. &ldquo;As we gain a greater understanding of what is actually happening,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;we will take appropriate steps in line with our values, our principles and our laws.&rdquo; She noted that communications were largely shut down.        

Among the steps the United States could take, analysts said, would be to reintroduce the sanctions it imposed, starting in the 1970s, for state-sponsored terrorism, most notably the bombing of a Pan Am plane over Lockerbie, Scotland. It lifted the sanctions after Libya renounced terrorism.        

An even more drastic step would be instituting a no-flight zone over Tripoli to prevent warplanes or helicopters from shooting at protesters. But NATO planes would most likely have to enforce such a ban, and analysts said the alliance was unlikely to take such a step without a much greater escalation of the violence.        

Administration officials said drafting a United Nations sanctions resolution would take time, since the Security Council would have to prove a case against Libya &mdash; which could be difficult, given the chaos on the ground.        

Despite the lack of military ties between the United States and Libya, unlike those with Egypt or Bahrain, analysts said it was wrong to argue that the administration had little leverage over the Libyan government.        

&ldquo;Not having ties also gives you more room to impose targeted sanctions or prosecute Libyan officials,&rdquo; Mr. Malinowski said. &ldquo;They weren&rsquo;t whining about their lack of leverage when they went after Qaddafi for his nuclear program.&rdquo;        
