
WASHINGTON &mdash; As president of the American Chamber of Commerce of Nicaragua, R&oacute;ger Arteaga Cano routinely dealt with business issues and trade practices affecting members like ExxonMobil or Citigroup. But he also led an unusual campaign: organizing secret meetings with opposition party leaders in an effort to oust President Daniel Ortega in an election this year.        

A former official in the previous government led by a rival party, Mr. Arteaga turned the chamber into a harsh critic of Mr. Ortega, the leftist Sandinista party leader and longtime adversary of the United States.        

On the group&rsquo;s behalf, Mr. Arteaga issued fiery denunciations of the Nicaraguan government and its governing party, calling its policies unconstitutional and its style that of &ldquo;gangsters&rdquo; or &ldquo;terrorists.&rdquo; He briefed officials at the United States Embassy in Managua, the capital, and in Washington on his efforts to spur an effective challenge to Mr. Ortega, winning their tacit approval.        

The chamber&rsquo;s activities over the past two years &mdash; detailed in interviews with Nicaraguan officials and business executives and in State Department cables obtained by WikiLeaks &mdash; illuminate the remarkable role the foreign affiliates of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce sometimes play in the politics of their host nations. Occasionally, they are at odds with United States policy. But often, the chamber groups are so aligned with it that they appear to act as unofficial instruments to advance the American government&rsquo;s goals.        

Created more than a century ago to promote the interests of American corporations, the groups &mdash; nicknamed AmChams &mdash; today operate in more than 100 countries. While many affiliates appear to restrict their activities to issues like opening access to government contracts or combating the counterfeiting of name-brand goods, others, like the Nicaraguan group, seek broader influence, echoing the role increasingly played in Washington by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.        

In Honduras, for example, executives at the American-affiliated chamber expressed support for the June 2009 coup d&rsquo;&eacute;tat that forced out President Jos&eacute; Manuel Zelaya, the State Department cables say. After leaders in the group applied pressure on the Obama administration, American officials retreated from their initial demands that Mr. Zelaya be allowed to return to power.        

In Taiwan, the chamber got into a nasty public dispute with a pro-independence party there, suggesting that the party was holding the island hostage to its belief that trade between China and Taiwan should be limited, the cables say.        

Kevin Casas-Zamora, who served as a minister of economic policy and second vice president of Costa Rica until 2007, said that overt political action by a United States-affiliated business group was almost always counterproductive.        

&ldquo;It is a really bad idea, and it tends to backfire,&rdquo; he said, noting that the logo for the American Chamber of Commerce of Nicaragua included the United States flag. &ldquo;You are simply handing on a platter a rhetorical weapon  that someone like Ortega will surely use against you.&rdquo;        

Indeed, the political intervention embraced by Mr. Arteaga &mdash; he has just stepped down after his two-year term as the chamber&rsquo;s president &mdash; has been denounced by the Nicaraguan government and other supporters of Mr. Ortega as unwelcome meddling by the United States.        

&ldquo;Every time outside forces have sought to interfere in Nicaragua&rsquo;s internal affairs, the result has been harmful to the Nicaraguan people,&rdquo; Francisco Campbell, the Nicaraguan ambassador to the United States, said in an interview.        

Executives at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in Washington, who came under scrutiny last year for spending tens of millions of dollars on advertising that helped Republicans in the midterm Congressional elections, said it had played no role in instigating political activity by foreign chamber groups.        

&ldquo;AmChams are independent of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in terms of the policies they advocate,&rdquo; a chamber spokeswoman said in a statement. The United States chamber collects dues from its international members, and approves the creation of any new foreign affiliate.        

In 2009, when Mr. Arteaga took over as the unpaid president of the chamber in Nicaragua &mdash; his small consulting firm has a corporate client based in the United States, making him eligible for membership &mdash; he began challenging Mr. Ortega almost from the start. The former top federal tax official under a previous administration, Mr. Arteaga was driven by disdain for Mr. Ortega, who was elected in 2006, after serving as president from 1985 to 1990 and as a leader of the post-revolution junta from 1979 to 1985.        
Andrew W. Lehren contributed reporting from New York.
