
ATHENS &mdash; Violent clashes between protesters and the police broke out here in the capital on Wednesday, as the two main labor unions staged the first general strike of the year against the government&rsquo;s austerity drive, paralyzing public services and disrupting transportation.        

Demonstrators estimated that 20,000 to 30,000 protesters turned out at two rallies that converged outside Parliament in the early afternoon. The numbers were not particularly large by Greek standards, but the mostly peaceful gathering was shaken when groups of youths broke off from the main body and fought with the police outside Parliament and Athens University. Dozens of youths threw stones and firebombs at the police, who responded with tear gas.        

Zougla, a news Web site, said two demonstrators were hurt and one police officer was burned when self-styled anarchists threw a firebomb at him, setting him alight.        

A police spokesman said 25 people had been detained for questioning, including a man carrying a rucksack containing a bow and arrows, an ax and leaflets with anti-establishment slogans. The spokesman  said three police officers had been wounded, including the one whose face was burned when he was hit by the firebomb. The number of injured demonstrators was unclear, the spokesman said.        

Despite the skirmishes, the demonstration got &ldquo;a good turnout,&rdquo; said Vassilis Xenakis, a senior official at the civil servants&rsquo; union. &ldquo;People are not scared to come out onto the streets, despite the risk of violence.&rdquo;        

Mr. Xenakis said he had seen police officers on motorcycles shouting at demonstrators to go home. &ldquo;This is a message that people won&rsquo;t go home,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re exasperated with the cuts to their income, and they can&rsquo;t take it anymore.&rdquo;        

As dusk fell and helicopters circled over the city center above clouds of tear gas, riot police officers remained in front of Parliament and on main roads to contain any new violence. Demonstrators, rolling up banners reading &ldquo;We are dying,&rdquo; retreated from the square in groups.        

The strike on Wednesday shut down schools and hospitals and all government offices. Many small businesses closed, too, protesting tax increases and attacks by self-styled anarchists on their store facades.        

Some public transportation was running, allowing demonstrators to join rallies in the city center, and flights were canceled for four hours in the afternoon.        

Mr. Xenakis, the union official, said such walkouts would be repeated until the Greek government reviewed its agreement with its international creditors, who pledged about $150 billion in loans to Greece last May if the country pushed through a raft of austerity measures, trimmed the public sector and changed the pension and tax systems.        

&ldquo;It is not just the unions and the people who are objecting, it&rsquo;s the politicians, too,&rdquo; said Mr. Xenakis, referring to recent objections by some members of the governing Socialist party to some of the structural changes demanded by Greece&rsquo;s creditors.        

One main reform aimed at opening up so-called closed professions &mdash; a group that includes pharmacists and lawyers &mdash; was watered down after several Socialist members of Parliament, some of them lawyers, threatened to vote against the bill.        
