
BAIDA, Libya &mdash; As rebellion crept closer to the capital and defections of military officers multiplied, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi called on thousands of mercenaries and irregular security forces on Wednesday to defend his bastion in Tripoli, in what residents said was a desperate and dangerous turn in the week-old uprising.        

Distrustful of even his own generals, Colonel Qaddafi has for years quietly built up this ruthless and loyal force. It is made up of special brigades headed by his sons, segments of the military loyal to his native tribe and its allies, and legions of African mercenaries he has helped train and equip. Many are believed to have fought elsewhere, in places like Sudan, but he has now called them back.        

Witnesses said thousands of members of this irregular army were massing on roads to the capital, Tripoli, where one resident described scenes evocative of anarchic Somalia: clusters of heavily armed men in mismatched uniforms clutching machine guns and willing to carry out orders to kill Libyans that other police and military units, and even fighter pilots, have refused.        

Some residents of Tripoli said they took the gathering army as a sign that the uprising might be entering a decisive stage, with Colonel Qaddafi fortifying his main stronghold in the capital and protesters there gearing up for their first organized demonstration after days of spontaneous rioting and bloody crackdowns.        

The fall of other cities to rebels on Wednesday, including Misurata, 130 miles east of the capital, left Colonel Qaddafi more embattled &mdash; and his opponents emboldened.        

&ldquo;A message comes to every mobile phone about a general protest on Friday in Tripoli,&rdquo; one resident of Tripoli said. Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s menacing speech to the country on Tuesday &mdash; when he vowed to hunt down opponents &ldquo;house by house&rdquo; &mdash; increased their determination &ldquo;100 percent,&rdquo; the resident said.        

Dozens of checkpoints operated by a combination of foreign mercenaries and plainclothes militiamen lined the road west of Tripoli for the first time, witnesses said, requiring not only the presentation of official papers but also displays of flag-waving, fist-pumping enthusiasm for Colonel Qaddafi, who has long fashioned himself as a pan-African icon.        

&ldquo;You are trying to convince them you are a loyalist,&rdquo; one resident said, &ldquo;and the second they realize that you are not, you are done for.&rdquo;        

The overall death toll so far has been impossible to determine. Human rights groups say they have confirmed about 300 deaths, though witnesses suggested the number was far larger. On Wednesday, Franco Frattini, the foreign minister of Italy &mdash; the former colonial power with longstanding ties &mdash; said that nationwide more than 1,000 people were probably dead in the strife.        

Egyptian officials said Wednesday that nearly 30,000 people &mdash; mostly Egyptians working in Libya &mdash; had fled across their border. People fleeing west into Tunisia said the rebellion was now taking off far from its origins just a week ago in the eastern city of Benghazi, Libya&rsquo;s second largest city, which fell over the weekend.        

There were reports for the first time of protests in the southern city of Sabha, considered a Qaddafi stronghold.        

On Wednesday, in addition to the northwestern city of Misurata, protesters claimed victory in nearby Zawai, where local army units are said to have joined them. Some said there had been intense fighting in the past few nights in the town of Sabratha, home of an important Roman archaeological site 50 miles west of Tripoli, where witnesses on Wednesday reported a heavy deployment of machine-gun toting foreign mercenaries and Qaddafi loyalists known as revolutionary committees.        

&ldquo;The revolutionary committees are trying to kill everyone who is against Qaddafi,&rdquo; said a doctor fleeing Sabratha, declining to give his name for fear of reprisals if he returned.        

But amid spreading rebellion and growing defections by top officials, diplomats and segments of the regular army, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s preparations for a defense of Tripoli also reframed the question of who might still be enforcing his rule. It is a puzzle that military analysts say reflects the singular  character of the society he has shaped &mdash; half tribal, half police state &mdash;  for the past 41 years.        

&ldquo;It is all shadow and mirrors and probably a great deal of corruption as well,&rdquo; said Paul Sullivan, a professor at Georgetown who has studied the Libyan military.        

Colonel Qaddafi, who took power in a military coup, has always kept the Libyan military too weak and divided to do the same thing to him. About half its relatively small 50,000-member army is made up of poorly trained and unreliable conscripts, according to the Center for Strategic and International Studies.        
Kareem Fahim reported from Baida, Libya, and David D. Kirkpatrick from the Tunisian border with Libya. Reporting was contributed by Sharon Otterman, Mona El-Naggar, Neil MacFarquhar and Liam Stack from Cairo.
