
Whether by plane or bus, ferry or foot, tens of thousands of foreign citizens &mdash; including hundreds of Americans  &mdash; were scrambling to find a way out of Libya on Wednesday as forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi fought  to maintain control of a shrinking portion of the oil-rich country.        

Turkey appeared to have had the most success in spiriting its people out of the country, packing more than 5,000  onto ferries and planes that left over the last several days.        

The United States, after being turned down for permission to land a chartered plane in Tripoli, sent a ferry Wednesday that was expected to transport about 600 people, mostly Americans, to Malta. The ferry arrived in Tripoli Wednesday, the State Department said, but its departure was delayed by high seas.        

The State Department has said several thousand United States citizens, most of them holding dual citizenship, were in Libya when the uprising against Colonel Qaddafi began.        

As wealthier nations rushed to coordinate rescues, migrant workers from poorer nations in Asia and Africa &mdash; the majority of the work force there, according to an immigration expert &mdash; were fending for themselves, with their home countries unable to organize evacuations. Many crossed the borders into Tunisia and Egypt by foot or in buses  piled high with luggage.        

Those fleeing the country, as well as those who had not yet found a way out, described scenes of chaos and deprivation. Protesters claimed that the opposition was taking control of cities close to the capital, Tripoli, where Colonel Qaddafi has mobilized mercenaries and militiamen to defend his stronghold.        

One worker, Suang Upara from Thailand, reported that Libyans had burglarized the place where he had been living with other migrants.        

&ldquo;They used knives to threaten us and stole everything from us,&rdquo; Mr. Upara, 29, said in a phone interview from Benghazi, where more than 200 people were reported to have been killed in a government crackdown.        

He said that he was subsisting on one small loaf of bread each day and dirty water filtered through tissue paper.        

Chinese reports said that a site run by a Chinese construction company in eastern Libya had been attacked by armed looters who forced nearly 1,000 workers out of their dormitories.        

The daunting nature of the evacuation led several nations to turn to others for help. Turkey, which  said it had mounted its largest evacuation effort ever, said 21 countries including Russia and the United States had asked for assistance in helping their citizens to leave. Officials in Ankara said that a 27-year-old Turkish worker had been killed in Tripoli, but they gave no details.        

Israel, meanwhile, agreed to allow about 300 Palestinians into the West Bank even though they did not have residency documents for the territory. While the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, welcomed Israel&rsquo;s offer, he had asked for thousands to be allowed entry, according to the official Palestinian news agency Wafa.        

The International Organization for Migration, an intergovernmental agency, estimates that as many as 1.5 million migrants were working in Libya at the start of the strife, which appears to have led to the deaths of hundreds of Libyans. Many of the migrants came to work in the country&rsquo;s construction industry, which had been booming, and in its rich oil fields.        

The huge numbers of people forced to flee quickly were exacerbating fears in Europe that countries like Italy would be flooded with needy people, leading Italy&rsquo;s foreign minister to refer to a possible &ldquo;biblical exodus.&rdquo;        

Although Turkey had rescued thousands of its citizens by Wednesday, about 25,000 were still stranded. Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said that Turkey would keep ferries running nonstop and was expecting at least some to carry medical and food supplies for Libyan civilians.        

With civilian flights overwhelmed by the numbers of people trying to leave, governments from around the world were trying to send ships and chartered aircraft.        

Two Italian naval vessels headed to eastern Libyan ports to rescue citizens from Benghazi and other cities where airports were damaged.        

The Chinese government moved to evacuate about 2,900 of its estimated 30,000 workers from Libya, the Xinhua news agency reported. And the Foreign Ministry of Jordan said that a Royal Jordanian plane carrying 285 citizens was expected to arrive from Libya and that another 90 crossed safely by land into Egypt on Wednesday.        

Jean-Philippe Chauzy, chief spokesman for the International Organization for Migration, said that many migrants from poorer nations were &ldquo;bunkering down for the moment.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Over the past 18 hours,&rdquo; he said Wednesday, there were &ldquo;only four nationals from Guinea who have made it to Tunisia.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;That&rsquo;s certainly not representative of the sub-Saharan Africans employed in Libya,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a trickle.&rdquo;        

On Wednesday, Italy&rsquo;s foreign minister, Franco Frattini, warned lawmakers that as many as 300,000 migrant workers in Libya could seek refuge in Europe, with many ending up in nearby countries, including Italy and Greece.        

&ldquo;We are not asking Europe to distribute the immigrants across its territory, but we are asking for a serious mechanism on how to split the economic and social burden of an immigration wave,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Europe needs to assume its duties.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Chauzy said those sorts of warnings were premature. For those who cannot flee by air or sea, the major points of exit will continue to be Egypt and Tunisia, he said.        

As migrants poured across both borders, Mr. Chauzy said there were reports that African workers desperate to leave but lacking money were trying to reach Libya&rsquo;s southern border with Niger &mdash; a desert trek of more than 1,000 miles.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s pretty awful,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;even in the best of times.&rdquo;        
Reporting was contributed by Sebnem Arsu  from Istanbul; Brian Knowlton from Washington; Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem; Poypiti Amatatham from Bangkok; Mona El-Naggar from Cairo;  and Rachel Donadio from Rome.
