
The authorities in Christchurch, New Zealand, kept emergency workers and others away from one of the city&rsquo;s tallest buildings on Friday, concerned that it might collapse three days after it was heavily damaged in an earthquake that killed at least 113 people.        

But engineers familiar with the city and with New Zealand&rsquo;s building codes said the structure, the 26-story Hotel Grand Chancellor, had performed up to standards during the quake. It survived initially, allowing those inside to escape.        

&ldquo;That&rsquo;s kind of the minimum performance expectation&rdquo; for a building of that type, said Chris Poland, who is chairman of an American Society of Civil Engineers committee on seismic rehabilitation of buildings.        

Certain buildings like hospitals are often built to tougher standards so that they can continue to operate after a quake. With other structures, though, preserving lives, rather than function, is the main consideration.        

Mr. Poland, chairman of Degenkolb Engineers of San Francisco, and others said that it appeared that most of the buildings that were destroyed in the 6.3-magnitude quake, which struck at midday Tuesday, were older ones built before the country&rsquo;s building codes were made tougher beginning in the 1980s. They include many masonry structures and two concrete office buildings.        

The authorities on Friday raised the confirmed death toll to 103, with more than 160 people hospitalized and about 200 people still missing. Damage is estimated at $12 billion or more.        

The earthquake was an aftershock of a 7.1-magnitude quake that struck the area last September. While that quake was stronger than the one on Tuesday, it originated deeper underground and farther from Christchurch, so there was less damage and only one death, from a heart attack.        

Mary Comerio, a professor of architecture at the University of California, Berkeley, said the earlier quake might have contributed to the extensive destruction on Tuesday. &ldquo;It may have weakened some of the masonry buildings,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;But it wasn&rsquo;t enough to touch those concrete structures.&rdquo;        

Professor Comerio led a team that visited Christchurch after the September earthquake and will be returning in a few weeks.        

Robert Pekelnicky, an engineer with Degenkolb who serves on the seismic-rehabilitation committee with Mr. Poland, said that while New Zealand had a &ldquo;somewhat robust culture&rdquo; of upgrading older buildings to stricter seismic standards, Christchurch had lagged behind other cities in such retrofitting. The city had been considered to be less at risk than others &mdash; until the September quake occurred on a previously unknown fault.        

While New Zealand had instituted mandatory upgrades in recent years, Mr. Pekelnicky said, Christchurch&rsquo;s program required a seismic retrofit only when there was a change of use or major remodeling. And upgraded buildings had to meet lower standards than new construction.        

&ldquo;That&rsquo;s very common with seismic upgrades,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a trade-off between cost and disruption and safety.&rdquo;        

Mr. Pekelnicky, who visited the city after the September quake, said that older buildings that had been upgraded received less damage than those that had not. But it was too early to determine whether more upgraded structures survived the stronger quake.        

Professor Comerio, who is in contact with colleagues in the stricken area, said that the devastation might be worse than had been conveyed. &ldquo;I think there&rsquo;s more damage to concrete buildings than just the two or three they are showing &mdash; buildings that have not collapsed but will have to be torn down,&rdquo; she said.        

The town of Lyttelton, about seven miles from Christchurch and about a mile from the quake&rsquo;s epicenter, may be even worse off, she said. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s going to be more issues on that side of the hill that we don&rsquo;t even know about yet.&rdquo;        
Emma Stoney contributed reporting from Christchurch, New Zealand.
