
Frantic operations to evacuate foreigners from the widening chaos in Libya continued Thursday, and European officials were already looking toward the next challenge: coping with what could be a huge influx of refugees from across the Mediterranean.        

More than 10,000 people crowded into Tripoli&rsquo;s main airport on Thursday, the Turkish Foreign Ministry said. Amateur video posted by the British newspaper The Independent showed desperate travelers filling the trash-strewn terminal and flowing out the doors into the roads.        

The scramble by foreigners to leave the country began several days ago, but the number of commercial flights could not keep up with demand. Many countries have been mobilizing military and chartered ships and planes.        

Some government-led evacuations were able to proceed Thursday, with two Greek ferries carrying about 4,500 Chinese workers departing from the eastern city of Benghazi. The United States Embassy said on its Web site that it was chartering a flight from Tripoli for Friday.        

Other efforts to remove American citizens have been frustrated, first when a chartered plane was denied permission to land and then when rough seas kept a chartered ferry from departing for Malta.        

Those on the ferry, which has been secured, were being given food and water, said Philip J. Crowley, a State Department spokesman. There were 285 passengers on board, including 167 Americans. The State Department said 40 members of the United States Embassy staff were on the vessel, which holds about 600 people.        

The State Department said roughly 6,000 United States citizens, most of them holding dual citizenship, were in Libya when the uprising against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi began. &ldquo;My understanding is that they would need the permission of the Libyan government to depart,&rdquo; Mr. Crowley said during a news conference, referring to those with dual citizenship.        

Jemini Pandya, a spokeswoman for the International Organization for Migration, said at least 30,000 people, mainly Tunisian and Egyptian migrant workers, fled violence in Libya from Monday to Wednesday.        

Drawn by jobs in Libya&rsquo;s booming construction industry and rich oil fields, as many as 1.5 million migrants were working in Libya when the violence began, according to Ms. Pandya&rsquo;s group.        

With such a vast population potentially displaced, officials of European countries likely to be the primary destinations were already looking for help.        

As the European Union convened a two-day meeting in Brussels on the crisis, Interior Minister Roberto Maroni of Italy said his country &ldquo;cannot be left&rdquo; to handle a possible Libyan exodus. But northern European countries, including Britain, urged a far more cautious approach, saying more precise estimates of the number of possible refugees from North Africa were required.        

The organization was particularly concerned that large numbers of migrant workers from sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia would be unable to leave Libya for either Tunisia or Egypt.        

France, Spain, Greece, Malta and Cyprus have joined Italy in asking for a special European Union solidarity fund to help them bear the brunt of the wave, and for assurances that other countries would join in accommodating refugees.        

Human rights organizations urged the European Union not to neglect humanitarian concerns.        

Tom Porteous, director of the British office of Human Rights Watch, said the Europeans, in focusing on evacuating their citizens, seemed indifferent to the fate of those foreign workers who could not return home so easily or who feared for their lives.        
Reporting was contributed by Sebnem Arsu from Istanbul, David D. Kirkpatrick from Tunisia, Brian Knowlton from Washington, Judy Dempsey from Berlin, Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem, Niki Kitsantonis from Athens, and Gaia Pianigiani from Rome.
