
JERUSALEM &mdash; With revolts toppling governments across the Middle East and peace talks between Israelis and Palestinians suspended, 25 of the Chilean miners rescued after more than two months underground toured the holy sites of the Old City of Jerusalem on Thursday.        

The miners arrived on Wednesday, accompanied by partners or siblings, for a weeklong visit as guests of the Israeli government.        

Their itinerary includes Yad Vashem, Israel&rsquo;s national Holocaust memorial, as well as the Dead Sea, Nazareth and the Sea of Galilee. They are also scheduled to visit the Church of the Nativity in the West Bank city of Bethlehem, which is governed by the Palestinian Authority, and the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights, captured from Syria in the 1967 Middle East war.        

Some are planning to take part in a communal baptism in the Jordan River, and on Sunday morning, the president of Israel, Shimon Peres, will host the group in his official residence.        

The trip, which Israel clearly intended as good public relations, was planned well before the turmoil in the region, and there was a conspicuous absence of any talk about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or the upheavals affecting Israel&rsquo;s Arab neighbors. Reporters mostly focused their questions on the men&rsquo;s emotions upon visiting Christian and other holy sites after a rescue that many people called nothing short of miraculous.        

Since being rescued in October, many of the 33 miners lifted from nearly half a mile underground have made other trips abroad. In December, they were guests of honor of the Manchester United soccer team in Britain, and in January they went to Disney World in Florida.        

For many, though, the Israeli trip was a highly symbolic pilgrimage, with talk of blessings from God.        

&ldquo;I am happy,&rdquo; said Jimmy S&aacute;nchez, 19, the youngest of the miners, at the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, venerated as the site of the crucifixion and burial of Jesus. &ldquo;I never imagined that I would get to the Holy Land.&rdquo;        

Wearing a silver crucifix around his neck, which he said he wore while underground, Mr. S&aacute;nchez, the father of a baby girl, said he had not returned to work in the mines.        

Israel was clearly hoping that its gesture to the miners would help promote the area as a religious tourism destination.        

&ldquo;Whoever wants to pray to their God has to come to the Holy Land,&rdquo; said Rafael Ben-Hur, a senior Israeli Tourism Ministry official, outside the church. &ldquo;They came to thank God for being saved.&rdquo;        

The Old City is in East Jerusalem, in territory annexed by Israel after the 1967 war and coveted by the Palestinians as the capital of a future state. Israel&rsquo;s claims of sovereignty in East Jerusalem have not been internationally recognized.        

In the narrow alleyways, journalists jostled for position and tour guides became flustered as government organizers tried to find a balance between religious experience and publicity.        

In the crush, the miners and their families, by now used to the media glare, remained calm.        

Many wore white hats distributed by the Ministry of Tourism bearing the English legend &ldquo;Israel Loves You.&rdquo;        

Jorge Galleguillos, 57, carried a Chilean flag that he unfurled at stops along the way. Richard Villarroel, 27, carried his 4-month-old son, born soon after the rescue, wrapped in a newly acquired Jewish prayer shawl for warmth.        
