
WASHINGTON &mdash; The United States will send more than 1,000 additional Marines to Afghanistan this month to try to solidify progress in the south before troop reductions begin in July, American military officials said Thursday.        

The majority of the forces will be sent to Helmand Province, where 20,000 Marines have made gains against the Taliban but where fighting remains intense in insurgent strongholds like Sangin. American commanders are under pressure to quell the violence and sustain their gains in the first six months of 2011, when the White House will assess whether a troop increase for the nearly decade-old war is working.        

Officials at the Florida-based United States Central Command, which has responsibility for the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, said that the Marines were being sent to take advantage of what is traditionally a winter hiatus for the Taliban and to try to set conditions for the fighting season that begins in the spring.        

Maj. Gen. Richard P. Mills, the commander of the 20,000 Marines in Helmand, said in a statement that the intent was to overwhelm the enemy &ldquo;with an increased operational tempo that he&rsquo;ll be unable to match.&rdquo;        

The 1,000-plus Marines are part of the 26th Marine Expeditionary Unit, a reserve force currently deployed in the Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea. Central Command officials said the Marines would go to Afghanistan for about three months. The rest of the expeditionary unit will remain aboard ship for other contingencies, military officials said.        

Currently there are about 100,000 United States troops in Afghanistan. In December 2009, President Obama announced that he was sending 30,000 additional troops there and at the same time said the United States would begin to withdraw troops from Afghanistan in July 2011.        

Since then, the Obama administration has tried to shift focus away from the July 2011 date &mdash; military commanders said the deadline was encouraging insurgents to bide their time until the United States withdrew &mdash; to a new date of 2014 as the end of American combat operations in Afghanistan.        

It is unclear what effect, if any, the additional Marines will have on the debate on the number of forces to be withdrawn in July.        

&ldquo;The coming debate is bigger than this,&rdquo; said Michael E. O&rsquo;Hanlon, a military analyst and senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. &ldquo;The issue will be, do we reduce in the second half of the year by 1,000, 5,000 or 20,000?&rdquo;        

During a visit to Afghanistan last month, Mr. Obama told American troops that they were &ldquo;making important progress&rdquo; and breaking the Taliban&rsquo;s momentum, but others in Washington and Kabul have been more skeptical about the gains and whether they can be sustained once the Americans leave.        
