
Despite threats by the embattled Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, journalists are finding ways to report and broadcast from parts of Libya, one of the least hospitable places in the world for news organizations.        

The host of foreign journalists that arrived in eastern Libya from Egypt in recent days have reported being greeted like liberators by the antigovernment forces there. News executives said Thursday that they were making hour-by-hour determinations about where it was safe for their journalists to be &mdash; and about how much detail to disclose to viewers about their locations.        

Libyan officials have forbidden foreign journalists to enter the country, and they have indicated to American diplomats that they consider those who had entered through eastern Libya to be Al Qaeda &ldquo;collaborators.&rdquo; But the officials also said Thursday that they would invite teams of journalists to tour the capital, Tripoli, ostensibly to counter claims made by witnesses of widespread violence there.        

Details about the tours were scarce, and Western news organizations were skeptical.        

On Thursday, there remained an effective news blackout around the capital, Tripoli, which remained in Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s control. Since the uprising began last week, the news media have had to rely heavily on witnesses via telephone and amateur video on the Internet.        

Now, in the east of the country at least, the accounts and images are being supplemented by those of foreign journalists, many of whom came from Cairo, where they had been covering the uprising there. By Wednesday, some of the journalists had reached Benghazi, the nation&rsquo;s second largest city, which is in the control of antigovernment forces.        

On Thursday, Heather Allan, the head of news gathering for Al Jazeera English, said that she expected more journalists to be in Benghazi by the weekend. Some journalists are traveling in small groups for safety reasons. &ldquo;We tend to do this,&rdquo; Ms. Allan said, &ldquo;when the going gets tough.&rdquo;        

Moving westward from Benghazi may be problematic, Richard Stengel, the managing editor of Time magazine, said Thursday, because &ldquo;the most prominent city on the route to the capital Tripoli is Surt, Qaddafi&rsquo;s hometown &mdash; a place likely to be very heavily defended.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s very dangerous and very fluid,&rdquo; Mr. Stengel said, adding that his staff in New York had instructed his reporters &ldquo;not to take any unnecessary risks.&rdquo; Amid uprisings in Egypt and Bahrain, some foreign journalists were singled out by security forces.        

Foreign journalists have also amassed in Tunisia, on the western border with Libya, but pro-government forces are in control there, impeding entry into the country from that direction.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a country where normal order has broken down; and where the government has made clear that they don&rsquo;t want to have western journalists on their soil right now, said Stuart Seidel, a deputy managing editor for NPR News. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s my big concern.&rdquo;        

On Thursday, David Verdi, a vice president at NBC News, said NBC was among the networks to be invited to Tripoli by a son of Colonel Qaddafi. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re considering what it would mean to go into the capital, hosted by a government that could potentially fall at any moment,&rdquo; he said.        

He suggested that one of the considerations is that journalists could be used by the Libyan government as human shields.        

According to the State Department, Libyan officials told American diplomats that CNN, BBC Arabic and Al Arabiya &ldquo;would be allowed into the country to report on the current situation.&rdquo; But &ldquo;that was news to us,&rdquo; said Tony Maddox, the executive vice president and managing director of CNN International, who said he was trying to find out more about the offer.        

Douglas Jehl, the foreign editor of The Washington Post, said in an e-mail message that &ldquo;we continue to hope that the Libyan government will grant visas allowing Post correspondents to travel to Tripoli and will commit itself to the security of all journalists inside the country.&rdquo;        

Until then, news organizations have two options. One is to do what James Bays, a correspondent for Al Jazeera, did on Wednesday: fly into Tripoli, survey the scene at the airport, and immediately fly back out of the country.        

&ldquo;It really is a desperate scene, a scene of panic there,&rdquo; Mr. Bays reported on the channel on Thursday, an hour after returning to London. He said that the police are &ldquo;even beating people with clubs, stopping them from getting into the airport.&rdquo; He was only able to record with a cellphone camera.        

The other option is to talk to witnesses in Tripoli who are willing to talk on condition on anonymity.        

Anderson Cooper, a CNN anchor, interviewed a woman on Wednesday night who said that sending images via the Internet was becoming &ldquo;very dangerous.&rdquo; Mr. Cooper asked, &ldquo;Why do you continue to report?&rdquo; She said, &ldquo;Because I would rather die reporting than see this &mdash; see him staying and give up about this war happening,&rdquo; referring to Colonel Qaddafi. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s him against the world.&rdquo;        
Jeremy W. Peters contributed reporting from Washington.
