
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; Rebels seeking to overturn the 40-year rule of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi repelled a concerted assault by his forces on Thursday on cities close to the capital, removing any doubt that Libya&rsquo;s patchwork of protests had evolved into an increasingly well-armed revolutionary movement.        

The series of determined stands by rebel forces on Thursday &mdash; especially in the strategic city of Zawiyah, near important oil resources and 30 miles from the capital, Tripoli &mdash; presented the gravest threat yet to the Libyan leader. In Zawiyah, more than 100 people were killed as Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces turned automatic weapons on a mosque filled with protesters, a witness said. Still, residents rallied afterward.        

Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s evident frustration at the resistance in Zawiyah spilled out in a rant by telephone over the state television network charging that Osama bin Laden had drugged the town&rsquo;s youth into a rebellious frenzy.        

&ldquo;Al Qaeda is the one who has recruited our sons,&rdquo; he said in a 30-minute tirade broadcast by the network. &ldquo;It is bin Laden.&rdquo;        

Colonel Qaddafi said, &ldquo;Those people who took your sons away from you and gave them drugs and said &lsquo;Let them die&rsquo; are launching a campaign over cellphones against your sons, telling them not to obey their fathers and mothers.&rdquo;        

The violence on Thursday underscored the contrast between the character of Libya&rsquo;s revolution and the uprising that toppled autocrats in neighboring Egypt and Tunisia. Unlike those Facebook-enabled youth rebellions, the insurrection here has been led by people who are more mature and who have been actively opposing the government for some time. It started with lawyers&rsquo; syndicates that have campaigned peacefully for two years for a written constitution and some semblance of a rule of law.        

Fueled by popular anger, the help of breakaway leaders of the armed forces and some of their troops, and weapons from looted military stockpiles or smuggled across the border, the uprising here has escalated toward more violence in the face of increasingly brutal government crackdowns.        

At the revolt&rsquo;s starting point, in the eastern city of Benghazi, Fathi Terbil, 39, the human rights lawyer whose detention first ignited the protests, drew a map of rebel-held territory in striking distance of Tripoli. &ldquo;It is only a matter of days,&rdquo; he said.        

A  turning point in the uprising&rsquo;s evolution was arguably the defection of the interior minister, Abdel Fattah Younes al-Abidi, an army general who had been a close ally of Colonel Qaddafi.        

The break by General Abidi, who has family roots near the revolt&rsquo;s eastern origins, encouraged other disaffected police, military and state security personnel to change sides as well. &ldquo;We are hoping to use his experience,&rdquo; said Mr. Terbil, who some  called the linchpin of the revolt.        

Opposition figures in rebel-held cities like Benghazi have been appearing on cable news channels promising that opponents of Colonel Qaddafi are heading toward Tripoli to bolster the resistance there. Their ability to carry out those assertions remains to be seen.        

In parts of the country, the revolutionaries, as they call themselves, appear to have access to potentially large stores of weapons, including small arms and heavy artillery, automatic weapons smuggled from the Egyptian border and rocket-propelled grenades taken from army bases, like the Kabila in Benghazi.        

Tawfik al-Shohiby, one of the rebels, said that in the early days of the revolt one of his relatives bought $75,000 in automatic weapons from arms dealers on the Egyptian border and distributed them to citizens&rsquo; groups in towns like Bayda.        

So far, at least in the east, many of the weapons appear to be held in storage to defend against a future attempt by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces to retake the territory. At a former security services building in Benghazi on Thursday, men in fatigues prepared to transport anti-aircraft and antitank weapons to what one said was a storage depot.        

Like their counterparts in Tunisia and Egypt, the rebels in Libya have shown tech-savvy guile in circumventing government efforts to block their communication. To sidestep the government&rsquo;s blocking of the Internet and curbing of cellphone access, for example, some of the more active antigovernment protesters distribute flash drives and CDs with videos of the fighting to friends in other towns and to journalists.        

Mr. Shohiby began helping lead an effort this week to shuttle foreign journalists from the Egyptian border to towns across eastern Libya.        
Kareem Fahim reported from Benghazi, and David D. Kirkpatrick from the Tunisian border with Libya. Reporting was contributed by Sharon Otterman, Mona El-Naggar and Neil MacFarquhar from Cairo, and Robert F. Worth from Tunis.
