
BAGHDAD &mdash; Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki on Thursday urged Iraqis not to take part in nationwide demonstrations scheduled for Friday, saying he had evidence that insurgents were trying to use the protests to create unrest.        

Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s statement was the first in which he or a member of his cabinet said that Iraqis should not join the protests, organized around demands like improved government services.        

In a nationally televised speech, Mr. Maliki said that loyalists of the deposed leader Saddam Hussein were behind the protests. He said the government would not prevent Iraqis from taking to the streets.        

But late on Thursday, security officials in Baghdad banned all cars from the streets until further notice, potentially preventing thousands from reaching the central square where the demonstrations were set to take place. On Friday morning, streets normally choked with cars and minibuses were eerily quiet, with only police officers and soldiers on patrol.        

Mr. Maliki said that insurgents, led by members of Mr. Hussein&rsquo;s Baath Party and terrorists from Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, were planning to do &ldquo;everything possible to create chaos, disturb public order and endanger the state institutions&rdquo; with the protests.        

&ldquo;They are attempting to crack down on everything you have achieved, all the democratic gains, the free elections, the peaceful exchanges of power and freedom,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;So I call on you, from a place of compassion, to thwart the enemy plans by not participating in the demonstrations tomorrow, because it&rsquo;s suspicious and it will give rise to the voice of those who destroyed Iraq.&rdquo;        

As protests have swept across the Arab world over the past month, there have been scattered demonstrations in Iraq, calling for better government services like electricity supplies and job creation &mdash; not an entirely new form of government.        

In a television interview recorded before Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s speech, a spokesman for the American Embassy said Iraqi officials appeared to be taking encouraging steps in response to the protests. He said that they had not outlawed the marches, and that they had ordered security forces not to use force against peaceful demonstrators.        

&ldquo;We hope that the demonstrations will be peaceful and a powerful affirmation of Iraqi democracy,&rdquo; said the spokesman, Aaron Snipe.        

In the speech on Thursday, Mr. Maliki said the concerns about government services were legitimate, and he blamed insurgents and terrorists for the problems.        

Responses to the planned demonstrations have cleaved along the familiar lines of political party affiliation and religious sect.        

As Mr. Maliki and two prominent Shiites, the populist cleric Moktada al-Sadr and Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, urged Iraqis not to march on Friday, members of a large political coalition supported by many members of Iraq&rsquo;s Sunni minority publicly embraced those who had been demonstrating.        

The political bloc, Iraqiya, released a statement on Wednesday that &ldquo;declared its solidarity with the just demands of the demonstrators&rdquo; and warned security forces not to respond violently to the protests.        

Late last year, Iraqiya grudgingly joined a coalition government assembled by Mr. Maliki, but many of its members have remained sharply critical of him.        

Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s warnings seemed to further inflame some Iraqis already angry with the government&rsquo;s failings. &ldquo;It is a threat,&rdquo; said Bushra Amin, who works for a radio station that has been encouraging the demonstrators. &ldquo;Iraqis will get the message: if you come out tomorrow you&rsquo;ll be responsible for what will happen. This government is so lame and so unprofessional.&rdquo;        

Ms. Amin said supporters of Mr. Hussein&rsquo;s overthrown government might be among the quilt of Communists, liberals, public employees, and other political and social groups who have been filling streets and public squares across Iraq over the past few weeks. But echoing a common refrain among protesters, she said the demonstrators were seeking only to reform Iraq&rsquo;s government, not tear it down.        

&ldquo;They want their rights,&rdquo; Ms. Amin said. &ldquo;They want to live like any other nation, with dignity.&rdquo;        

In western Iraq, a suicide bomber in Ramadi walked into a commemoration of the Prophet Muhammad&rsquo;s birth, shouted &ldquo;God is great!&rdquo; and detonated a vest filled with explosives, killing 11 people and wounding 25, security officials said. The deputy governor of Anbar Province was seriously wounded in the blast.        
Duraid Adnan and Yasir Ghazi contributed reporting.
