
JUBA, Sudan &mdash; The medic said patients started coming in by the dozens, and never stopped.        

The symptoms were similar, he said &mdash; acute stomach pains, bloody noses, diarrhea, high fevers, bruising. One came in shot in the leg. Many healed, but many others died. Two he remembers vividly. They had come in a few days before, complaining of nagging pains, but otherwise in decent spirits.        

&ldquo;I saw them through the window when they were being carried away,&rdquo; the medic said, speaking anonymously for fear of reprisals.        

The stream of patients he saw at Juba Teaching Hospital, the primary hospital in southern Sudan, were not everyday civilian cases. They were police recruits. And they were not coming from battle. They were coming from initiation.        

Diplomats, researchers and recruits recount cases of sexual assaults and torture, including a campuswide punishment last year that lasted for days, sending many to the hospital.        

Over the course of the training, as many as 100 recruits may have died from severe punishment and harsh conditions, recruits and international observers say, prompting a United Nations investigation and a diplomatic scramble by donor nations.        

&ldquo;We are really concerned,&rdquo; said Joseph Feeney, head of the United Nations Development Program in southern Sudan.        

For 50 years, the people of southern Sudan fought as resolute, spartan warriors in civil wars with the north. Conflict is all many of them had ever known, and the reality of peace, achieved in a 2005 accord, has never been fully trusted.        

Now, after a referendum, the south is expected to declare independence from the north on July 9. With less than five months to go, this legion of lifelong rebels is scrambling to evolve into a full-fledged government.        

Southern Sudan is expected to become a close strategic partner to the United States in an increasingly troubled region and, as one of the poorest places on earth, a recipient of hundreds of millions of dollars in American aid.        

But the rebels-turned-government here have struggled with a core element of their transformation: shaking off a culture of severe military discipline that has been deeply ingrained over generations.        

Nowhere are the scars of this struggle more evident than on the legs, arms and torsos of southern Sudan&rsquo;s young police cadets, recruits to a government training program partly paid for and supported by United Nations and donors like the United States.        

The program was intended to build the soon-to-be-country&rsquo;s first professional, civil-rights oriented police force, part of a strategic effort by the United Nations to help establish security in a region that desperately needs it. Cattle-rustling is a dangerous problem here. So are the tens of thousands of soldiers from the civil war yet to be demobilized. This month, a pair of mutinies by soldiers left about 250 dead.        

The new police force was meant to be a backbone of better security, but last December, the newly graduated officers were implicated in cases of assaults on young women in the capital, Juba, for what they were wearing on the street. The attacks caught many by surprise, particularly those who saw southern Sudan as an open, Western-oriented society.        

But before the officers ever took to the street, it seems they were victims of large-scale human-rights abuses themselves, carried out at the hands of their superior officers while they were still in training.        

For Jane Amito, the beginning now seems almost surreal. In January 2010, she joined 6,000 others at the Dr. John Garang Police Training Center in the village of Rejaf, near Juba. Many were just like herself, young and educated and enthusiastic about serving their newborn country.        

&ldquo;I was very much excited,&rdquo; said Ms. Amito, 25, who applied to the program after seeing an advertisement. &ldquo;They told us we would become police officers.&rdquo;        

But Ms. Amito never became an officer. Instead, she and other recruits described harsh, life-threatening conditions at the camp. Upon arrival, Ms. Amito said, recruits slept outside for days. Soon they built mud-hut shelters, but they lived in squalor and poverty. Many fell ill to malaria and typhoid, she and other recruits said.        

Last April, recruits asked the visiting police chief whether they could vote in the national presidential elections, and for stipends they said they were promised.        

The chief got angry and called the recruits insubordinate, saying they would be disciplined.        

The punishments began that afternoon, led by a unit of special military commandos, according to recruits and human rights researchers. For days, nearly all 6,000 recruits were forced to stand still for hours; they were forced to jump into the river, hop like frogs, crawl on their elbows and stare at the sun, all while being kicked and beaten with clubs.        

The punishments took a heavy psychological toll on the recruits. They were soon halted, but Rejaf was never the same.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Female recruits say they were sexually abused by male officers on a routine basis. Ms. Amito remembers one man in particular, who regularly tried to seduce her, and later threatened her at gunpoint to have sex with him. She ran off, and the officer was later dismissed.        

Martin Mude Jackson, another recruit, remembers a time when a recruit, exhausted from work, suddenly quit in the middle of training.        

&ldquo;They started caning this guy, telling him they didn&rsquo;t respect him; they caned this guy until he collapsed,&rdquo; said Officer Jackson, who graduated from the program but had not yet been deployed. &ldquo;They thought he was pretending. They caned him until he could not even breathe. We had to carry him to the health unit.&rdquo;        

The international community learned of the troubles at Rejaf by chance one morning in early December. A delegation of diplomats and journalists were touring the camp and Ms. Amito was chosen among a number of recruits to speak.        

When a journalist asked how the recruits were being treated, Ms. Amito said she simply told the truth.        

&ldquo;I did not know it was bad; I was just answering like any person,&rdquo; Ms. Amito said.        

Now she is in hiding, fearing for her life after being suddenly dismissed from the program days after the interview.        

&ldquo;They said, &lsquo;What did you tell the white man?&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Ms. Amito recalled her superiors as saying.        

The medic at Juba Teaching Hospital said some patients from Rejaf who died at the hospital had been admitted for malaria, anemia, facial bleeding and, as written in the registration book, &ldquo;running too long.&rdquo;        

The training program at Rejaf received about $1 million from international donors through the United Nations, which helped to build classrooms and provide part-time trainers, particularly in human rights. Millions more dollars have been promised.        

&ldquo;The international community was skeptical in the beginning, but then there was a lot of pride,&rdquo; one diplomat, who would speak only on the condition of anonymity, said of the local government&rsquo;s ability to train its own police. &ldquo;Now it has come up short.&rdquo;        

The United Nations began supporting Rejaf in February 2010, before the collective punishment, but says it was unaware of what was happening.        

&ldquo;We are monitoring the situation in regard to our future involvements,&rdquo; said Mr. Feeney of the United Nations.        

The southern Sudanese government has strongly condemned the abuses at Rejaf, and has removed officials involved, but has evaded acknowledging direct responsibility.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re trying our best,&rdquo; said Lt. Gen. Gier Chuang Aluong, southern minister of internal affairs, adding that an independent panel would be established to investigate the matter. &ldquo;It will not be easy to change overnight.&rdquo;        

Dr. Carol Berger, an anthropologist who has specialized in southern Sudan&rsquo;s rebel military that is now the governing party, said the abuse echoed a culture of &ldquo;discipline and punishment&rdquo; in military training during the years of war and that there was &ldquo;much resentment&rdquo; from older veterans toward the younger, relatively better-educated generation, a belief articulated by some recruits.        

&ldquo;I regret joining,&rdquo; said Joseph Onen, who trained at Rejaf. &ldquo;I thought when I joined this could be a time for me to help myself, but the whole time I spent there was misery.&rdquo;        
