
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Battling to keep his government together, Prime Minister Yusuf Raza Gilani announced Thursday that he would reverse a recent increase in fuel prices that had led to public discontent and was used as a pretext by a major political party to quit the governing coalition.        

Mr. Gilani made the announcement during a session of the National Assembly in Islamabad and said the decision was supported by all of Pakistan&rsquo;s political parties.        

Opposition parties hailed the price shift, but there were no initial indications that the Muttahida Qaumi Movement, the political party that broke with the government last Sunday, planned to rejoin it.        

While Mr. Gilani and his Pakistan Peoples Party struggled to save the ruling coalition from collapse, the country faced deepened divisions between religious and secular forces in the aftermath of the assassination of Salman Taseer, the Punjab governor, who was killed on Tuesday by one of his guards.        

In Rawalpindi on Thursday, throngs of lawyers and hundreds of students belonging to religious seminaries gathered in advance of a hearing for Malik Mumtaz Hussain Qadri, 26, who has confessed to the killing. But officials appeared determined to avoid a replay of Mr. Qadri&rsquo;s initial appearance in court on Wednesday, when lawyers showered him with rose petals and shouted slogans in his favor, and smiling police officials allowed him to address the crowd. He was taken by armored vehicle to a makeshift courtroom in nearby Islamabad.        

But their effort went awry when the judge, Malik Akram Awan, refused to travel to the hastily arranged courtroom. Mr. Qadri was sent back to Rawalpindi a few hours later, where his supporters awaited. They threw rose petals at the armored vehicle when it arrived. Lawyers cheered as Mr. Qadri was ushered into court, his face hidden under a cloak.        

Mr. Qadri was remanded into police custody for five days, lawyers and officials said. Police officers say they need more time to question Mr. Qadri to determine whether he acted alone or had accomplices.        

The next hearing is scheduled for Tuesday  in Rawalpindi.        

Some of the lawyers said that they were intent on protecting the country&rsquo;s tough blasphemy laws, which mandate capital punishment for offenders. Mr. Qadri indicated that he had killed the Punjab governor, Salman Taseer, because he was among the main backers of efforts to ease the laws. Sherry Rehman, a lawmaker and former information minister, is another.        

One of the Qadri supporters in Rawalpindi cited opposition to both politicians as an inspiration for an organized lawyers&rsquo; group that is now trying to help Mr. Qadri.        

&ldquo;We decided to form a lawyers&rsquo; forum to defend the honor of the prophet a month and a half ago in protest to statements by Salman Taseer and Sherry Rehman,&rdquo; said Chaudhry Kazim Jamil.        

Mr. Jamil said the forum consisted of 350 lawyers of Islamabad. &ldquo;Each one of us wanted to defend Mumtaz Qadri,&rdquo; Mr. Jamil said.        

But he said that the police did not allow him or any other lawyer to meet with Mr. Qadri on Thursday.        
J. David Goodman contributed reporting from New York.
