
This article is by C. J. Chivers, Alissa J. Rubin and Wesley Morgan.        

KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; After years of fighting for control of a prominent valley in the rugged mountains of eastern Afghanistan, the United States military has begun to pull back most of its forces from ground it once insisted was central to the campaign against the Taliban and Al Qaeda.        

The withdrawal from the Pech Valley, a remote region in Kunar Province, formally began on Feb. 15. The military projects that it will last about two months, part of a shift of Western forces to the province&rsquo;s more populated areas. Afghan units will remain in the valley, a test of their military readiness.        

While American officials say the withdrawal matches the latest counterinsurgency doctrine&rsquo;s emphasis on protecting Afghan civilians, Afghan officials worry that the shift of troops amounts to an abandonment of territory where multiple insurgent groups are well established, an area that Afghans fear they may not be ready to defend on their own.        

And it is an emotional issue for American troops, who fear that their service and sacrifices could be squandered. At least 103 American soldiers have died in or near the valley&rsquo;s maze of steep gullies and soaring peaks, according to a count by The New York Times, and many times more have been wounded, often severely.        

Military officials say they are sensitive to those perceptions. &ldquo;People say, &lsquo;You are coming out of the Pech&rsquo;; I prefer to look at it as realigning to provide better security for the Afghan people,&rdquo; said Maj. Gen. John F. Campbell, the commander for eastern Afghanistan. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want the impression we&rsquo;re abandoning the Pech.&rdquo;        

The reorganization, which follows the complete Afghan and American withdrawals from isolated outposts in nearby Nuristan Province and the Korangal Valley, runs the risk of providing the Taliban with an opportunity to claim success and raises questions about the latest strategy guiding the war.        

American officials say their logic is simple and compelling: the valley consumed resources disproportionate with its importance; those forces could be deployed in other areas; and there are not enough troops to win decisively in the Pech Valley in any case.        

&ldquo;If you continue to stay with the status quo, where will you be a year from now?&rdquo; General Campbell said. &ldquo;I would tell you that there are places where we&rsquo;ll continue to build up security and it leads to development and better governance, but there are some areas that are not ready for that, and I&rsquo;ve got to use the forces where they can do the most good.&rdquo;        

President Obama&rsquo;s Afghan troop buildup is now fully in place, and the United States military has its largest-ever contingent in Afghanistan. Mr. Obama&rsquo;s reinforced campaign has switched focus to operations in Afghanistan&rsquo;s south, and to building up Afghan security forces.        

The previous strategy emphasized denying sanctuaries to insurgents, blocking infiltration routes from Pakistan and trying to fight away from populated areas, where NATO&rsquo;s superior firepower could be massed, in theory, with less risk to civilians. The Pech Valley effort was once a cornerstone of this thinking.        

The new plan stands as a clear, if unstated, repudiation of earlier decisions. When Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal, the former NATO commander, overhauled the Afghan strategy two years ago, his staff designated 80 &ldquo;key terrain districts&rdquo; to concentrate on. The Pech Valley was not one of them.        

Ultimately, the decision to withdraw reflected a stark &mdash; and controversial &mdash; internal assessment by the military that it would have been better served by not having entered the high valley in the first place.        

&ldquo;What we figured out is that people in the Pech really aren&rsquo;t anti-U.S. or anti-anything; they just want to be left alone,&rdquo; said one American military official familiar with the decision. &ldquo;Our presence is what&rsquo;s destabilizing this area.&rdquo;        

Gen. Mohammed Zaman Mamozai, a former commander of the region&rsquo;s Afghan Border Police, agreed with some of this assessment. He said that residents of the Pech Valley bristled at the American presence but might tolerate Afghan units. &ldquo;Many times they promised us that if we could tell the Americans to pull out of the area, they wouldn&rsquo;t fight the Afghan forces,&rdquo; he said.        

It is impossible to know whether such pledges will hold. Some veterans worry that the withdrawal will create an ideal sanctuary for insurgent activity &mdash; an area under titular government influence where fighters or terrorists will shelter or prepare attacks elsewhere.        
Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington, and Sangar Rahimi from Kabul.
