
VALLETTA, Malta &mdash; After a two-day wait in the Tripoli harbor followed by a rough eight-hour crossing, more than 300 evacuees from Libya landed here on Friday night on a high-speed ferry chartered by the United States government.        

As they wheeled their dusty suitcases into a ferry terminal in this storied Mediterranean port, tired passengers recounted days of fear as scattered demonstrations turned into chaotic violence, and exhaled with relief at being on dry land.        

&ldquo;It feels great to be here,&rdquo; said Keith Diebold, a petroleum engineer from Missouri, looking ebullient as he and his fellow passengers emerged from the terminal and into the eye of dozens of waiting television cameras.        

The United States hired the ferry Maria Dolores after commercial flights from Tripoli could not keep up with demand. The Tripoli airport was overwhelmed, with as many as 10,000 people waiting to leave the country, according to the Turkish Foreign Ministry.        

But the catamaran ferry remained docked in the Tripoli harbor for two days until rough waters and winds subsided enough for it to depart.        

&ldquo;It was a terrible crossing with very big waves,&rdquo; said Tammi Shreve, from Florida, who teaches at the American School in Tripoli. But she said that the passengers had rallied and stuck together, and that the United States Embassy had taken good care of them.        

&ldquo;It wasn&rsquo;t scary, it&rsquo;s just that a lot of people were sick,&rdquo; she said.        

Like many passengers, Ms. Shreve said she would return to Libya as soon as she could. She said she was distraught that the turmoil had scattered her students and colleagues. &ldquo;I was crying when we left Tripoli,&rdquo; she said.        

The ferry carried 338 passengers, including 183 Americans, the State Department spokesman, Philip J. Crowley, said at a briefing in Washington. About 40 of the Americans were government officials, he said. The officials included staff members from the American Embassy in Tripoli, which was formally shut down on Friday.        

The other passengers included British, Australian, Canadian and South African citizens.        

Mr. Crowley said a charter plane had also left Tripoli on Friday carrying the remaining American diplomatic personnel, as well as other American citizens and people from other countries.        

Around Libya, frantic operations to evacuate foreigners from the widening chaos continued Friday, and European officials were already looking toward the next challenge: coping with what could be a huge influx of refugees from across the Mediterranean.        

Tens of thousands of foreigners have fled Libya this week. Jemini Pandya, a spokeswoman for the International Organization for Migration, an intergovernmental group, said at least 30,000 people, mainly Tunisian and Egyptian migrant workers, fled Libya from Monday to Wednesday.        

Drawn by jobs in Libya&rsquo;s booming construction industry and rich oil fields, as many as 1.5 million migrants were working in Libya when the violence began, the organization said.        

Sam Dewhirst, a Briton who managed to get a seat on a flight to Malta chartered by the British government, described the situation at the Tripoli airport as &ldquo;hellish&rdquo; and his government&rsquo;s response as underwhelming.        

Mr. Dewhirst, from Leeds, had been teaching English in Libya.        

While he and other Britons had been able to &ldquo;jump the queue,&rdquo; he said, scores of North Africans were still waiting to leave or had abandoned their suitcases on the tarmac in a mad scramble to get on flights. &ldquo;It was heartbreaking,&rdquo; he said.        

Many of those arriving in Malta said that they had not witnessed the violence firsthand, but that they had heard the gunshots with a growing sense of dread.        

Andy Law, from Manchester, England, came off the ferry with two black suitcases and one black eye, which he said he had received in a confrontation. He said there had been &ldquo;a few tense moments, a few gunshots,&rdquo; on his way out of Libya.        

He declined to explain the black eye any further other than to say, &ldquo;I kind of bumped into something.&rdquo;        

A construction engineer, Mr. Law had been holed up in his apartment about 10 miles outside Tripoli. &ldquo;At first I thought it was just a demonstration,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t think the gunfire would be so heavy.&rdquo; But he said he was stunned &ldquo;by how quickly everything changed.&rdquo;        

Ernie Diller, a history teacher at the American School in Tripoli, did not mince words describing the mood in Libya when he left. &ldquo;Kind of like, you&rsquo;d like to get out of the country,&rdquo; he said. But he said he had not feared for his life and said he hoped to return to Libya as soon as he could.        

&ldquo;I hope my daughter doesn&rsquo;t hear that,&rdquo; he added.        
Rachel Donadio reported from Valletta and J. David Goodman from New York. Reporting was contributed by Helene Cooper from Washington, Sebnem Arsu from Istanbul, Judy Dempsey from Berlin, Niki Kitsantonis from Athens, and Gaia Pianigiani from Rome.
