
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Mercenaries and army forces put down an attempt by protesters on Friday to break Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s hold on this capital city, opening fire on crowds who had taken to the streets after prayers to mount their first major challenge to the government&rsquo;s crackdown, witnesses said.        

The bloodshed heightened a standoff that has pitted Colonel Qaddafi &mdash; who vowed Friday to turn Libya into &ldquo;a hell&rdquo; as he hunkered down in his stronghold &mdash; against a spreading rebel force and increasingly alarmed international community, which condemned the violence and promised sanctions in coming days.        

A rebel officer who is coordinating an attack on Tripoli, Col. Tarek Saad Hussein, asserted in an interview that an armed volunteer force of about 2,000 men &mdash; including army defectors &mdash; was to arrive in Tripoli on Friday night. There was no way to confirm his claim.        

He was especially angered at the reports of security forces&rsquo; firing on protesters after prayers. &ldquo;They did not have weapons,&rdquo; he said, speaking at an abandoned army base in the eastern city of Benghazi, which is firmly under rebel control. &ldquo;They shot people outside the mosque.&rdquo;        

Indeed, accounts of the bloodshed on Friday indicated that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces had deployed the same determined brutality as they had earlier in the week defending their leader, who has ruled for more than 40 years.        

&ldquo;They shoot people from the ambulances,&rdquo; said one terrified resident, Omar, by telephone as he recalled an episode during the protests on Friday when one protester was wounded. &ldquo;We thought they&rsquo;d take him to the hospital,&rdquo; he said, but the militiamen &ldquo;shot him dead and left with a squeal.&rdquo;        

Reports said several people were killed, but a precise toll might be impossible. Omar said that friends who were doctors at a hospital in Tripoli saw bodies being removed from the morgue to conceal the death toll. Local residents told him that the bodies were being taken to beaches and burned. There was no way to confirm the account, and Omar did not want his full named used for fear of his life.        

&ldquo;We have no freedom here,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We want our freedom, too.&rdquo;        

Heba Morayef, a researcher with Human Rights Watch trying to confirm the number of fatalities, said she had heard widespread reports of security forces inside hospitals. Top officials of the biggest Tripoli hospitals were said to be loyal to Colonel Qaddafi and understating the casualties, she said.        

The Tripoli airport has become a refugee camp packed with thousands of people trying to flee. The floors inside are a carpet of flesh and blankets, including families with children. Outside, a thick wall of thousands of refugees was waiting to get in, and at least two guards were beating them back &mdash; one with a billy club and the other a whip.        

The city had been cleansed Thursday night for a visit by a number of foreign journalists the Qaddafi government has invited. Billboards with pictures of Colonel Qaddafi that were burned and defaced last week have all been restored, witnesses said. &ldquo;It is a stage set they built overnight,&rdquo; one resident said.        

Witnesses in Tripoli said that the streets were lined with extra police officers in riot gear before Friday Prayer services, and militia members patrolled the area near Bab al-Aziziya, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s military base.        

A resident who spoke with friends in several neighborhoods said the police opened fire on worshipers after the prayers, killing at least five people in Siyahiya, in western Tripoli, and several other people in Zawiat al-Dahmani, in the city&rsquo;s center.        

There were also reports of gunfire in Fashloom and the Souq al-Jumaa area. Those reports could not be immediately confirmed.        

It was no longer possible to reach Tripoli&rsquo;s central Green Square, the scene of many of the demonstrations &mdash; and much of the slaughter. The area was surrounded by checkpoints and barricades patrolled by members of the armed forces, Omar and other witnesses said.        

Indeed, earlier Friday, Libyan state television showed Colonel Qaddafi speaking from a parapet overlooking Green Square and addressing a crowd of supporters. There was no sign of resistance, only the sight of thousands of young loyalists. There was no way to know if the broadcast was live or pre-recorded.        
 David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Tripoli, and Kareem Fahim from Benghazi, Libya. . Sharon Otterman and Mona El-Naggar contributed reporting from Cairo, and Gaia Pianigiani from Rome.
