
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; More than 40 people, including men, women and children, have been raped in the past two weeks in eastern Congo in roughly the same area as a series of rapes earlier this year, United Nations officials said on Friday.        

On two separate occasions, the victims were coming back from the market in large groups when they were attacked, aid workers said, and the most likely culprits were rebel forces hiding out in the thickly forested hills of the eastern areas of the Democratic Republic of Congo.        

&ldquo;Rape continues to be a plague, a pandemic, which risks spreading across the D.R.C.,&rdquo; said Maurizio Giuliano, a United Nations spokesman in Congo. &ldquo;It is used by belligerent parties against civilians, as a weapon of war.&rdquo;        

Mr. Giuliano added, &ldquo;Most of the rapes are committed by opposition groups, and while we call on all to respect civilians, only an end to the conflict can realistically end their plight.&rdquo;        

The rapes happened in the Fizi area, a war-torn and relatively inaccessible part of eastern Congo, where there are few aid organizations or United Nations peacekeepers. In early January, dozens of people were raped in the same area by soldiers in the national army.        

The Congolese government has taken the rare step of prosecuting the soldiers and sentencing the commanding officer, Lt. Col. Kibibi Mutware, to 20 years in prison. Several other officers were also punished.        

United Nations officials have called eastern Congo the worst place in the world in terms of sexual violence because of the hundreds of thousands of people who have been sexually assaulted there in recent years. Most of the victims were women and girls, although there appears to be an increasing number of rapes of men and boys.        

The causes are not clear. But the area is bitterly contested by many armed groups battling over territory teeming with mineral riches. And the Congolese government&rsquo;s hold on the vast country is notoriously weak, with large stretches outside of its control. But even in areas where United Nations peacekeepers are stationed, mass rapes have occurred.        

Aid workers in Fizi said more than 150 people had been raped since the beginning of the year, with at least five cases of large groups of people being attacked at the same time, often going to or coming from local markets.        
