
NAJAF, Iraq &mdash; It was fewer than seven lines of handwritten Arabic on a small piece of paper, bearing his stamp. But with it, Moktada al-Sadr, son of a revered ayatollah and scourge of the American occupation, made clear on Thursday that he was in charge again of a group that has begun shaping Iraq as the United States withdraws.        

&ldquo;The lack of discipline of some of you as I performed my religious rituals bothered me and hurt me,&rdquo; he said, scolding his followers for the rapturous welcome the day before. &ldquo;Please exercise discipline and refrain from excessive chants and pushing which harms me, others, you, your reputation and the reputation of the Sadr family.&rdquo;        

Or, translated more loosely, this is not yesterday&rsquo;s movement.        

In scene after scene on Thursday, a day after Mr. Sadr returned from more than three years of exile in Iran, signs abounded of the new face his movement is projecting, with him in charge. Not least was a security detail outfitted in gray suits or khaki that looked borrowed from a mercenary outfit.        

On dirt packed by the feet of pilgrims, under imperious flags of piety, his supporters spoke with a new confidence, even arrogance, about a future they claim. And at the end of town, near the softly lighted shrine of Imam Ali, detractors &mdash; and they are many &mdash; said they had yet to forgive, whatever he might promise.        

&ldquo;This man,&rdquo; said Mohammed Ali Jaafar, a merchant there, &ldquo;he is nothing.&rdquo;        

In that, it was a familiar scene in a country rarely quiet since the United States invaded in 2003. At the center of events, once again, was Mr. Sadr, the rare figure in Iraq who carries both religious mystique and political authority, heeded by a grass-roots movement with a canny sense of the street and a remarkable ability to fashion itself as the opposition, even when it plays the role of kingmaker, as it is now.        

Ryan C. Crocker, the former American ambassador to Iraq, once suggested that the followers of Mr. Sadr &ldquo;could revolutionize Iraqi politics.&rdquo; He made the remark months ago, but these days, the prediction seems closer to reality. In conversations across Najaf on Thursday, a portrait emerged of a movement less at a crossroads and more on the verge of a synthesis of all its disparate elements, perhaps made possible by Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s return.        

&ldquo;Now that he&rsquo;s back, he can begin solving our problems,&rdquo; said Sadeq Ibrahim, 38, a veteran of Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s ostensibly disbanded militia. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s the man who can do it &mdash; a religious leader and a political leader &mdash; and it takes both to solve the problems of Iraq.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ibrahim joined dozens of clerics, tribesmen and youths with the hard faces of the disenfranchised at Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s home on Thursday, waiting for a glimpse of the cleric. Some had ventured from as far away as southernmost Basra, huddling in knots and casting their voices in the hurried whispers of anticipation. All of them seemed to echo the slogan of the black banner behind them: &ldquo;Yes, yes, to the leader.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Our father, our brother and our leader,&rdquo; declared one, Maher Ghanem.        

Such fervor is nothing new for a populist movement that emerged after the American invasion as one of Iraq&rsquo;s most unpredictable forces, building on the  following of Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s father, who was assassinated in 1999. In 2004, its militia twice fought the American military, and its language, as religious as it is nationalist, remains decidedly anti-American.        

These days, though, it is a far more sophisticated movement, recovering from military defeats in 2008 to win 40 seats in Parliament and to offer decisive support for Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki&rsquo;s return to power last month.        

Many here have viewed the group&rsquo;s success as a sign of its maturation. Its own cadres, almost entirely free of the menace and suspicion of their Shiite rivals, deem it simply the natural outcome of their longstanding grass-roots support. In the long months of negotiations over the government, some of Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s rivals complained of his delegates&rsquo; rollicking arrogance about their power, a haughtiness echoed in the streets on Thursday.        

&ldquo;There was no government for eight months, until the Sadrists gave their blessing and it came together,&rdquo; said Anmar Khafaji, 22, a supporter who traveled from Nasiriya to see Mr. Sadr. &ldquo;If there were no Sadrists, there would be no government.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
Others were even blunter. &ldquo;God willing, we&rsquo;ll rule the country, but we&rsquo;ll do it by way of justice, with our brothers, through our thoughts and intellect that will gather Iraqis together,&rdquo; Mr. Ibrahim said. &ldquo;The pen is our weapon now, and so is our knowledge.&rdquo;        

Whether that is the case remains a debate here. The current American ambassador, James F. Jeffrey, has said he has seen no evidence that the Sadrists have renounced, &ldquo;in practice or in theory,&rdquo; the idea of using force against opponents. Through the  months of negotiations after last year&rsquo;s parliamentary elections, American diplomats worried about the Sadrists playing a decisive role in the new government.        

But the reaction to Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s return was subdued in Washington. In 2004, an American spokesman in Baghdad called Mr. Sadr &ldquo;a two-bit thug.&rdquo; On Wednesday, the State Department spokesman, Philip J. Crowley, called him &ldquo;the leader of an Iraqi political party that won a number of seats in the March 2010 election.&rdquo;        

In fact, he is neither, a reality that was evident on Thursday. Mr. Sadr set out from his office in the style of a Baghdad potentate, riding in a convoy of silver BMWs escorted by sport utility vehicles. A few miles away, at a mosque that is hallowed ground for the movement, his supporters spoke in millennial terms of Mr. Sadr as a savior, a mystic and a herald of the coming of the Hidden Imam, who will reveal himself at the end of time, bringing order and justice and taking revenge on God&rsquo;s enemies.        

Some posters declare Mr. Sadr &ldquo;the preparer,&rdquo; paving the way for the imam&rsquo;s return. His group&rsquo;s cultural arm is known as &ldquo;the Preparers,&rdquo; too, in a synthesis of the religious and the political so seamless that no one really remarks on it. Abdel-Hussein Saadi, a pilgrim from Baghdad, said he was indeed certain of the imam&rsquo;s appearance in his lifetime. He was no less certain of Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s determination to fight for his rights before then, whatever his distance from a government filled with his own ministers and deputies.        

&ldquo;He represents his father, and he&rsquo;s going to save Iraqis from the great suffering they&rsquo;re having to endure from a government that will never close our ranks,&rdquo; he said.        
