
ISTANBUL  &mdash; President Nicolas Sarkozy of France made a six-hour visit to Turkey on Friday, and was greeted with criticism on Europe&rsquo;s so-far limited reaction to the Libyan crackdown as well as Mr. Sarkozy&rsquo;s own reluctance to bring Turkey into the European Union.        

Speaking at a joint news conference in the Turkish capital, Ankara, with President Abdullah Gul, Mr. Sarkozy called for the Libyan leader to resign and face trial before the International Criminal Court.        

Mr. Sarkozy said that Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi &ldquo;must go&rdquo; and that he and others should be brought to trial for their bloody response to peaceful demonstrators. &ldquo;The systematic violence against the Libyan people is unacceptable and will be the subject of investigations and sanctions,&rdquo; he said.        

But Mr. Sarkozy said that military intervention was not a good idea. &ldquo;What kind of credibility would such intervention bring to the people there?&rdquo; Mr. Sarkozy asked. &ldquo;People would then claim that riots have been plotted by foreigners.&rdquo;        

Turkish officials, meanwhile, said that the European Union had been too slow to respond to the turmoil in the Middle East and North Africa and that it should respond more rapidly to the needs of people fleeing the conflict, instead of trying to keep them away from European shores.        

Mr. Sarkozy strongly opposes Turkey&rsquo;s bid to join the European Union, and his lightning visit to Turkey &mdash; intended to discuss Turkish participation in the Group of 20, of which France is the president this year &mdash; was loudly criticized by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan in advance as insulting.        

&ldquo;We would have liked to welcome him as president of France,&rdquo; and not as chairman of the Group of 20, Mr. Erdogan told Agence France-Presse. &ldquo;So I think this is not a visit at the level of friendship between Turkey and France,&rdquo; he said, adding, &ldquo;Turkey and Turkish-French ties deserve better than that.&rdquo;        

Mr. Sarkozy reiterated his position favoring a special partnership with the European Union rather than membership.        

&ldquo;Between accession and partnership, which Turkey says it does not accept, there is a path of equilibrium that we can find,&rdquo; Mr. Sarkozy told reporters on Friday, while Mr. Gul insisted that the union &ldquo;should keep the promise it made&rdquo; and let Turkey complete accession negotiations.        

Mr. Sarkozy was also distracted by problems at home, with reports coming from his own political party that he would fire his  foreign minister, Mich&egrave;le Alliot-Marie, over the weekend. She is expected to be replaced by the defense minister, Alain Jupp&eacute;, 65, a former foreign minister and prime minister under Jacques Chirac, French officials said.        

Ms. Alliot-Marie has been sharply criticized for a December visit to Tunisia, where she and her family took free flights from a Tunisian businessman close to the family of the ousted president, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali,  who also did a business deal with her parents.        

Mr. Sarkozy asked Turkey to be the host of a ministerial meeting in April on how to regulate commodity prices to which Russia would be invited.        

In Ankara, Mr. Sarkozy praised Turkey&rsquo;s role and image as a democratic country  building a bridge between Europe and Asia. But scholars cautioned about using Turkey as a &ldquo;model&rdquo; for countries like Egypt and Tunisia.        

Turkey imposed secularism before democracy, and the process of democratic development has taken 60 years, with the army only recently stepping aside, cautioned Sinan Ulgen, a visiting scholar at the Carnegie Endowment in Brussels and chairman of the Center for Economics and Foreign Policy Studies in Istanbul. &ldquo;So it&rsquo;s a bit unfair to compare where Turkey stands today as a short-  or medium-term objective for an Arab world that is hopefully starting its transition to democracy,&rdquo; he said.        

Still, Turkey&rsquo;s experience with building political parties and institutions, checks and balances, election monitoring groups and a state system that did not dominate or crush the market &ldquo;may contain some lessons for others,&rdquo; Mr. Ulgen said.        
Sebnem Arsu reported from Istanbul, and Steven Erlanger from Paris.
