
RIO DE JANEIRO        

AS the gregarious Ronaldinho, one of the world&rsquo;s best soccer players, emerged this month from the locker room in his black-and-red Flamengo club jersey and pulling at his trademark ponytail, fans erupted in applause. But a group of shirtless men in the seats below had their sights on someone else, turning toward a private box above and chanting.        

&ldquo;Pa-tri-cia! Pa-tri-cia!&rdquo; they shouted. &ldquo;We love you!&rdquo;        

Patricia Amorim, the president of Flamengo, Brazil&rsquo;s most popular sports club, blushed and acknowledged them with a small wave.        

It was a hopeful moment for Ms. Amorim, a former Olympic swimmer, after a year to forget as the first woman to run the 115-year-old club.        

Last year, the police charged Flamengo&rsquo;s soccer goalie and captain, Bruno Fernandes das Dores de Souza, with murder in the disappearance of a former lover who claimed to have had his child. Another star player, Adriano Leite Ribeiro, struggled with alcoholism and was questioned about possible ties to drug traffickers.        

The series of events, seemingly outside of Ms. Amorim&rsquo;s control, painted a picture of a club that lacked discipline, and it fueled sexist notions that a woman could not manage a Brazilian soccer team, especially one as beloved as Flamengo to its estimated 35 million fans.        

&ldquo;She had all the bad luck she could think of,&rdquo; said Ruy Castro, who has written a book about Flamengo.        

Rumors that some club members wanted to impeach Ms. Amorim began circulating in the media once the beleaguered Flamengo soccer team &mdash; which had won the Brazilian championship in 2009 &mdash; began losing games and had trouble filling the stands.        

A seasoned competitor, Ms. Amorim, 42, tried not to curse her misfortune.        

&ldquo;Sometimes we think something is just so horrible that there is no light at the end of the tunnel,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;But you might have been lucky to go through all that because you can turn it around even faster.&rdquo;        

In soccer-obsessed Brazil, there is no team more popular or with more history than Flamengo, which is based in Rio. What began as a team that was followed by the elite grew into the club of the masses, rising in popularity during the early days of national radio broadcasts in the 1930s, when Rio was still the capital of Brazil.        

Ms. Amorim spent her life trying to scale the conservative, male-dominated culture of Flamengo, which started as a rowing club and branched out into other sports, including Olympic events like swimming, water polo, basketball and volleyball. She reached the summit in December 2009 when club members, in a surprise, elected her as president.        

Ms. Amorim grew up just a few blocks from the sprawling but aging Flamengo headquarters, nestled on a congested corner in Rio&rsquo;s trendy South Zone. Her father is a jazz and bossa nova bassist. Her mother was a primary-school teacher.        

Swimming became her obsession early on. When she was 3, a doctor recommended that her mother enroll her older sister Paula in swimming classes to help with her asthma; Patricia tagged along.        

Just two years later, accompanied by an instructor and a rescue boat, Patricia was swimming across Guanabara Bay in Rio, a distance of more than a mile. &ldquo;She wasn&rsquo;t even a little scared,&rdquo; said her mother, Tania Amorim.        

A framed photo from that day now sits in Patricia Amorim&rsquo;s Flamengo office; it shows her in a bathing suit among swimmers almost twice her size.        

Deborah Frochtengarten, a lifelong friend of Ms. Amorim&rsquo;s and a fellow swimmer, remembered her as having something to prove. &ldquo;She wasn&rsquo;t that tall; she wasn&rsquo;t that strong,&rdquo; Ms. Frochtengarten said. &ldquo;But she was the first to arrive to the pool and the last to leave.&rdquo;        

MS. Amorim was still in her teens when she qualified for the 1988  Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, finishing 11th in the four-by-100 relay. She won 28 titles in Brazil before retiring in 1991.        

While working and training at Flamengo, Ms. Amorim developed a taste for politics and was elected to Rio&rsquo;s city council in 2000; she is now in her third term. She and her husband, Fernando Sihman, an economist and former Brazilian volleyball player whom she met at a competition in Israel, have four children and lean on their families to help out.        

Despite her political career, the sporting world and Flamengo had always been her first loves. And in 2009, she was supported by Helio Ferraz, a former Flamengo president, in her bid to lead the club.        
Myrna Domit contributed reporting from São Paulo, Brazil.
