
TAIZ, Yemen &mdash; Tens of thousands of demonstrators massed in pivotal Yemeni cities on Friday, holding their largest demonstrations against President Ali Abdullah Saleh since the wave of anti-authoritarian unrest began sweeping across North Africa and the Middle East.        

In Taiz, a mountainous city in central Yemen that has long been a bastion of opposition sentiment, as many as 100,000 demonstrators held Friday Prayer in unison as a local cleric preached to the crowds of men and women sitting on the pavement.        

&ldquo;This is not a revolution against a person, a family or a tribe,&rdquo; he said over a loudspeaker to the gathering, which stretched over blocks and blocks of the city&rsquo;s streets. &ldquo;This is a revolution against oppression and corruption.&rdquo;        

After the mass prayer was finished, the crowd burst out into the kind of chant that has echoed across the Arab world since the Tunisian revolution: &ldquo;The people want the regime to fall.&rdquo;        

Large demonstrations also took place across Yemen&rsquo;s southern port city of Aden, where at least one person was fatally shot amid reports of snipers being used against protesters.        

And in the capital, Sana, tens of thousands of demonstrators held their largest protest since the unrest began, swelling what started as marches by a few dozen students and activists only a few weeks ago.        

Protesters in Taiz have held their own continuous sit-in for the past two weeks since Hosni Mubarak stepped down as president of Egypt. It has been much more organized than the one in the capital, with scheduled speakers, civilian-run checkpoints and even a series of distinct protest committees arranging security, food and media access.        

A four-block section of the road has been cordoned off by rocks and dubbed &ldquo;Freedom Square.&rdquo; A handful of Yemeni soldiers stand on the outskirts, relaxing against cars with AK-47s at their sides.        

Many of the protesters say they feel that if a democratic revolution is possible in Yemen, it will be a result of the momentum gained here in Taiz, an opposition stronghold often described as a geographic and ideological link between the north and south of the country.        

&ldquo;We feel that we want to start the revolution here, but that the results will be felt in Sana,&rdquo; said Fahim al-Mawfy, a lawyer who works with youth protesters in Taiz and Yemen&rsquo;s popular Islamist Al Islah political party.        

&ldquo;Taiz will be the heart of the revolution,&rdquo; said Abdul-Ghani al-Iryani, a prominent Yemeni political analyst. &ldquo;If the government can crush the protesters in Sana, it won&rsquo;t be able to crush it in Taiz.&rdquo;        

As with other democracy movements in the region, the protest in Taiz started on Facebook. About 50 activists organized small demonstrations before Mr. Mubarak fell, but it quickly escalated.        

&ldquo;One step in our plan is to start mobilizing the people in the countryside,&rdquo; said Boshra al-Maqtari, a protest leader, shouting directions into her phone to activists in Aden on how to get to the protest here.        

The Taiz organizers said that if the president had not stepped down after another month of protests, they would move to nationwide strikes, despite Yemen&rsquo;s fractured society.        

&ldquo;It will be difficult,&rdquo; said Ms. Maqtari, but  &ldquo;we can also make our demands across the country one.&rdquo;        

Organizers said they had seen some movement in that direction already, with protest chants across south Yemen changing from calls for separation &mdash; the demand of the south&rsquo;s popular secessionist movement &mdash; into calls for the government to fall.        

While protests in the capital have been tense, with repeated clashes between forces for and against the government, the demonstration in Taiz took on an exhilarated feel. Families walk around the cordoned off area. Hundreds of tents have been set up. On Wednesday, two weddings were held at the sit-in. And on Friday, three famous actors took the stage before prayers to tell jokes about the president as the crowd laughed on cue.        

Taiz&rsquo;s population is often described as the most educated in Yemen, but the people here complain that they are treated as second-class citizens, and that the culture of Yemen has been dominated by the northern tribes since Mr. Saleh came to power.        

&ldquo;I have a master&rsquo;s degree, while my boss has only graduated from high school,&rdquo; said Mr. Mawfy, the lawyer.        

Sadeq Qasim, from a village in Taiz Province, the most populous in Yemen, said he heard about the demonstration on a local television station.        

&ldquo;The opinion is united&rdquo; in my village, said Mr. Qasim, 32 and unemployed. &ldquo;We want Saleh to go.&rdquo;        
