
BAGHDAD &mdash; Iraq&rsquo;s largest oil refinery, in Baiji, was crippled by a predawn attack on Saturday in which gunmen stormed the vast complex, killed one engineer and set off several bombs.        

The attack shut down parts of the Baiji Refinery, halting the production of about 150,000 barrels per day of petroleum products and threatening to interrupt supplies of heating oil, gasoline and oil for generators for millions of people in northern Iraq.        

Oil Ministry officials were just beginning to investigate the extent of the damage on Saturday, and the acting manager  of the refinery said he feared it would take months to repair the pipelines, cables, furnaces and other equipment damaged by the explosions and fires. The refinery is about 100 miles north of Baghdad.        

&ldquo;This will create a crisis,&rdquo; said the official, Abud al-Kadir Salih. &ldquo;It will affect consumers of fuel from factories to power plants, and people in daily need. It will be very hard to cover the shortfall.&rdquo;        

The attack was the second one by insurgents this month on Iraq&rsquo;s all-important oil sector, which supplies about 90 percent of government revenues in a country whose economy is still reeling from years of war and insurgency.        

The bombing &mdash; carried out by just two gunmen, according to refinery officials &mdash; raised questions about the security of Iraq&rsquo;s sometimes antiquated oil facilities, which have long been a target for insurgent bombings.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a target &mdash; a big target,&rdquo; said Ahmed al-Shamma, under secretary of the Oil Ministry. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s very difficult to get into this refinery. They must have had some help.&rdquo;        

Security officials blamed the insurgent group Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia. The Oil Ministry called the assault part of a &ldquo;terrorist plan&rdquo; to undermine the ministry&rsquo;s ability to deliver oil products to Iraqis, who spend hours waiting in line for diesel and gasoline, despite living atop an ocean of oil.        

According to officials from the refinery and the provincial government, men armed with pistols with noise suppressors broke into the refinery around 4:30 a.m. and attacked the few security guards and engineers who had been working overnight.        

The attackers then set off several bombs, sending jets of flame pouring from pipes and plumes of smoke billowing into the sky. It took 50 fire trucks more than five hours to contain the blaze, Reuters reported.        

In addition to the engineer who was killed, three people were wounded, at least one of them critically.        

After the American invasion in 2003, millions of dollars in fuel from the Baiji Refinery was funneled onto the black market, some of it into the hands of militants. In 2008, an American captain stationed at Baiji called the illegal flow of oil the &ldquo;money pit of the insurgency.&rdquo;        

On Feb. 10, a pipeline leading to another refinery north of Baghdad was bombed, disrupting production at the Dora refinery in the capital.        

Although Iraq has the world&rsquo;s third-largest oil reserves, it has struggled to increase production beyond about 2.6 million barrels per day, hampered by creaky pipelines and other infrastructure, as well as political and security uncertainties.        

Elsewhere across Iraq, the residual anger of Friday&rsquo;s nationwide protests continued as demonstrators turned out in the streets. Their numbers were far smaller, and the protests less deadly than a day earlier, when at least 16 protesters were killed  across the country.        

On Saturday, one person was killed in confrontations between security forces and demonstrators in the  city of Kirkuk.        

In the south, stick-wielding security forces in Hilla attacked a group of demonstrators who had been staging a sit-in at the provincial governor&rsquo;s office, wounding six. About 200 protesters in Ramadi clashed with policemen, who dispersed the crowd with tear gas.        

Iraq&rsquo;s most revered Shiite cleric, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, issued a statement on Saturday calling on Iraq&rsquo;s government to heed the protesters&rsquo; demands. Before the protests, a spokesman for Mr. Sistani had suggested that the demonstrators stay home.        

But in the statement on Saturday, translated by Reuters, the ayatollah said the clerical leadership, &ldquo;which has always stressed to officials to work on people&rsquo;s legitimate demands, is warning them not to insist on sticking to current policies in running the state.&rdquo;        
Yasir Ghazi and Khalid D. Ali contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an Iraqi employee of The New York Times from Samarra, Iraq.
