
TOKYO (Reuters) &mdash; A Japanese governing party elder suggested Saturday that Prime Minister Naoto Kan&rsquo;s resignation was an option to win opposition support for bills to enact a workable budget, adding to pressure on the unpopular leader as he struggles with a divided Parliament.        

Mr. Kan, whose public support ratings have fallen to about 20 percent, had already been facing pressure from inside and outside the governing Democratic Party either to quit or call a snap election to break a political deadlock that is keeping Japan from dealing with pressing problems including an enormous public debt.        

&ldquo;We need to put top priority on the passage of the budget and related bills&rdquo; over the Democratic Party or Prime Minister Kan, Kozo Watanabe, a senior adviser to the party, told reporters. But he added that as long as Mr. Kan wanted to stay on, it was the duty of party members to &ldquo;protect&rdquo; him.        

Rifts in the party, which deepened after its power broker, Ichiro Ozawa, was indicted last month on accusations that he had misreported political funds, have also weakened Mr. Kan&rsquo;s grip on power and distracted the government from dealing with policy problems.        

On a television show earlier in the day, Mr. Watanabe, a veteran lawmaker, ruled out the chance of a snap election for Parliament&rsquo;s powerful lower house, the Kyodo News Agency reported.        

Sounding a theme he has raised before, Shizuka Kamei, the leader of a small coalition party, the People&rsquo;s New Party, called for a shuffle of the cabinet that would bring in opposition lawmakers as a way to break the political impasse, Japan&rsquo;s public broadcaster, NHK, reported.        

&ldquo;Prime Minister Kan must forget the past, forge ahead and stand at the forefront of such a choice,&rdquo; Mr. Kamei said.        

But the Democrats&rsquo; secretary general, Katsuya Okada, dismissed talk of Mr. Kan&rsquo;s resignation in return for opposition help with passing bills, including one to allow the issuance of deficit-financing bonds to carry out steps in the budget for the year starting in April.        

&ldquo;The opposition has rejected the idea of such an exchange, so to focus on that debate is meaningless,&rdquo; Mr. Okada said.        

The government wants to have the lower house of Parliament, where the Democrats hold a big majority, approve the $1 trillion 2011-12 budget on Monday, but it plans to hold off on submitting related bills.        

The budget itself can be enacted by Parliament&rsquo;s lower house alone. But the related bills to implement the budget require approval of the opposition-controlled upper chamber.        
