
HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam &mdash; The United States lodged an official protest with the Vietnamese government on Thursday over what news reports called a police assault of an American diplomat who monitors human rights issues as he was trying to visit a dissident priest.        

Michael W. Michalak, the United States ambassador to Vietnam, described the attack on the diplomat, Christian Marchant, as &ldquo;an incident of grave concern.&rdquo;        

The attack took place Wednesday in Hue, the former imperial capital. Accounts of the episode were sketchy, and the embassy&rsquo;s spokesman in Hanoi declined to provide details. But a report by Radio Free Asia, the United States-financed broadcaster, said Mr. Marchant had been wrestled to the ground outside the home of the Rev. Thadeus Nguyen Van Ly, a Roman Catholic priest being held under house arrest as part of a 2007 conviction on accusations of undermining the government.        

A report by The Associated Press said the police had repeatedly closed a car door on Mr. Marchant&rsquo;s legs.        

Mr. Marchant, a political officer at the embassy since 2007, could not be reached for comment. He is known among fellow diplomats as an ardent advocate of dissident rights and religious freedoms in Vietnam. He was recently chosen to receive the Human Rights and Democracy Award that the State Department presents to an embassy officer.        

He was attacked less than a week before Vietnam&rsquo;s Communist Party is to hold its National Party Congress, a meeting that will decide the country&rsquo;s leadership for the next five years.        

A statement by Human Rights Watch said the assault on Mr. Marchant fit what it called a pattern of police brutality in Vietnam.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s clear that Vietnam&rsquo;s police are out of control,&rdquo; said Phil Robertson, the deputy director of the Asian division of Human Rights Watch.        

&ldquo;They beat and sometimes kill suspects in detention,&rdquo; Mr. Robertson said. &ldquo;They brutalize dissidents, human rights advocates and religious activists. They assault citizens over minor traffic violations.&rdquo;        

News services quoted a spokeswoman for Vietnam&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry as saying that the government was reviewing the episode, but that foreign diplomats had a responsibility to abide by Vietnam&rsquo;s laws.        

Relations between Vietnam and the United States have flourished in recent years. American companies, including Intel, the chip maker, are among the largest investors here. The armed forces of the United States and Vietnam, former wartime enemies, now treat each other like allies, a reconciliation spurred in part by the desire to counterbalance the rise of China.        

But human rights remains one area where Vietnam bristles at American criticism, recently calling Washington&rsquo;s assessments of the state of religious freedom in Vietnam &ldquo;biased.&rdquo;        
