
PARIS &mdash; In a hastily scheduled speech to the nation, President Nicolas Sarkozy announced Sunday evening that he had once more reshuffled his cabinet, removing the foreign minister, Mich&egrave;le Alliot-Marie, after only three months in office and replacing her with Alain Jupp&eacute;, the defense minister and a former prime minister and foreign minister.        

Ms. Alliot-Marie had been a focus of controversy after taking a vacation to Tunisia as antigovernment demonstrations were under way there, and amid disclosures of her family&rsquo;s business dealings in the country.        

Mr. Sarkozy&rsquo;s seven-minute televised speech was billed as an address on international affairs in the wake of the &ldquo;Arab spring&rdquo; that has taken France and the rest of the West by surprise and was an effort to answer charges that French diplomacy had failed and needed a reorganization of spirit and leadership.        

He spoke of an effort to &ldquo;refound&rdquo; his stalled &ldquo;Union for the Mediterranean&rdquo; to better aid the transition to democracy of nations in North Africa and to better control illegal immigration. &ldquo;Europe is in the front line,&rdquo; Mr. Sarkozy said, and he called for a European summit meeting to discuss how to help new democracies and to find a joint position on immigration, to deal with those fleeing uncertainty and violence in North Africa.        

Mr. Sarkozy announced other shifts in the French cabinet. G&eacute;rard Longuet, 65, the head of Mr. Sarkozy&rsquo;s Union for a Popular Movement in the French Senate, becomes defense minister. Claude Gu&eacute;ant, a Sarkozy intimate, becomes interior minister, replacing another Sarkozy confidant, Brice Hortefeux, who is expected to become a political counselor to Mr. Sarkozy to prepare for the 2012 presidential election.        

But Mr. Sarkozy kept Ms. Alliot-Marie&rsquo;s popular partner, Patrick Ollier, as a junior minister in charge of relations with Parliament.        

The change was the fourth cabinet reshuffle within a year, a measure of Mr. Sarkozy&rsquo;s difficulties and changing fortunes. The change that brought Ms. Alliot-Marie and Mr. Jupp&eacute;, 65, into the government last November, while keeping Fran&ccedil;ois Fillon as prime minister, was supposed to give Mr. Sarkozy a new stability and a new political wind.        

But the controversy surrounding Ms. Alliot-Marie, 64, soon overwhelmed the government, dragging Mr. Sarkozy ever further down in popularity, even as political gossip increased that Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the Socialist now running the International Monetary Fund in Washington, will enter the race later this year for the presidential election of 2012. Mr. Sarkozy&rsquo;s popularity ratings are at historical lows, hovering around 30 percent.        

His center-right party faces strong challenges from the far-right National Front of Marine Le Pen, which is gathering around 20 percent of the prospective vote in early opinion polls. The nightmare for Mr. Sarkozy would be to be squeezed out of a second-round runoff for the presidency because of splits on the right and a strong showing by both the Socialists and the National Front.        

Ms. Alliot-Marie, a self-described Gaullist who has in the past been minister of defense, interior and most recently justice, got into trouble with a Christmastime vacation to Tunisia, which was by then in the beginning of the protests that overthrew the government of President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali. Some Tunisian protesters had died by then, but Ms. Alliot-Marie flew on vacation there   with her partner, himself a new member of the government, and her parents. She took two free flights from a Tunisian businessman who is considered close to the Ben Ali family, and her parents bought a company from the businessman at a price she refused to disclose.        

In the end, Mr. Sarkozy could not afford to keep her, bringing an embarrassing end to a remarkable governmental career that began as a secretary of state for education in 1986.        
