
LA PAZ, Bolivia (AP) &mdash; A senior Interior Ministry official who recently headed Bolivia&rsquo;s counternarcotics police has been arrested in Panama and sent to the United States to face charges that he ran a cocaine trafficking ring.        

The arrest of the official, Ren&eacute; Sanabria, a retired police general, on Thursday and the related arrests in Bolivia of at least three other senior police officers were widely seen as an embarrassment for leftist President Evo Morales, who expelled United States drug agents three years ago.        

A former coca growers union leader, Mr. Morales has promoted traditional uses of coca leaf while professing zero tolerance for cocaine trafficking.        

&ldquo;In the coming days we are going to arrest everyone [involved] and bring them to justice,&rdquo; Bolivia&rsquo;s deputy minister of social defense, Felipe Caceres, said on Sunday.        

The arrest of General Sanabria, who headed the FELCN counternarcotics police in 2007-2008, along with a second Bolivian man, was announced on Saturday by Interior Minister Sacha Llorenti.        

General Sanabria was named chief of the Center of Intelligence and Information Generation in the Interior Ministry in 2009. Bolivian officials did not explain what led to the arrests or the nature of their cooperation in the investigation that precipitated them.        

A United States official told The Associated Press on Sunday that General Sanabria was arrested at Washington&rsquo;s request and had an initial federal court appearance in Miami on Friday.        

The official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the delicate political nature of the issue, would not offer further details on the investigation.        

He did say, however, that the other suspect was expected to appear in court in Miami  Sunday. That man has been identified in Bolivian press reports as Marcelo Foronda.        

The police officials arrested as alleged members of the trafficking organization were identified by Bolivian authorities as Col. Milton S&aacute;nchez Pantoja, Maj. Edwin Ra&uacute;l Ona Moncada and Capt. Franz Hernando Siles R&iacute;os.        

Mr. Caceres said the intelligence center that General Sanabria ran comprised 15 officials, most of them police officers.        

Andr&eacute;s Ortega, an opposition lawmaker,  called the case &ldquo;a very clear signal that drug trafficking has deeply infiltrated the Interior Ministry.&rdquo;        

When President Morales expelled United States drug agents along with Ambassador Philip Goldberg in 2008, he accused them of inciting his political opponents. That same year, according to Bolivia&rsquo;s government, the country&rsquo;s police confiscated a record 27 tons of drugs.        

Relations between Washington and La Paz have since been tense, with Washington decreasing aid to the poor Andean nation.        

Bolivia is the No. 3 cocaine-producing country after Colombia and Peru. United States and Colombia counterdrug officials have told The A.P. that without a D.E.A. presence in Bolivia, drug traffickers from Brazil, Colombia, Mexico and elsewhere have been operating with increasing impunity there.        

Until relations with the United States soured, the FELCN was a bulwark of United States influence in Bolivia. Its counterdrug units were Bolivia&rsquo;s best-equipped officers, with Washington providing them with everything from gasoline to jungle boots.        
