
BEIJING &mdash; On the heels of a North Korean plea for negotiations to end the crisis on the Korean Peninsula, Obama administration envoys central to stalled six-party talks met Thursday with their Chinese counterparts, and one said he was hopeful that serious talks on North Korea would begin soon.        

The comment, by Stephen W. Bosworth, the special representative for North Korea policy, underscores a shift in the American approach to North Korea, away from two years of what the administration called &ldquo;strategic patience&rdquo; marked by steadfast refusal to engage with the North.        

With China&rsquo;s president, Hu Jintao, scheduled to visit Washington in two weeks, the United States is trying to choreograph a resumption of the multiparty talks with the North that include China, South Korea, Japan and Russia. The United States has begun pressing the North to back up its newly conciliatory words with proof that it has abandoned its recent bellicose behavior. At the same time, it is nudging a deeply suspicious South to be receptive to the North&rsquo;s overture.        

Mr. Bosworth and Sung Kim, the United States envoy to the suspended six-party talks, met in Beijing with Vice Foreign Minister Zhang Zhijun and Wu Dawei, China&rsquo;s representative to the talks, as well as Wang Jiarui, a senior foreign affairs official in the Communist Party. The Americans&rsquo; next stop is Japan.        

There were no statements on the specifics of the Beijing meeting, but Mr. Bosworth was widely expected to seek details of a meeting last month between China&rsquo;s top foreign policy official, State Councilor Dai Bingguo, and North Korea&rsquo;s leader, Kim Jong-il.        

As North Korea&rsquo;s closest ally, China has come under rising  pressure from the United States and domestic critics to take a harder line toward the North after its Nov. 23 artillery attack on a South Korean island, which killed two South Korean marines and two civilians.        

In the past week, North Korea has repeatedly sought dialogue with the South. On Thursday, South Korea rejected North Korea&rsquo;s offer on Wednesday of &ldquo;unconditional&rdquo; peace talks &ldquo;anytime and anywhere, letting bygones be bygones,&rdquo; according to local news media reports.        

That offer followed New Year&rsquo;s commentaries in Northern newspapers calling for dialogue and a relaxation of tensions &ldquo;as soon as possible.&rdquo;        

South Korean officials, however, quickly pointed out that the recent statements from Pyongyang followed a pattern of provocative acts followed by calls for talks that sought concessions.        

&ldquo;We have emphasized that it is important for North Korea to show a sincere attitude about inter-Korean dialogue and inter-Korean relations,&rdquo; the Foreign Ministry spokesman, Kim Young-sun, said in a report carried by the South Korean news service Yonhap.        

Relations between the Koreas are perhaps more strained than at any time since the end of the Korean War in 1953. In March, a torpedo attack attributed to North Korea sank a South Korean warship, the Cheonan, killing 46 sailors. North Korea has denied responsibility.        

In November, Pyongyang revealed the existence of a modern and previously unknown uranium enrichment facility. Shortly after came the North&rsquo;s lethal attack on Yeonpyeong Island.        

But when the South responded with more military exercises, the North withheld retaliation.        
Michael Wines reported from Beijing, and Mark Landler from Washington. Kevin Drew contributed reporting from Hong Kong and Sharon LaFraniere from Beijing.
