
TEL AVIV &mdash; The children in the kindergarten class were taking their new celebrity status in stride on Monday, singing a Hebrew song about patience hours after a movie about their school, Bialik-Rogozin in south Tel Aviv, won the Academy Award for best short documentary in Los Angeles.        

The school, which is state-supported, caters to the children of migrant workers and refugees from 48 countries. For many of them it is a safe haven from daily hardships and, in some cases, traumatic pasts.        

Although the American-made documentary, &ldquo;Strangers No More,&rdquo; celebrates the school&rsquo;s atmosphere of diversity and tolerance as it tries to integrate the children into Israeli life, there is an ominous subtext to the story that was not explored in the movie. Of the school&rsquo;s 828 pupils, ranging from kindergarten to 12th grade, 120 are facing deportation with their families because they do not meet government criteria for obtaining legal status.        

Despite all the school&rsquo;s attention from the Oscar, Israel&rsquo;s Interior Ministry said Monday that the government&rsquo;s preparations for dealing with the children of illegal residents were in their final stages and that the plan would be carried out in the coming weeks.        

Among the potential deportees is Esther, 12, one of the stars of the movie, who came to Israel from South Africa at the age of 8. An appealing girl with big dark eyes, Esther was brought here by her father after her mother was murdered, teachers said. Interviewed at school on Monday, she said she was happy with the way the movie turned out.        

&ldquo;I want everyone to know about me and about the school,&rdquo; said Esther, whose favorite subjects are Hebrew and mathematics, &ldquo;but not the reason why I came.&rdquo; A staff member who accompanied her said she did not want to discuss the threat of deportation, either.        

Last summer, the Israeli cabinet laid down guidelines for granting legal status to the children of people who have entered Israel with a valid visa or permit but have stayed on illegally. The criteria grant permanent residency visas to children of migrants if they attend school, they speak Hebrew, their parents entered the country legally and they have resided in Israel for at least five years.        

Under those rules, up to 400 children and their families living in Israel are not qualified to remain.        

A spokeswoman for the Interior Ministry said that since August the government had considered more than 700 requests from people appealing their expected deportation.        

Most, including Esther and her father, who are a year short of meeting the criteria, have not received word about their fate.        

In Israel, a country of 7.5 million people, the idea of deporting children has become the subject of emotional debate. It is estimated that there are as many as 300,000 foreign laborers in Israel, about half of them without valid documents. Many have entered legally to work in construction, agriculture and domestic jobs, but have outstayed their visas. Their numbers have swelled as African refugees and economic migrants have crossed the border from Egypt over the past several years.        

Israel&rsquo;s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has described the illegal migration in the past as &ldquo;a threat&rdquo; that could &ldquo;flood the foundation of the Zionist state.&rdquo;        

Others here say that Israel, a nation of Jewish refugees, should show more compassion, especially for Hebrew-speaking children who consider themselves Israeli and have not known any other home. &ldquo;I cannot believe that we do not have room in our territory or in our hearts for these children,&rdquo; said Rotem Ilan, the founder of Israeli Children, a nongovernmental volunteer organization that helps the children of immigrant families. &ldquo;We let them go through the Israeli school system, and then we are surprised that they feel Israeli and want to stay?&rdquo;        

The directors of the documentary, Karen Goodman and Kirk Simon, became aware of the deportation issue during filming but decided not to focus on it.        

"We chose to create a film that was not political," Ms. Goodman wrote in an email message en route from Los Angeles to New York. "Bialik is a place of peace and introducing the issue of deportation in a broad way would have been inappropriate."        

Mr. Simon added, "Because our film would take over a year to produce and will not be broadcast in the United States until later this year we thought that including an issue that could be resolved or change or evolve could hurt the long time viewership potential of the film."        

Both, however, expressed hope that all the children threatened with deportation would be allowed to stay in Israel, and at the school.        

Bialik-Rogozin is supported by the Tel Aviv-Jaffa municipality and the Ministry of Education. Ron Huldai, the mayor of Tel Aviv-Jaffa, told Israel Radio on Monday that the school slowly began to become a center for the children of foreign workers about 15 years ago. &ldquo;When I became mayor we made things formal,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;not to ignore them but to care for them, and there were wonderful people who joined and helped.&rdquo;        

Over the past six years or so, the rate of children passing their matriculation exams at the school has almost doubled to about 78 percent, according to Nechama Seinberg, one of the school&rsquo;s deputy principals.        

Meanwhile, Gila Benarzi, a staff member, said that winning an Oscar had imbued the school with a &ldquo;feeling of euphoria and hope,&rdquo; adding, &ldquo;The children are proud.&rdquo;        
