
Pirates in the Arabian Sea hijacked a yacht carrying seven Danish citizens, including three children, the Danish government said Monday, in the first reported attack on a small pleasure vessel since four Americans were killed by their pirate captors last week.        

That episode was the deadliest in recent years involving Somali pirates, who have struck with increasing impunity throughout the waters off the Horn of Africa, and appeared to represent a departure from the usual hijacking playbook, which calls for large cash ransoms and little violence.        

What effect the American deaths would have on Denmark&rsquo;s approach to the latest hijacking remained unclear. Along with United States Navy vessels, Danish naval ships are part of international antipiracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden and the Arabian Sea. In the past, however, Denmark has favored negotiation over taking an aggressive posture toward pirates.        

Aboard the Danish yacht, which was taken on Thursday, were a man and a woman; their three children, ages 12 to 16; and two crew members, the Danish Foreign Ministry said. The ministry did not explain why it had waited several days to make the announcement; it said relatives of the hostages had been notified.        

It was not immediately clear how many pirates boarded the yacht or whether they were Somali. Ecoterra International, a nonprofit maritime group that monitors pirate attacks, said the yacht had been hijacked in the southern Arabian Sea, far from the Horn of Africa, but appeared to be heading toward Somalia.        

&ldquo;Naturally, I am deeply concerned over the situation,&rdquo; the Danish foreign minister, Lene Espersen, said in a statement. She added that was especially true &ldquo;as there are children involved, and I can only express my utter disdain for the pirates&rsquo; actions.&rdquo;        

Governments have pleaded with shipowners and seafaring vacationers to stick to designated shipping lanes when passing through the Arabian Sea, where pirates continue to strike despite the presence of dozens of warships. The United States Navy sometimes provides escorts for convoys, and the ships travel in numbers for safety.        

Last Tuesday, pirates shot and killed Jean and Scott Adam of Marina del Rey, Calif., and Phyllis Macay and Robert A. Riggle of Seattle during what appeared to be a dispute among jittery pirates as United States Navy forces shadowed the hijacked yacht, the Quest, in the Gulf of Aden. Why the pirates chose to kill their captives remains murky. Generally, Somali pirates try to ransom captives alive.        

Several Danes have been held by Somali pirates in recent years. In 2007, five sailors were held captive for 83 days on board the hijacked Danish freighter Danica White, the Danish newspaper Politiken has reported, and pirates are currently holding two Danes and four Filipino sailors from a Danish freighter. That ship was hijacked Jan. 12 near Oman in the Gulf of Aden and later abandoned.        

Somali pirates increased their attacks in 2010 for the fourth straight year, striking more ships and taking more hostages than in any year on record, according to a January report by the Piracy Reporting Center of the International Maritime Bureau. According to the report, 1,181 people were taken hostage and eight killed in attacks on 445 ships in 2010.        
Christina Anderson contributed reporting.
