
PARIS &mdash; Almost 100,000 people have fled Libya&rsquo;s fighting for neighboring Egypt and Tunisia, the United Nations refugee agency said, in what it called a humanitarian emergency.        

The numbers seem to have increased over the weekend as armed rebel forces moved closer to a showdown with Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and his loyalists who were standing their ground in Tripoli, the capital, and a handful of other places.        

The executive director of the World Food Program traveled to Tunisia on Monday to meet with government officials on refugees&rsquo; needs and the impact on the region. In Geneva, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton announced that the United States Agency for International Development was dispatching two teams to Libya&rsquo;s borders in Egypt and Tunisia to assess the need for emergency assistance. She said the aid agency had set aside $10 million for humanitarian assistance and begun an inventory of American emergency food supplies.        

On Monday, the French prime minister, Fran&ccedil;ois Fillon, said in Paris that his country was sending two planes carrying doctors, nurses, medications and medical equipment to the rebels&rsquo; eastern stronghold of Benghazi.        

People from the United States and many European nations have been evacuated by sea and air from Tripoli and Benghazi, using the island of Malta as a staging point. The European Union said in Brussels that most of its 10,000 people in Libya had left, but that 650 were still asking to be evacuated, many of them from areas where rescue is difficult, The Associated Press reported. China said Monday that it had sent four military transport planes to rescue the remaining 1,000 of some 30,000 of its people who were there before the crisis.        

Kristalina Georgieva, the European Union&rsquo;s crisis response commissioner, said that 1.5 million additional foreigners remained in Libya, increasing pressure on the borders with Egypt and Tunisia as non-Libyans sought to flee.        

In a statement on Sunday, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, based in Geneva, said Tunisian authorities had estimated that 40,000 refugees had arrived from Libya in a week. And Egyptian authorities said 55,000 people had fled since Feb. 19. Over half the total number of refugees were Egyptians, the refugee agency said, but they also included Libyans, Chinese and people from several other Asian countries.        

Television coverage at Libya&rsquo;s land borders showed mainly poor contract workers carrying few possessions. Some footage showed hundreds of people crossing into Tunisia, then sitting on the ground, awaiting help.        

&ldquo;We are committed to assisting Tunisia and Egypt in helping each and every person fleeing Libya,&rdquo; said Ant&oacute;nio Guterres, the high commissioner for refugees. &ldquo;We call upon the international community to respond quickly and generously to enable these governments to cope with this humanitarian emergency.&rdquo;        

The crisis in Libya had left people from Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sudan and Thailand stranded with no travel documents as they tried to flee to Egypt, the refugee agency&rsquo;s statement said. The agency said it had sent more than 100 tons of supplies like tents, blankets and cooking equipment.        

&ldquo;According to the tribal leaders, Africans are being treated with suspicion in eastern Libya, due to rumors about the government employing mercenaries from sub-Saharan Africa,&rdquo; the statement said.        

Reuters reported Monday that Kenyans who fled said they had faced attacks and hostility from Libyan citizens and officials who branded them as mercenaries supporting Colonel Qaddafi. A Kenya Airways flight landed in Nairobi with 90 Kenyans and 64 people from Burundi, Congo, Lesotho, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, officials said.        

&ldquo;We were being attacked by local people who said that we were mercenaries killing people,&rdquo; Julius Kiluu, 60, a building supervisor, told Reuters. &ldquo;Let me say that they did not want to see black people.&rdquo;        

Last week, British and German military planes flew into Libya&rsquo;s desert to pluck hundreds of people from remote oil installations and, British news reports said, the British C-130 Hercules military transports were protected by special forces units in case they came under attack.        
Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Geneva.
