
BEIJING &mdash; The call to action shot across mobile phones and Internet chat sites, urging people to converge on 13 Chinese cities to demand an end to corruption, inflation and the strictures of authoritarian rule. &ldquo;The Chinese people do not have the patience to wait any longer,&rdquo; said one message.        

The anonymous organizers got a sizable turnout &mdash; but in China, most of those who poured into squares and shopping centers were police officers and plainclothes security agents.        

Two months of upheaval in the Mideast have cast doubt on the staying power of all authoritarian governments. But in China calls for change are so far being met with political controls wielded by authorities who, even during a period of rising prosperity and national pride, have not taken their staying power for granted.        

The nearly instantaneous deployment of the police to prevent even notional gatherings in big cities the past two weeks is just one example of what Chinese officials call &ldquo;stability maintenance.&rdquo; This refers to a raft of policies and practices refined after &ldquo;color revolutions&rdquo; abroad and, at home, tens of thousands of demonstrations by workers and peasants, ethnic unrest, and the spread of mobile communications and broadband networking.        

Chinese officials charged with ensuring security, lavishly financed and permitted to operate above the law, have remained perpetually on edge, employing state-of-the-art surveillance, technologically sophisticated censorship, new crime-fighting tools, as well as proactive efforts to resolve labor and land disputes, all to prevent any organized or sustained resistance to single-party rule.        

&ldquo;It is a comprehensive call to arms for the entire bureaucracy to promote social stability,&rdquo; said Murray Scot Tanner, a China security analyst at C.N.A., a private research group in Alexandria, Va.        

Since the first widespread calls for Middle East-style demonstrations in China were published two weeks ago on an American Web site that is blocked in China, the police have reacted with brutal efficiency. They have placed more than 100 dissidents and human rights campaigners under house arrest and threatened others who forwarded messages about the protests, and have detained six prominent lawyers and activists on suspicion of inciting subversion. Censors have also intensified the filters on microblogs, already among the tightest in the world.        

At an unpublicized meeting in February, the Politburo outlined heightened controls to prevent the type of revolts that toppled governments in Egypt and Tunisia, said one ranking journalist who declined to be named.        

&ldquo;The crackdown has been the most severe we&rsquo;ve seen in years,&rdquo; said Wang Songlian, a researcher at Chinese Human Rights Defenders.        

Despite persistent calls for political reform among the country&rsquo;s small and embattled group of human rights advocates, most analysts agreed that China faced a smaller risk of street unrest than did Egypt, Libya and Bahrain. Unlike those countries, where oligarchic rule and high unemployment have fed discontent, China&rsquo;s leaders have largely tamed widespread antipathy through policies that have led to robust economic growth and through selective repression that most Chinese have come to tolerate.        

Over the past five years, stability maintenance, known as &ldquo;weiwen&rdquo; in Chinese, has become a multiagency juggernaut that relies on a sophisticated menu of Internet censorship, the harassment of blacklisted troublemakers and an industrial complex of paid informants and contractors. The vast bureaucracy extends from the Politiburo Standing Committee&rsquo;s chief law enforcer, Zhou Yongkang, to neighborhood &ldquo;safety patrol&rdquo; volunteers on the lookout for Falun Gong members and low-level clashes that can mushroom into large-scale disturbances.        

The party has matched this tight fist with a buildup of mediation techniques and manpower within party organizations and a system of rewards and punishments for bureaucrats who fulfill &mdash; or fail to meet &mdash; social harmony goals.        

The problem, critics say, is that the high-level pressures to achieve stability often force local officials to clamp down on the symptoms of social discontent rather than address the underlying inequities. That feeds a spiral of new abuses and controls. Just as troubling, legal scholars and judges say, is a party drive to prioritize defusing conflict over adjudication by law.        

Yu Jianrong, a leading sociologist at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, has been blogging and traveling the country to warn local officials that the fixation on weiwen fuels government mistrust. &ldquo;It is tantamount to drinking poison to quench one&rsquo;s thirst,&rdquo; he recently wrote in Caixin weekly.        

During a study session last month for provincial and ministerial leaders, President Hu Jintao called for a mix of increased Internet controls and investment in local government services to reduce &ldquo;inharmonious factors to the minimum.&rdquo;        
Li Bibo contributed research.
