
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; The United Nations torture investigator confirmed Monday that he had written the government of Zimbabwe to express concern about allegations that state security agents had assaulted the 45 activists who, after watching reports of the uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia, were recently detained and charged with treason.        

A lawyer for the detainees told the investigator, Juan E. M&eacute;ndez, that a dozen of the activists had been beaten with broomsticks, metal rods and blunt objects on their bodies and the soles of their feet. They were tortured to force them to testify for the state, and they have since been denied medical care for their injuries, the lawyer, Jared Genser, said.        

&ldquo;Among the same group, six detainees received a series of lashes, which were administered while they lay down on their stomachs,&rdquo; said Mr. Genser, with the American nonprofit group, Freedom Now, which seeks the release of political prisoners.        

Mr. M&eacute;ndez, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture, said in an e-mail that he had not yet heard back from the government of Zimbabwe and could make no further comment.        

The police arrested the 45 activists, trade unionists and students on Feb. 19 during a meeting in Harare called by Munyaradzi Gwisai, a lecturer at the University of Zimbabwe&rsquo;s law school, to discuss the implications of the anti-authoritarian uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia for Zimbabwe.        

Prosecutors contend that Mr. Gwisai and the others were plotting to overthrow the government led by President Robert Mugabe, 87, who has been in power for 30 years. Lawyers for the accused say they were just having an academic discussion.        

Human rights groups and Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s political rivals in the Movement for Democratic Change, which is part of a power-sharing government with him and his party, Zanu-PF, say the harsh treatment of the detainees is part of a broader escalation of violence, harassment and trumped up charges against Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s critics and political opponents before elections Zanu-PF wants to hold this year.        

Nelson Chamisa, a spokesman for the Movement for Democratic Change, said that more than 200 of his party&rsquo;s members had been arrested since the beginning of the year alone, including 10 members of Parliament, three of whom remain jailed. He also denounced the detention of Mr. Gwisai and the 44 others.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s all prosecution to persecute,&rdquo; Mr. Chamisa said. &ldquo;Only a government afraid of its people and that has a guilty conscience would be in perennial combat with its own citizens.&rdquo;        

In one of the cases, the state indicated on Monday that it would continue with its legal effort to keep an opposition member of Parliament, Douglas Mwonzora, and 23 villagers in jail on charges of public violence, though a magistrate had granted them bail.        

Mr. Mwonzora, a lawyer detained for two weeks, is co-chairman of the parliamentary committee overseeing the development of a new constitution, to help ensure that the next elections are free and fair. The last presidential election, held in 2008, was discredited after the intimidation, torture and killings of Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s political opponents.        

The previous United Nations torture investigator, Manfred Nowak, went to Zimbabwe in October 2009 to look into what he then called &ldquo;credible and serious allegations of human rights violations,&rdquo; some of them dating to the 2008 elections. But he was detained and ejected from the country. Like Mr. M&eacute;ndez, Mr. Nowak opened his investigation amid surging arrests of members of pro-democracy groups.        
