
BEIJING &mdash; In the days since plainclothes security agents harassed and assaulted several foreign journalists on Sunday, the Chinese police have moved to prevent reporters and photographers from covering any potential public protests by establishing &ldquo;no reporting&rdquo; zones in Shanghai and Beijing.        

On Tuesday, a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman defended the new restrictions and the behavior of the police, suggesting that the authorities were simply trying to maintain order. &ldquo;The police provided reasonable guidance, and the journalists should understand and cooperate,&rdquo; the spokeswoman, Jiang Yu, said at a regular news conference. &ldquo;If both sides take this attitude, we can minimize the occurrence of such incidents.&rdquo;        

The new limitations on reporters even in the absence of demonstrations highlight the government&rsquo;s anxiety over the possible spread of unrest that has toppled authoritarian rulers in Egypt and Tunisia. Since anonymous calls for protests went out two weeks ago on an American Web site, state security forces have also placed scores of dissidents and rights advocates under surveillance and tightened censorship to prevent word of the &ldquo;jasmine&rdquo; rallies from spreading on the Internet or by means of microblogs.        

Although the new rules have not been formally announced, officials have informed a number of reporters and photographers that one of the capital&rsquo;s main shopping districts, Wangfujing, and People&rsquo;s Square in the heart of Shanghai are either off limits or require a special permit for taking photographs and conducting interviews. A cameraman working for The Associated Press received such a permit on Tuesday but was nonetheless prevented from filming by the police, the news agency said.        

The restrictions, which appeared to be a rollback of the news media laws that were liberalized before the 2008 Olympics in Beijing, follow an outbreak of violence and intimidation against journalists who tried to cover rallies called by organizers last Sunday for more than 20 cities across the country.        

Three journalists were injured, including a Bloomberg News videographer who was seriously beaten by plainclothes security agents, according to the Foreign Correspondents Club of China, and more than a dozen reporters were barred from approaching Wangfujing by officers who cited vague new restrictions.        

The association also said that employees from five news organizations reported that some material or images had been confiscated and that nine other journalists had been detained for as long as four hours.        

In a statement e-mailed to its membership on Monday, the group described the tactics as vicious and well orchestrated, recounting instances in which men in plain clothes grabbed journalists, dragged them into alleys or shops and then forcibly erased images from their cameras.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s absolutely outrageous that in the middle of Beijing, the capital of China, a foreign reporter can be kicked and beaten in the face, and the authorities just blame the journalist, saying he was in breach of some regulations,&rdquo; said the association&rsquo;s president, Stephen McDonell, a correspondent for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a terrible development.&rdquo;        

The Chinese news media have been barred from even discussing the rallies.        

In addition to the new restrictions on foreign reporters, the authorities have employed physical obstacles to would-be protests, erecting metal construction barriers adjacent to possible protest sites and hosing down nearby sidewalks to keep people moving.        

American and European diplomats have condemned the intimidation of journalists and criticized the rollback of news media rules.        

&ldquo;I am disappointed that the Chinese public security authorities could not protect the safety and property of foreign journalists doing their jobs,&rdquo; Jon Huntsman Jr., the departing American ambassador to China, said in a statement on Monday. &ldquo;I call on the Chinese government to hold the perpetrators accountable for harassing and assaulting innocent individuals and ask that they respect the rights of foreign journalists to report in China.&rdquo;        
