
SALUM, Egypt &mdash; The no man&rsquo;s land between the Libyan and Egyptian border checkpoints here has become a sprawling, ragged boardinghouse for thousands of poor migrant workers trying to flee Libya.        
The latest images from Libya, along with pictures going back to the beginning of the unrest. View photos »

More than 700 Bangladeshi workers have been living on the floor of the arrival and departure halls for up to a week, turning the floor into a carpet of cardboard boxes, polyester blankets, banged-up suitcases and biscuit wrappers. On stretches of litter-strewn pavement, migrants from sub-Saharan Africa, Thailand and the Philippines shroud themselves in blankets and curl up on the pavement to sleep amid their belongings in the cold.        

Taken by surprise by the spiraling conflict in Libya, international aid workers have not caught up with the enormous logistical challenge of transporting the tens of thousands of migrant workers who are leaving Libya, most of whom have no transit visas and no money to pay for plane tickets.        

From Egypt on Tuesday, the International Organization for Migration, a United Nations affiliate, secured a charter plane to fly 174 Bangladeshis back to Dhaka, the Bangladeshi capital, and found other plane seats for nearly 100 Vietnamese. But the arrival hall here is still packed with people complaining of insufficient food and poor sanitary conditions, and more keep coming.        

Some 3,000 people slept in the border zone on Tuesday, a small number compared with those at the Tunisian-Libyan border to the west, where the authorities are setting up a camp that can hold 20,000. Though conditions are difficult, the zone remains relatively calm and organized, in part because 60,000 of the 78,000 migrants who have crossed are Egyptians who quickly boarded buses provided by the army and headed home.        

At the Tunisian border, there are growing reports of chaos, with news reports and witnesses saying Tunisian guards fired into the air repeatedly on Tuesday when a crowd of refugees sought to clamber over a wall and border guards responded by beating them back with sticks.        

The huge numbers entering Tunisia &mdash; some 70,000 had crossed by Tuesday &mdash; had simply outpaced the ability of the government to deal with them, said Firos Kayal, the United Nations refugee agency&rsquo;s representative posted to the Tunisian border. &ldquo;It is a humanitarian emergency,&rdquo; he said of the situation there. &ldquo;The Tunisians have been generous, but they have reached a point of saturation and they need assistance.&rdquo;        

The number of Libyans crossing either border is far fewer. Of the 3,500 Libyans who have crossed into Egypt, all have friends or family in Egypt and none have required assistance, said Elizabeth Tan, the deputy representative in Cairo for the refugee agency.        

But for workers from countries that would normally need visas to enter Egypt, the border has become a sea of red tape. Stacks of handwritten visa applications sit in a packed immigration office, waiting for embassies to sign off on their citizens. The Egyptian government will allow entry only to those migrants with a plane ticket, so the International Office of Migration has become a harried travel agency searching for spare seats on flights for places like Guinea and Mali.        

&ldquo;We are not sure what is happening,&rdquo; said Jahidul Islam, 24, who was working at a Hyundai-owned power plant near Benghazi, Libya, making $3,000 a year. He fled a week ago after his camp was attacked by gunmen, he said, but he was still waiting to find out from the Bangladeshi Embassy what was happening. He complained of hunger, as did others. One Bangladeshi official at the border said that an emergency coordinator for the I.O.M. had been trying to arrange visas for three straight days and nights.        

Migrants had many reasons for leaving. Some said their companies in Libya had shut, leaving them stranded. Others said they were just afraid. Bassiro Cande, a 41-year-old from Guinea, was among several people who said they had been either threatened or beaten in recent days, as rebels mistook them for African mercenaries whom Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi had brought in from countries to the south.        

&ldquo;Before only the police would beat us, now the people did as well,&rdquo; Mr. Cande said. &ldquo;People thought we were fighting for Qaddafi, but we were innocent.&rdquo;        

Asammoah Solomon, 32, from Ghana, who was waiting to board a bus, said, &ldquo;We became enemies to the Libyan people.&rdquo; He said a crowd in Benghazi had rushed at him and three other Ghanaians with sticks, &ldquo;so we ran.&rdquo;        

On Monday, the United Nations said it flew out 216 Guineans, 15 Moroccans and 35 Bangladeshis. On Tuesday, Ghana sent buses for hundreds of its citizens, and on Wednesday, 174 people will be put on a charter plane to Dhaka. So far, the United Nations and the Egyptian Army are the only organizations that seem to be helping.        

Only one group was being turned back at the border: Palestinians, said Mai Mahmoud, a United Nations worker in Salum. Egyptian authorities had returned 33 Palestinians to Libya on Tuesday, including children, and two more families were being threatened with expulsion.        

&ldquo;Obviously we are very concerned about this,&rdquo; Ms. Mahmoud said, &ldquo;and we are going to follow up with the authorities.&rdquo;        
Alan Cowell contributed reporting from Paris.
