
TOKYO &mdash; At first, the postings on a popular Web site last week seemed innocuous enough: a user soliciting help for answers to a series of difficult math and English questions.        

But it later became clear that the questions were taken straight from an entrance exam to prestigious Kyoto University. And they were being posted &mdash; and being answered by other users &mdash; while the exam was still under way.        

On Tuesday, the police began a manhunt for one or possibly more users who are believed to have used a single online handle, &ldquo;aicezuki,&rdquo; to cheat on exams at Kyoto University and three other top universities. The schools say they suspect test takers used cellphones to post the questions on the site and get the answers while the tests were still in progress.        

While it is unclear whether more than one person was involved, the episode has become a national scandal, raising questions about how to monitor the grueling exams, the main route to success in Japan, in an era of smartphones and instant Internet access.        

It also touched a nerve in a proudly egalitarian nation that has struggled to come to terms with its growing economic and social inequalities. Many here are wondering aloud whether admission to top universities &mdash; a ticket to a top corporate or government job &mdash; remains as merit-based as it used to be, or whether some young people are unfairly getting a leg up, in this case from misuse of new technologies.        

&ldquo;This is a heinous act that undermines the fairness that should be the basis of the university entrance system,&rdquo; Japan&rsquo;s largest daily newspaper, the Yomiuri Shimbun, warned in an editorial on Monday.        

Stung by the outcry, the Education Ministry said it might ban cellphones and other communications devices at exam sites. South Korea, which has similarly demanding admissions tests, imposed such a ban after a 2004 cheating scandal that also involved cellphones. During the current scandal, Japan&rsquo;s national NHK broadcaster has repeatedly shown footage of Korean students passing through metal detectors before taking exams.        

Japan&rsquo;s education minister, Yoshiaki Takaki, said that measures must be taken immediately to ensure the fairness of the exams, which are given every year in late winter and early spring.        

&ldquo;This is unforgivable,&rdquo; Mr. Takaki told reporters.        

One of the four Japanese schools, Waseda University in Tokyo, said it would compare the answers posted on the site with the completed entrance exams of 9,935 applicants, to see if any match. It may also ask the 462 teachers and graduate students who monitored the exams if they noticed anything suspicious.        

The exams often take one or two days, and are usually administered in large halls where up to hundreds of applicants scribble in hushed silence.        

&ldquo;The fairness and justice of our exams are the basis of our institution,&rdquo; said Zenta Uchida, a spokesman for Waseda.        

The four schools, which also include Doshisha Universityin Kyoto and Rikkyo University in Tokyo, have asked the police for help, and promised to take measures to prevent cheating by cellphone in the future. Toshiyuki Awaji, the vice president of Kyoto University, said in a statement that anyone found to have cheated would be denied entry to the school.        

The suspected cheating took place during this year&rsquo;s entrance exams. The universities said they believed that at least one applicant used his cellphone either to type out exam questions and post them on the site or to take photos, which would have been posted with the help of an accomplice at a different site.        

The questions were posted on a site run by Yahoo Japan called Chiebukuro, or &ldquo;Pearls of Wisdom,&rdquo; on which users can ask each other for answers to questions. Yahoo Japan, which is a separate company from the American Internet portal, said it would cooperate with the authorities.        

In the case of Kyoto University, a user posted six math questions on Friday and two English questions on Saturday, all from the university&rsquo;s two-day-long entrance exam, the university said. It said one of the postings could have been made only by someone who was physically present at the exam, since it involved a correction to the question that was written on a blackboard.        

Users on the Yahoo site posted answers to some of the questions within minutes, in time to be used for the exam. The universities said it was unclear if those who gave answers knew the questions came from an entrance exam. The postings gave no indication where the questions came from.        

While cheating itself is not a criminal offense, the police said they would investigate whether those involved had violated laws that prohibit obstructing the operations of institutions like schools.        
Makiko Inoue and Yasuko Kamiizumi contributed reporting. 
Makiko Inoue and Yasuko Kamiizumi contributed reporting.
