
BERLIN &mdash; In a bitter political setback for Chancellor Angela Merkel, Germany&rsquo;s defense minister resigned Tuesday under pressure over his admission that he had plagiarized parts of his doctoral dissertation.        

One of the country&rsquo;s most popular politicians, the minister, Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg, 39, had faced mounting criticism from academics and his own conservative party. Resigning was the &ldquo;most painful step of my life,&rdquo; he told reporters in the Defense Ministry in Berlin. &ldquo;I was always ready to fight, but have to admit I have reached the limit.&rdquo;        

At a news conference later, Mrs. Merkel said she greatly regretted Mr. Guttenberg&rsquo;s resignation, which she said she had accepted &ldquo;with a heavy heart,&rdquo; adding that she understood &ldquo;his personal decision.&rdquo;        

It was not immediately clear who would succeed him.        

Mr. Guttenberg has been a leading member of the Bavarian-based Christian Social Union, the sister party of Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s Christian Democratic Union. He had been expected to play a major role in six important regional elections this year.        

Even after the scandal broke a month ago, Mrs. Merkel was expecting him to hit the campaign trail to help the party recover from a rout 10 days ago in elections in Hamburg.        

Conservative lawmakers shrugged off the resignation, even playing down his absence in the coming campaigns. Some said that he would eventually be back in politics.        

However, Thomas Oppermann, defense expert for the opposition Social Democrats, said Mr. Guttenberg&rsquo;s resignation was &ldquo;long overdue.&rdquo; He criticized Mrs. Merkel for continuing to support Mr. Guttenberg until the last minute.        

&ldquo;She has really disgraced herself,&rdquo; Mr. Oppermann said.        

At first, Mr. Guttenberg dismissed the allegations that he had lifted other scholars&rsquo; texts as &ldquo;fanciful.&rdquo;        

But the pressure on him only grew. Last week in the Bundestag, or Parliament, Mr. Guttenberg admitted that he had made mistakes when writing the dissertation, losing sight of sourcing on two passages. Having said earlier that he would no longer use the title of doctor, he announced that he would renounce it completely.        

The University of Bayreuth, which conferred the doctorate in 2007, revoked Mr. Guttenberg&rsquo;s academic title, saying he had &ldquo;seriously violated&rdquo; the institution&rsquo;s standards.        

Conservatives had hoped that his apology would quell the controversy, but last weekend more than 20,000 scholars from Germany and other parts of Europe sent an open letter to the Chancellery saying that Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s continuing support of Mr. Guttenberg was a &ldquo;mockery&rdquo; of all those who &ldquo;contribute to scientific advancement in an honest manner.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;If the protection of ideas is no longer an important value in our society, then we are gambling away our future,&rdquo; the statement said.        

&ldquo;We do not expect gratitude for our scientific work, but we do demand respect. The scientific community is suffering as a result of the treatment of the Guttenberg case as a trivial offense. As is Germany&rsquo;s credibility.&rdquo;        

Mr. Guttenberg had begun major reforms of Germany&rsquo;s armed forces.        

He abolished conscription and was in the process of shrinking the armed forces, reducing the number of soldiers to 190,000 from 250,000, and planning to close many bases.        

Because of the way the ministries are divided among the conservative bloc, analysts said the new defense minister would come from the Christian Social Union, though it has few known experts in military, security and foreign affairs.        
