
MUSCAT, Oman &mdash; Thousands of demonstrators spent Tuesday marching down the manicured streets of this modern seaside capital by day and speeding around in caravans of honking cars by night.        

Unlike the protesters in Tunisia, Egypt and Bahrain who have demanded that their leaders step down, the large crowds here chanted praise for their sultan, Qaboos bin Said, who has ruled for nearly 41 years.        

&ldquo;We will sacrifice our blood, our soul, for you, your majesty!&rdquo; people here shouted.        

The rally was part government choreography, part genuine outpouring of affection for the sultan, an absolute monarch who has transformed this strip of sand and bone-dry mountains from an impoverished backwater to a tidy country of well-paved roads and relative affluence. Every citizen, male and female, has free health care and free education through college.        

Ahmed al-Abri, 27, an employee of a brokerage firm who took part in the rally, answered a question about his allegiance to the sultan by reaching into the pocket of his white robe and brandishing the keys to his Lexus sedan. &ldquo;My father was poor,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Now this is my car.&rdquo;        

Amid the whirlwind of democratic revolutions across the Arab world, even Oman&rsquo;s pro-democracy protesters are careful about criticizing the sultan.        

&ldquo;We love His Majesty, but there are problems we want to fix,&rdquo; said Maan al-Miaani, a 24-year-old bank teller who attended a vigil on Tuesday night outside a police station in the northern city of Sohar, where two protesters were being detained.        

That is not to say that Oman has escaped from violence. Several hundred protesters clashed with security forces in Sohar over the weekend, leaving at least one demonstrator dead. Soldiers also fired into the air to try to clear protesters from a roundabout in the city on Tuesday. But the total number of protesters has remained small, and their demands are specific &mdash; they do not include the ouster of the sultan.        

The protesters want more jobs, more freedom of expression and less government control over the news media. In a letter to the sultan, they also requested subsidies for young people who want to get married but cannot afford the wedding expenses.        

The sultan has responded to the protests by promising to create 50,000 jobs and raising the possibility of widening the powers of a consultative council, which could be a predecessor of a parliament.        

Protesters at the vigil in Sohar on Tuesday said they regretted the burning of a supermarket over the weekend and other acts of violence, which they said were carried out by a small band of excited young people.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want to be like Tunisia, where I hear a lot of things were destroyed,&rdquo; Mr. Miaani said.        

With only three million people stretched over a large territory of mountainous desert, Oman has been able to harness its modest oil reserves to build schools and hospitals. The average life expectancy of an Omani, which was 49 when the sultan came to power in 1970, is now 74.        

Oman is promoting its beaches and its wild and empty hinterland as a niche tourist destination. The country shares the cosmopolitan instincts of its neighbors in the Persian Gulf and shuns the rigid Islamic mores of its western neighbor, Saudi Arabia.        

An ethos of pragmatism puts Oman in the unusual position of being an ally of both Iran and the United States.        

In the long run, Omanis say, they expect a transition to a more participatory system.        

&ldquo;I hope His Majesty can transform this country from its present status quo to a democratic country,&rdquo; said Zahran Ruqeishi, an employee at a government electricity company who took part in a demonstration of several hundred people in Muscat calling for political change on Monday. &ldquo;He has taken great steps, but his steps could have been faster.&rdquo;        

There are concerns here about the succession &mdash; the 70-year-old sultan is not married and does not have children, and last year he celebrated 40 years on the throne. He stares down from portraits in shops and offices wearing colorful headgear, a meticulously trimmed beard and a sheathed dagger in his belt.        

Some government ministers are unpopular and are accused of corruption, but that does not seem to dent the sultan&rsquo;s popularity. &ldquo;If you had a free and fair election, he would win,&rdquo; Mr. Ruqeishi said. He said he did not rule out protests in coastal cities by people inspired by the revolutions across the Arab world. &ldquo;But not in Muscat,&rdquo; he said.        

Mohamed Zaid Al Wahaibi, a manager at a construction company in Muscat, said he received an e-mail from a government ministry inviting him to the march on Tuesday.        

&ldquo;We didn&rsquo;t need a push,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s from our heart.&rdquo;        
