
BEIJING &mdash; The agendas for China&rsquo;s two quasi legislatures this week include proposals to raise taxes on gas-guzzling cars, crack down on drunken driving and improve food safety, most of them predigested by the Communist Party&rsquo;s leadership and destined for rote approval. About the only uncertainty involves the one topic that will get the most attention: the future of China&rsquo;s roaring economy.        

The two annual meetings will unveil China&rsquo;s latest five-year plan, which calls for a shift away from an economy based on exports and public works projects to one powered by consumer spending.        

Foreign economists and political leaders say the change will be a critical part of the effort to rebalance global trade. In China, it is seen as crucial to sustaining the country&rsquo;s economic growth and the party&rsquo;s unchallenged rule.        

The uncertainty is whether the leadership can pull it off. The last five-year plan, issued in 2006, also proposed measures to increase incomes in an effort to restructure the economy.        

In the end, however, exports and public projects revved up the economy, and the gross domestic product was 10.3 percent higher in 2010 than in 2009, well above the government&rsquo;s target. Meanwhile, consumer spending&rsquo;s share of the G.D.P. plummeted almost 10 percentage points from 2000 to 2009, to 35.6 percent &mdash; roughly two-thirds the level in many Asian nations, and half of that in the United States.        

&ldquo;For years and years they&rsquo;ve talked about rebalancing the economy and more household consumption,&rdquo; Arthur Kroeber, the managing director of the Beijing forecasting firm Dragonomics, said in an interview. The new plan, he said, &ldquo;shows they&rsquo;ve been listening to their economists and do have, in principle, a stronger commitment to trying to figure out how to create a more domestically oriented economy.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Kroeber said he did not expect quick results. &ldquo;China&rsquo;s so enormous that any shift like this is going to take longer than in a smaller country,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the difference between a supertanker and a sailboat.&rdquo;        

There is growing urgency behind the reform effort. China&rsquo;s rapid economic growth has enriched the country&rsquo;s eastern coast and its largest cities, but has left behind many rural families. The huge trade surpluses are a growing source of friction with the United States and other nations that could lead to trade wars and currency fights and could slow economies worldwide.        

The two legislatures &mdash; the Chinese People&rsquo;s Political Consultative Congress and the National People&rsquo;s Congress &mdash; will take up the latest economic plan separately. The Chinese People&rsquo;s Congress, which convenes on Thursday, is an advisory body; the National People&rsquo;s Congress, which in principle devises and enacts legislation, will give the plan ceremonial legal approval after it convenes on Saturday.        

The police usually lock down central Beijing for the duration of the sessions. But the crackdown this year appears to be even harsher in the wake of the pro-democracy uprisings in the Middle East and North Africa. Those protests, which have received little attention from the state-run media, have spawned small sympathetic protests here.        

The city has banned vehicles that are not registered in Beijing from the city&rsquo;s freeways, set up spot checks on vehicles entering the city and barred hazardous materials from being trucked in.        

On Wednesday, security officials threatened to revoke the visas of foreign journalists, among other punishments, if they reported on protests. Several journalists were injured, and one was beaten, while trying to report on a small protest in central Beijing on Sunday.        

The economic plan&rsquo;s goals were decided at a Communist Party meeting in October, and Prime Minister Wen Jiabao is expected to outline the details in a speech on Saturday to both legislatures. Some of the details, however, have been reported in the state press and on the Internet.        

In an Internet question-and-answer session on Saturday, Mr. Wen signaled that the government would settle for 7 percent growth in the G.D.P. this year, the lowest in recent history. That would suggest that some of the billions now spent on construction and corporate subsidies might be diverted to increasing household incomes.        

The government offered another hint of its strategy on Wednesday, when the State Council said it would ask the National People&rsquo;s Congress to raise the minimum threshold for personal income tax, now 2,000 renminbi, or $304, a month, by an unspecified amount. News reports also suggested that the National People&rsquo;s Congress would consider measures to improve the income of farmers, who have benefited far less from the nation&rsquo;s prosperity than most groups.        

Still, most details of China&rsquo;s economic rebalancing act have yet to be revealed. Many of them are likely to face serious opposition from interest groups that have prospered during the period of blistering growth, like the powerful state-owned corporations and regional and local officials.        

Shen Minggao, Citibank&rsquo;s chief China economist in Hong Kong, said the government needed to cut taxes, raise wages and increase social spending if it wanted consumer demand to grow. &ldquo;In words, they&rsquo;ve said they&rsquo;re paying a lot of attention to these areas,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;What I&rsquo;m curious about is how much money will follow after the words.&rdquo;        

The five-year plan will include a raft of other initiatives, including increased government support for high-tech companies and other strategic industries, proposals to address environmental problems and more money for health care, pensions and other social welfare needs.        

The National People&rsquo;s Congress has taken some preliminary steps. Its standing committee, made up of a handful of the 3,000 or so delegates, has approved a tax of up to $820 on vehicles with engine displacements larger than two liters. The highest tax now is about $100.        

The committee has also approved legislation making it a crime for employers to withhold wages, a frequent problem at companies that are struggling financially. And it approved plans to remove 13 crimes, most of them related to the economy, from the list of 68 offenses that can carry the death penalty.        
