
SANA, Yemen &mdash; President Ali Abdullah Saleh of Yemen called the White House on Wednesday to express &ldquo;regret for misunderstandings&rdquo; over remarks he had made accusing the United States and Israel of fomenting unrest in the Middle East, the administration announced in a statement.        

Mr. Saleh, who has faced widening calls in Yemen to relinquish power, offered his regrets to John O. Brennan, President Obama&rsquo;s top counterterrorism adviser, and said he was committed to political reform in Yemen, according to the statement.        

The administration had played down the remarks by Mr. Saleh, an American ally in the fight against terrorism, with officials saying off the record on Tuesday that they assumed the beleaguered president was trying to score points at home by attacking the United States and Israel.        

The statement on Wednesday said Mr. Brennan had encouraged Mr. Saleh to continue with his &ldquo;constructive outreach&rdquo; to the opposition.        

Opposition parties on Monday refused the president&rsquo;s offer to join a unity government. On Wednesday, however, the parties were meeting with the president late into the night to see if they could devise some political compromise.        

The mainstream opposition parties have expressed their wish for Mr. Saleh to step down in the next several months, rather than in 2013 as he has said he would. They also have been urging him to remove his sons from powerful posts to try to ensure they do not seek the presidency.        

It is unclear if the protesters who have taken to Yemen&rsquo;s streets would recognize any compromise worked out between the mainstream political parties and Mr. Saleh. The demonstrators, many of them young, have been calling for the president to step down immediately.        

The Youth Revolution Coalition, organizers of a continuing sit-in the capital, Sana, said, &ldquo;We condemn all attempts to seek to circumvent the clear objective of our revolution and overthrowing the regime.&rdquo;        

Mr. Saleh has been under increasing pressure: a powerful tribal sheik declared his support for the protesters, the mainstream opposition said it would send its own followers to join the demonstrations and a prominent radical cleric joined the calls for the president&rsquo;s ouster.        

Two protesters were killed Wednesday in Lahj Province, adding to at least 20 killed in Aden since mid-February.        
