
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; Late for the funeral of his friend the martyr, Muhieddin Gebril raced his car through the soldiers&rsquo; checkpoints, toward the cemetery next to the cement factory where the rebels buried their dead in a long and growing line.        

The men had known each other in England as business partners. In Libya, during this uprising, they were fellow revolutionaries. A few days ago, Mr. Gebril and his friend, Khaled el-Taghdi, hugged each other outside this city&rsquo;s courthouse, where the opponents of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi gather.        

&ldquo;He told me, &lsquo;We won. We won,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Gebril said.        

But it was too early to declare victory. The colonel fought back on Wednesday morning, storming the city of Brega in the rebel-held east of the country. Mr. Taghdi was supposed to go home to Manchester that day, but instead he joined hundreds of other Libyan men, grabbing guns they barely knew how to use, driving south from Benghazi to retake the town, his friends said.        

Mr. Taghdi, who had seven children, never even fired a shot, a friend said.        

At least 14 people died during the daylong battle, which ended when the government troops fled the town. The celebrations afterward went late, and by morning it was time for funerals and mourning tents. Relatives and friends of the dead men prayed over the fresh red earth, remembering the men and cursing the dictator in Tripoli who refused to leave.        

&ldquo;Take him to hell soon,&rdquo; said Najah Hilal al-Jazwi, who stood over the grave of his brother, Abdul Razak, who Mr. Jazwi said was at work when the government&rsquo;s soldiers came.        

One attack killed a young shepherd and wounded his twin brother. Another killed a 27-year-old oil field engineer named Abdul Salam Mohamed Nabus. He had left his home in Benghazi on Wednesday morning with four friends, after asking his father to forgive him.        

Now Mohamed Nabus, his father, expected that his two other sons would also join the fight. &ldquo;I am a little too old,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Gebril ran through the cemetery, asking whether he had missed the burial. On a dirt hill, a man wearing white called the dead men &ldquo;God&rsquo;s beloved.&rdquo; Another man wearing fatigues pointed at the graves and yelled, &ldquo;This is Qaddafi!&rdquo; Mr. Gebril found one of his friends, hugged him and cried. His friends said Mr. Taghdi, who had family in Tripoli, had traveled from Manchester to be with them. He was excited about the revolution, they said, but focused on getting to the capital, which was hard to reach. Earlier this week, he gave up and was planning to go back home.        

&ldquo;He was a very close friend,&rdquo; said Khaled Balaam. &ldquo;He had a very good character. He was someone I relied on. I&rsquo;m not saying that because he&rsquo;s dead.&rdquo;        

They spoke on Wednesday morning, as news of the attack on Brega spread, and Mr. Balaam, Mr. Taghdi and other friends &mdash; quite suddenly &mdash; decided to join the fight. Some carried Kalashnikovs, others carried nothing, and all of them, including a stranger, piled into Mr. Balaam&rsquo;s truck. &ldquo;It was my first time to carry a gun,&rdquo; he said.        

On the drive south to Brega, none of them were nervous. The road was full of other cars, on similar missions. The dust storm that covered the countryside cleared somewhere near the eastern city of Ajdabiya. Along the way, well-wishers sprayed water on the fighters, and fired guns in the air to encourage them.        

&ldquo;You can&rsquo;t sit at home when you&rsquo;ve been threatened,&rdquo; Mr. Balaam said. &ldquo;We all wanted to do something.&rdquo;        

They arrived at noon, and headed for the fight in Brega&rsquo;s dunes.        

Almost as soon as they reached the battlefield, Mr. Balaam heard a whoosh and saw Mr. Taghdi fall. Something &mdash; a piece of a missile perhaps &mdash; had torn through his friend&rsquo;s left cheek, his leg and his stomach. &ldquo;He was next to me. I was thinking he was dead,&rdquo; he said. The stranger who traveled with them was also killed. Mr. Balaam ran, dragging other wounded people away from the dunes. &ldquo;Our guns were useless,&rdquo; he said.        

When it was over, two of the six men were wounded, two were unhurt and two were dead.        

His friends said Mr. Taghdi had been married twice, supplied restaurants in Manchester and hailed from a wealthy family. Now, a cinder block served as his headstone. Fresh cement was poured on top and the number 196 was laid in small red pebbles.        

Next to two other cinder blocks, other families mourned, until the funerals were over and it was time to go home.        

&ldquo;I would go again,&rdquo; said Mr. Balaam. &ldquo;This is our land. We have to do our best to defend it.&rdquo;        
