
KAMPALA, Uganda &mdash; More than 100 people have died in clashes over the last week in a hotly contested region of Sudan, authorities said Thursday.        

Fighting broke out last Sunday in the Abyei region, which is claimed by both north and south Sudan, after a rebel militia aligned with Arab nomads attacked villages and police posts, leaving about 70 dead within two days, southern officials said.        

The fighting continued until Wednesday, mostly the nomads and militia against Abyei&rsquo;s police force, leaving more than 30 more dead, all police officers, according to the southern military.        

&ldquo;Many of Abyei&rsquo;s police have been killed,&rdquo; said Col. Philip Aguer, a spokesman for the southern Sudanese military. &ldquo;Villages are being burned down.&rdquo;        

The violence has caused thousands of residents to flee, advocacy groups said, while Colonel Aguer contended that the aggressors in the recent fighting were &ldquo;heavily armed&rdquo; with pickup trucks and machine guns &mdash; evidence, he argued, that the nomads and militia were being supported by the north.        

&ldquo;They are the ones that are doing this,&rdquo; Colonel Aguer said. &ldquo;The north wants to occupy Abyei.&rdquo;        

The north armed militias during the long civil war between north and south &mdash; in tactics similar to those used in the Darfur region of Sudan &mdash; and it has been accused of continuing to supply Arab militias around the border between the two sides, in an attempt to weaken the southern government. The north rejects the allegations, saying southern officials have no evidence of its current involvement in the instability around Abyei.        

Abyei is administered as a region separate from both the north and the south, and it is guarded by special police units made up of northern and southern officers.        

While the separation of southern Sudan from the north &mdash; the capstone of the 2005 peace agreement that ended decades of civil war &mdash; is expected this summer, Abyei&rsquo;s fate is not yet decided.        

Colonel Aguer said that the attackers included Arab nomads known as the Misserya, and that many of the police officers they fought against came from the Ngok Dinka ethnic group, traditional cattle herders of south Sudan who have long claimed Abyei as their own.        

The Ngok Dinka are supported by the southern Sudanese government, and many top southern Sudanese leaders originally hailed from the contested region.        

As southern Sudan creeps toward formal independence, expected in July, the security situation in the region has grown more precarious, with the battle for control over Abyei just one of the worries.        

Last month, a revolt by southern Sudanese soldiers loyal to a renegade general, George Athor, led to the death of about 200 people. Earlier this week, the military said 40 more had died in renewed clashes, and that General Athor was still on the loose.        

The United Nations and donor states have enthusiastically supported the southern Sudanese government in trying to get a grip on security. But a demobilization program backed by the United Nations has run aground, leaving tens of thousands of excess soldiers with weapons. A United Nations-sponsored police-training program has also led to allegations of human-rights abuses, including torture and rape carried out against the police officers themselves.        

With the outbreak of new violence in Abyei, there are worries that tensions will increase.        

&ldquo;Our instinct is that this will not stop,&rdquo; Colonel Aguer said. &ldquo;A violent conflict is like a fire. We have to monitor it.&rdquo;        
