
FRANKFURT &mdash; German prosecutors said Thursday that they were trying to determine whether Islamic radicalism motivated a young man to open fire on an American military bus a day earlier at the Frankfurt airport, killing two United States airmen and seriously wounding two others.        

One of the dead men as well as the two injured men were members of a security team en route from Britain to Afghanistan, the United States Air Force said in a statement. The other man killed was the driver of the bus, who was stationed at Ramstein Air Base in Germany, the Air Force said.        

The police did not name the suspect, identified as a 21-year-old Kosovar who lives in Frankfurt, but his brother identified him as Arid Uka. He worked at a mail sorting center at the airport, according to Deutsche Post, the German mail service.        

His father, Murat Uka, said Arid had finished high school but was unable to win admission to a university. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t have any explanation for what has happened yesterday,&rdquo; Mr. Uka said by telephone in Frankfurt. &ldquo; He is a calm and silent boy.&rdquo;        

The police charged the suspect with murder and attempted murder. He was expected to appear in German federal court on Thursday.        

&ldquo;The circumstances raise suspicion that the attack had an Islamic motivation,&rdquo; the federal prosecutor&rsquo;s office in Karlsruhe, Germany, said in a statement on Thursday.        

Boris Rhein, the interior minister for the state of Hesse where the airport is located, said there was no evidence the suspect was part of a larger group. However, he said there was evidence the man had deliberately targeted the American military personnel for ideological reasons.        

Germany has so far been spared a catastrophic terrorist attack of the kind experienced in the United States, Britain and Spain. But three of the Sept. 11, 2001, attackers lived in Germany, and security officials acknowledge that the country remains a breeding ground for Islamic radicals.        

Even as the inquiry into Mr. Uka&rsquo;s motivations continued, some took the attack as confirmation of the threat of terrorist strikes by people who are not part of a group or have received formal training, but are inspired by radical ideologies, like those propagated by Al Qaeda.        

He was &ldquo;a so-called home-grown terrorist,&rdquo; Bernhard Witthaut, chairman of the Federal Police Trade Union, said Thursday in a statement. &ldquo;We were always concerned that the indoctrination and recruitment strategies of the Islamists would one day have a deadly outcome.&rdquo;        

Germany, Britain, and France have been on edge since last year over warnings of the possibility of pending attacks by radicalized European citizens who might have received training in the lawless border region between Afghanistan and Pakistan. In November, the German authorities beefed up security at train stations and airports after an informant said that a group linked to Al Qaeda was planning to shoot civilians in a public place.        

The Associated Press, quoting the suspect&rsquo;s uncle in Kosovo, said he was born and raised in Germany after his parents moved there about 40 years ago. The German police, however, said he was born in Kosovo, The A.P. said. The uncle, Rexhep Uka, said that the family was Muslim. But he also said the family was pro-American for its leadership in the NATO bombing campaign against Serb forces in 1999.        

Mr. Uka&rsquo;s brother, Hastrit Uka, 27, said the family was distraught. In an interview, he said he believed Arid had admitted the attack, and that, &ldquo;For us, the situation is like a bad dream.&rdquo;        

He said he had no idea how the younger man got a gun. Arid played combat video games, and occasionally went to a mosque, his brother said, but was not conspicuously devout and never criticized the United States or commented on politics.        

The suspect worked at a large building in the airport complex that Deutsche Post uses to sort incoming and outgoing international mail, said Dirk Klasen, a spokesman for the postal service. Mr. Klasen said there was no indication the suspect had been a problem employee. He was on a temporary contract due to expire in several weeks, Mr. Klasen said.        

The names of the dead were being withheld pending notification of the families. The injured were being treated at Frankfurt hospitals for wounds listed as critical in one case and serious in the other, the Air Force said.        

&ldquo;Our hearts go out to the family and friends of those Airmen who were killed and wounded in yesterday&rsquo;s attack,&rdquo; Gen. Mark A. Welsh III, commander of U.S. Air Forces in Europe, said in a statement. &ldquo;Despite this terrible tragedy, we believe Germany is a safe place for our airmen and their families to live and work.&rdquo;        

General Welsh said the United States military was working with German authorities on the investigation.        
 Elisabeth Bumiller and Mark Mazzetti contributed reporting  from Washington.
