
BAGHDAD &mdash; Iraq&rsquo;s shaky power-sharing government suffered another setback on Thursday when former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi rejected a high-ranking advisory job that had been created to end the country&rsquo;s protracted political deadlock.        

The decision by Mr. Allawi, who leads a political coalition backed by much of Iraq&rsquo;s Sunni minority, exposed new fissures in a coalition government forged with American backing late last year. The coalition brought together Iraq&rsquo;s main ethnic, religious and political factions, with Mr. Allawi playing a crucial part.        

But in recent days, Mr. Allawi and members of his coalition, Iraqiya, have accused Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of failing to follow through on his promises to share power, deepening a sense of their marginalization.        

Mr. Allawi has threatened to leave the government before. It was unclear on Thursday whether his decision was part of a negotiating ploy.        

The political maneuvers came as Iraq braced for potentially violent protests on Friday, calling for more accountability from Mr. Maliki and better government services.        

On Thursday night, the authorities banned all cars and motorcycles from the streets of Baghdad, making it hard for protesters to reach the central square. Similar bans were announced in Samarra and Kirkuk.        

Mr. Allawi said Mr. Maliki had been slow to detail the powers of a new strategic policy council, which Mr. Allawi had agreed to lead. He said he would decline the position &ldquo;because of a lack of commitment to national partnership.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I will not participate,&rdquo; Mr. Allawi said, according to excerpts of an interview with Iraqi television. &ldquo;This is a final decision.&rdquo;        

It was a sharp turnabout from three months ago, when Mr. Allawi accepted defeat after last March&rsquo;s inconclusive national elections and agreed to join a government led by his old political rival, Mr. Maliki.        

Mr. Allawi&rsquo;s coalition narrowly won the popular vote, but was outmaneuvered by Mr. Maliki in the nine months of political deal-making that ensued.        

With the top positions of prime minister and president out of his reach, Mr. Allawi was offered a consolation prize as head of a strategic policy council that still remains to be formed. The body would provide a check on Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s power, though its exact powers or membership have not yet been determined.        

On Thursday, Mr. Allawi traveled to the holy city of Najaf in southern Iraq, where he and the radical anti-American cleric Moktada al-Sadr met and held a joint news conference. It was a striking sight: one man who led an uprising against the United States standing beside another who had received the job of interim prime minister from American authorities.        

Mr. Allawi reiterated his decision to decline the advisory position, but said his bloc would not leave the government.        

&ldquo;We are not looking for jobs, but looking for the people to benefit and for there to be stability and progress in Iraq,&rdquo; Mr. Allawi said.        

He added: &ldquo;There is no opposition. All of us are in one ship. We&rsquo;ll support any decision that helps serve the Iraqi people and will refuse to support any decision that Iraqis don&rsquo;t want. Today there are real demands on the Iraqi street, and we have to respond.&rdquo;        

Ali al-Alaq, a member of Parliament from Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s State of Law coalition, criticized Mr. Allawi&rsquo;s withdrawal as rash, and said that Iraqi leaders were still negotiating the contours of the position Mr. Allawi had rejected.        

&ldquo;We need to be more united and flexible for the good of the country,&rdquo; Mr. Alaq said.        

The Iraqiya bloc has fumed over the last few months, saying Mr. Maliki has failed to follow through on agreements to share power, and has personally taken control of crucial security ministries in charge of Iraq&rsquo;s police and army.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know the obstacles,&rdquo; Mr. Allawi said at the news conference, referring to why Mr. Maliki had not appointed a minister of defense or interior. He said that Iraqiya had put together the names of several candidates for minister of defense and had not heard back from Mr. Maliki.        

&ldquo;Maliki is not interested in this partnership,&rdquo; said Maysoon al-Damluji, a spokeswoman for Iraqiya and a member of Parliament. &ldquo;He wants to have all powers in his hand. He doesn&rsquo;t want to share with anyone. So let them be in his hands and good luck to him.&rdquo;        

Iraqiya is still nominally a part of the government, but its members have increasingly accused Mr. Maliki of reneging on the deal that helped return him to a second term as prime minister.        

&ldquo;None of it has materialized. None,&rdquo; Ms. Damluji said. &ldquo;There is no partnership as far as we are concerned.&rdquo;        

American officials said the participation of Mr. Allawi and his Sunni-supported political bloc were both crucial to forming a representative government. In November, an American official said Mr. Allawi had to be &ldquo;a genuine partner in the government with real authority.&rdquo;        

Ms. Damluji said Mr. Allawi would retain his seat in Parliament.        
Reporting was contributed by Duraid Adnan, Omar al-Jawoshy, Zaid Thaker and Yasir Ghazi from Baghdad, and an employee for The New York Times from Najaf, Iraq.
