
Necmettin Erbakan, the first Islamist prime minister of Turkey, whose attempt to turn his country away from the West led the military to depose him in 1997, died on Sunday in Ankara. He was 84.        

The cause was heart failure, said Dr. Tevfik Ali Kucukbas of Guven Hospital, where Mr. Erbakan had been in intensive care since mid-January.        

During his turbulent year as prime minister, Mr. Erbakan boldly challenged Turkey&rsquo;s secular dogma, vowing to create a pan-Islamic currency and rescue Turkey from &ldquo;the unbelievers of Europe.&rdquo; He embraced the religious government in Iran, allowed female civil servants to wear head scarves to work, and held Islamic feasts in the prime minister&rsquo;s residence.        

Yet Mr. Erbakan was also a consummate insider, always dapper in trademark Versace ties. He was among the last survivors of the political generation that ruled Turkey as it struggled toward democracy during the second half of the 20th century, a period punctuated by three military coups. He was often called Hodja, a term of affection accorded to religious teachers or wise men.        

Like other political patriarchs of his era, he was a nationalist who bowed before the reality of military power. He had no sympathy for the demands of Kurdish nationalists who sought broadened cultural and political rights. Yet he repeatedly pushed for a greater role for religion in public life. His party was banned multiple times. After each shutdown, he reinvented and renamed it.        

&ldquo;He introduced political Islam to Turkey,&rdquo; Sedat Bozkurt, a Turkish journalist, said in a televised interview on Monday. &ldquo;However, the political Islam applied in Turkey differed from the others. One of its elements was Turkish nationalism.&rdquo;        

Among Mr. Erbakan&rsquo;s most successful followers was the ambitious candy salesman Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who under his tutelage was elected mayor of Istanbul and is now prime minister. The men split politically, and Prime Minister Erdogan displaced Mr. Erbakan as the hero of Turkey&rsquo;s devout.        

&ldquo;We will always remember him with gratitude as a teacher and a leader,&rdquo; Mr. Erdogan said of Mr. Erbakan, who is survived by two daughters and a son.        

Necmettin Erbakan was born on Oct. 29, 1926, in the Black Sea town of Sinop, home in antiquity to Diogenes the Cynic. Mr. Erbakan&rsquo;s father, a judge, sent him to high school in Istanbul. He later compiled an outstanding record as an engineering student. He completed his doctoral work in Aachen, Germany, and worked in that country for several years, specializing in diesel engine design. His German remained fluent and lyrical.        

In 1970, stung by the refusal of a center-right party to nominate him for a seat in Parliament, he formed his own political party, which advocated a return to religious values &mdash; not an obvious choice for the son of a civil servant. The party survived repeated closings and Mr. Erbakan&rsquo;s several years of exile in Switzerland. Though the party never won nearly enough votes to put him in power, he emerged as a kingmaker. Twice in the 1970s he became deputy prime minister.        

In the 1995 election, with the political scene atomized, Mr. Erbakan&rsquo;s party, then called Welfare, finished first with 21 percent of the vote. After striking a coalition deal with another party leader who was eager to control corruption investigations, Mr. Erbakan became prime minister. He immediately began challenging the secular, pro-Western foundations of modern Turkey.        

The last straw for his opponents may have been Jerusalem Night, when the Iranian ambassador, evidently with Mr. Erbakan&rsquo;s permission, addressed an audience in the town of Sincan and roused it to a frenzy with lurid calls for fundamentalism and anti-Zionist struggle. Alarmed Turks began taking to the streets, marching behind protest banners reading &ldquo;Turkey Is Secular and Will Remain So!&rdquo;        

After Mr. Erbakan had been in office for 12 months, military commanders, who consider themselves the ultimate guardians of Turkish secularism, decided to strike against him. They forced him out with a series of threatening memoranda listing his sins. He resigned on Feb. 28, 1997, ousted by what is widely described as Turkey&rsquo;s only postmodern coup.        

These events split the religious political movement in Turkey. A group of insurgents, accusing Mr. Erbakan of losing touch with a rapidly changing country, tried to wrest control of the party from him. When they failed, they quit the party; founded their own, calling it Justice and Development; and rocketed to national power.        

Mr. Erbakan later became the target of corruption charges. In 2002 he was sentenced to two years and four months in prison on charges of &ldquo;forgery of personal documents.&rdquo; President Abdullah Gul, who was his foreign policy adviser during his ill-fated year in power, pardoned him.        

Mr. Erbakan&rsquo;s party withered into insignificance by clinging to old-style Islamism. His onetime follower, Prime Minister Erdogan, devised a more inclusive political formula that combined respect for religious belief with commitments to democracy, capitalism and Western alliances. That formula &mdash; a refined version of the one Mr. Erbakan developed nearly half a century ago &mdash; propelled Mr. Erdogan to power and has kept him there for nearly a decade.        
Sebnem Arsu contributed reporting from Istanbul.
