
WASHINGTON &mdash; President Obama demanded Thursday that the embattled Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, &ldquo;step down from power and leave&rdquo; immediately, and said he would consider a full range of options to stem the bloodshed there, though he did not commit the United States to any direct military action.        

In his most forceful response to the near-civil war in Libya, Mr. Obama said the United States would consider imposing a &ldquo;no-flight zone&rdquo; over the country &mdash; a step his defense secretary, Robert M. Gates, warned a day earlier would carry major risks, requiring the United States to destroy Libya&rsquo;s air defenses.        

Mr. Obama said the United States and the world were outraged by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s &ldquo;appalling violence against the Libyan people.&rdquo; Speaking after he met with President Felipe Calder&oacute;n of Mexico at the White House, he declared, &ldquo;Muammar Qaddafi has lost the legitimacy to lead, and he must leave.&rdquo;        

The president&rsquo;s statement, while robust, left important questions unanswered: Where would Colonel Qaddafi go, given the lack of countries that have offered him sanctuary? And what kind of intervention, beyond airlifting refugees on military planes, would the United States be willing to undertake?        

Mr. Obama avoided using the phrase &ldquo;no-flight zone,&rdquo; even as he confirmed it was one of the options on the table. He emphasized a strong preference for the Libyan people to be masters of their own future, much as the Egyptian protesters were able to oust President Hosni Mubarak without foreign help.        

The president&rsquo;s remarks illustrate the dilemma confronting the White House: Libya now looks less like a Facebook-fueled rebellion and more like an African civil war of the kind that the United States has tried to avoid. With forces loyal to Colonel Qaddafi staging a desperate counterattack to seize rebel-controlled cities, Mr. Obama acknowledged that Libya could descend into a bloody stalemate.        

In such a situation, there are few realistic &mdash; let alone attractive &mdash; military options for the United States, which is already entangled in two other wars. Even limited options, like a no-flight-zone intended to prevent Libyan planes from shooting at their own people, are drawing opposition from some European allies, and would be unlikely to win the approval of the United Nations Security Council.        

Mr. Obama&rsquo;s top national security advisers have diverged in public, with Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton sounding more receptive to a no-flight zone than Mr. Gates. Testifying before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on Tuesday, she said that &ldquo;there are arguments that would favor it, questions that would be raised about, but it is under active consideration.&rdquo;        

In his testimony before the House Appropriations Committee, Mr. Gates said, &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s just call a spade a spade,&rdquo; before going on to describe how a no-flight zone would involve destroying Libya&rsquo;s air defense systems so that American planes could fly without fear of being shot down.        

Some of the policy differences, analysts said, reflect institutional biases. Pentagon leaders often dramatize the costs of military action to test the commitment of civilian leaders. It also reflects the experiences that Mr. Gates and other officials have had in Iraq, where military intervention brought the United States years of costly engagement and inflamed anti-American feelings throughout the Middle East.        

&ldquo;He is right to raise these issues,&rdquo; said Robert M. Danin, a senior fellow for Middle East and Africa studies at the Council on Foreign Relations who worked in the Bush White House. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s interesting is that he&rsquo;s doing it in public.&rdquo;        

Other administration officials were shaped by the wars in the Balkans, where the United States waited months before intervening, drawing criticism that it stood by while atrocities were committed.        

Administration officials said there was less disagreement in internal talks. Mrs. Clinton, though open to a no-flight zone, is not actively pushing it, one official said. She and Mr. Gates agree on the &ldquo;risks and difficulties&rdquo; but see the need to &ldquo;consider and plan for all contingencies.&rdquo;        

For Mr. Obama, the lack of good options may also be reflected in the uneven political pressure he is getting from Congress. Two early proponents of military action in Libya, Senators John McCain and Joseph I. Lieberman, muted their comments in a joint appearance on Thursday at the Brookings Institution.        

&ldquo;We are not advocating military at this time,&rdquo; said Mr. McCain, Republican of Arizona. &ldquo;We are not calling for military assistance to a provisional government at this time.&rdquo;        

On Sunday, Mr. Lieberman, the Connecticut independent, said the United States should provide the rebels with weapons. But on Thursday, he said that was merely one thing on a &ldquo;menu of things.&rdquo;        

Another frequent Republican critic, Representative Eric Cantor of Virginia, praised Mr. Obama&rsquo;s call for Colonel Qaddafi to resign and did not mention military intervention.        

Mr. Obama&rsquo;s response to the violence in Libya has been deliberate, initially because the administration worried about the safety of Americans in the country. Thursday was the first time the president had publicly called on Colonel Qaddafi to resign. He raised it in a telephone call on Sunday with Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany that the White House told reporters about.        

The administration has moved rapidly on other fronts. The Treasury Department has frozen an additional $1.2 billion in Libyan assets this week, bringing the total of blocked funds to nearly $32 billion.        

Mr. Obama said he had authorized military airlifts to transport Egyptian refugees who were massed at the Tunisian border trying to flee Libya. In addition, he said the United States Agency for International Development would charter civilian planes to transport refugees from several countries.        

&ldquo;There is a danger of a stalemate that over time could be bloody,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said. &ldquo;And that is something that we&rsquo;re obviously considering. So what I want to make sure of is, is that the United States has full capacity to act &mdash; potentially rapidly &mdash; if the situation deteriorates in such a way that you had a humanitarian crisis.&rdquo;        

Mr. Obama said the United States would work with other countries in any broader effort. And he said he said had told the Pentagon, the State Department and other agencies to examine all the options, adding, &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want us hamstrung.&rdquo;        

Still, the president made it clear that he would prefer to stick to relief efforts and keep American troops outside the borders.        

&ldquo;One of the extraordinary successes of Egypt was the full ownership that the Egyptian people felt for that transformation,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said. &ldquo;That has served the Egyptian people well; it serves U.S. interests well.&rdquo;        
