
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; A state of terror has seized two working-class neighborhoods here that just a week ago exploded in revolt, with residents reporting constant surveillance, searches of cars and even cellphones by militiamen with Kalashnikovs at block-by-block checkpoints and a rash of disappearances of those involved in last week&rsquo;s protest.        

As rebel fighters in the country&rsquo;s east celebrated their defeat of a raid on Wednesday by hundreds of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s loyalists in the strategic oil town of Brega, many people in Tripoli said they had lost hope that peaceful protests might push the Libyan leader from power the way street demonstrations had toppled the strongmen in neighboring Egypt and Tunisia.        

The climate of fear suggests just how effectively the government&rsquo;s ruthless application of force in Tripoli has locked down the city and suppressed simmering rage, even as the rebels have held control of the eastern half of the country and a string of smaller western cities surrounding the capital.        

&ldquo;I think the people know that if they make any protest now they will be killed, so all the people in Tripoli are waiting for someone to help them,&rdquo; one resident said. &ldquo;It is easy to kill anybody here. I have seen it with my own eyes.&rdquo;        

Several people in the two neighborhoods, Feshloom and Tajura, speaking on the condition of anonymity for fear of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s secret police, said militias loyal to the colonel were using photos taken at last week&rsquo;s protest to track down the men involved. &ldquo;They know that there are people who have energy and who are willing to die, so they pick them up,&rdquo; another resident said.        

Residents of Feshloom showed reporters cellphone photographs taken at Tripoli Central Hospital of a large wound in the chest of a neighbor, Nagi Ali el-Nafishi, 56, and they pointed out a bloodstain on the concrete where he had been shot after leaving a mosque last Friday. A doctor who examined him told reporters that the bullet had exploded his heart and lungs, causing him to die of blood loss within minutes.        

Several residents said at least four people from their neighborhood had been killed that day, including Hisham el-Trabelsi, 19, who they said was shot in the head, and Abdel Basit Ismail, 25, who they said was hit by random gunfire while she was calling to a relative involved in the protest.        

They also reported the discovery of the body of at least one man, Salem Bashir al-Osta, a 37-year-old teacher who disappeared at a protest last Sunday. It was found near the Abu Slim prison, showing signs of a severe beating but no bullet holes.        

And in both neighborhoods, both hotbeds of resistance, residents say disappearances have continued all week as the security forces appear to be rounding up suspected protesters in anticipation of Friday Prayer services, the customary gathering time for street protests across the Arab world.        

On Wednesday night, a resident Tajura called a journalist to report that five people had been arrested leaving a mosque on Saturday, including Mohammed Safi, the director of mechanical engineering at a university here. &ldquo;Every day they take people away,&rdquo; the resident said. &ldquo;We would like to know where they are, what happened to them?&rdquo;        

Another resident reached by telephone on Thursday said the police had broken down a door to arrest a relative the night before. &ldquo;They tried to frighten his mother and sister,&rdquo; the resident said. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know where they have taken him.&rdquo;        

As Colonel Qaddafi tightened his grip on Tripoli, there were indications that the conflict was settling into a stalemate.        

Flush with their victory in Brega, rebel fighters pushed 25 miles to the west and established a makeshift checkpoint. A dozen lightly armed men stood guard, greeting trucks filled with Egyptian migrant workers fleeing eastward toward home. At rebel checkpoints in the east and at the Tunisian border, many of the refugees have said that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s soldiers had robbed them, taking their phones and money.        

Yet witnesses reported that Libyan Air Force planes had conducted bombing raids near the front, and in a British television interview one of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons, Seif al-Islam, appeared to confirm reports of bombing near Brega, saying that the bombs were meant &ldquo;to frighten them to go away, not to kill them.&rdquo;        
 Kareem Fahim contributed reporting from Benghazi, Libya; Lynsey Addario from Agella, Libya; and Neil MacFarquhar from Cairo.
