
WASHINGTON &mdash; Seeking to ease the tensions that had put a chill in this country&rsquo;s relations with Mexico, President Obama on Thursday heaped praise on President Felipe Calder&oacute;n&rsquo;s campaign against the drug-trafficking organizations wreaking havoc south of the border.        

He also announced a breakthrough on a festering trade dispute that prevents Mexican trucks from operating on American highways.        

At a joint news conference at the White House with Mr. Calder&oacute;n, Mr. Obama said Mexico had shown &ldquo;extraordinary courage,&rdquo; in its stand against a wave of crime and violence that has left tens of thousands of Mexicans dead since 2006, threatening the stability of a country whose democracy is barely a decade old.        

And he pledged that the United States, which provides a market for the illegal drugs, would do more to help.        

&ldquo;We are very mindful that the battle President Calder&oacute;n is fighting in Mexico is not just his,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s also ours. We have to take responsibility, just as he&rsquo;s taking responsibility.&rdquo;        

The comments marked a dramatic turn of events for two leaders whose relationship had been severely strained by broad public sentiment that their governments were losing the war against drugs, the murder of an American Immigration and Customs Enforcement agent in the line of duty in Mexico, and the release of secret State Department cables obtained by WikiLeaks.        

The tensions had bubbled up into a kind of diplomatic blame game, with the United States raising questions about whether Mexico was too weak and corrupt to confront the narcotics rackets, while Mexico accused Washington of failing to accept responsibility &mdash; in deeds, as much as words &mdash; for its share of the problem.        

But after the meeting Thursday, it was as if those tensions had vanished into thin air, as the presidents praised each other in ways that went far beyond diplomatic platitudes.        

&ldquo;I have nothing but admiration for President Calder&oacute;n and his willingness to take this on,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said, referring to the battle against drug trafficking.        

&ldquo;And the United States will support him in any ways we can to help him achieve his goals, because his goals are our goals as well.&rdquo;        

Among the few tangible new agreements to come out of the meetings was a plan to resolve a dispute over Mexican trucking that had been an extremely sore point since passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement.        

The White House explained that Mexican and American carriers would be allowed to engage in cross-border operations, provided the Mexican trucks met United States safety standards.        

That had been one of the provisions of the 1994 Nafta agreement, but the United States had refused to abide by it, citing concerns over the ability of Mexican truckers to meet safety and environmental standards.        

Mexico, in response, placed higher tariffs on dozens of American products.        

Under the proposed agreement, according to the White House, Mexico would reduce the tariffs by 50 percent at the signing of an agreement and suspend the remaining 50 percent when the first Mexican carrier is granted operating authority under the program.        

The White House said United States and Mexican negotiators expected to have a draft final agreement in place very soon, at which point Congress and the public would have a chance to comment.        

Thomas J. Donohue, president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, said finalizing a deal between the two countries would be &ldquo;a major step toward providing certainty to trucking companies and shippers throughout North America.&rdquo;        

The progress toward a trucking deal, however, was overshadowed by the two presidents&rsquo; efforts to restore cooperation on antinarcotics efforts.        

Responding to broad Mexican complaints, Mr. Obama said that the United States would speed up the delivery of equipment and training that it had promised under the so-called Merida Initiative.        

He said that his administration would do more to crack down on the firearms and money that flow south from this country into the hands of Mexican traffickers. And he pledged to focus more attention on reducing the demand for drugs through education, prevention and treatment.        

Mr. Calder&oacute;n seemed equally eager to answer American critics, saying that though he did not support lifting a rule that prohibits American law enforcement agents in Mexico from carrying weapons, he was open to discussing ways to protect them better.        

He said he was also open to a request by the United States to extradite the suspect accused of killing the immigration agent, Jaime J. Zapata.        

&ldquo;I think that here, not just in terms of weapons, guns, we have to think in a much more open manner and seek much more creative solutions,&rdquo; Mr. Calder&oacute;n said.        

&ldquo;It seems to me that we are experiencing extraordinary circumstances that call for extraordinary actions by our governments.&rdquo;        

A senior State Department official said that the harmonious tone of the news conference belied some flare-ups during off-stage conversations of the two leaders.        

The official said, for example, that Mr. Calder&oacute;n made it clear to Mr. Obama that he was still annoyed about criticisms of his government contained in secret diplomatic cables obtained by WikiLleaks.        

The official said that Mr. Calder&oacute;n called the cables unfair to his government and that he directed the blame at the United States ambassador to Mexico, Carlos Pascual.        

And, the official said, the Mexican leader added that it would be difficult for him to trust the ambassador in the future.        

But the official, who asked not to be named while discussing private conversations between the leaders, said Mr. Obama stood by his emissary, and left no room for Mexico to press for Mr. Pascual to be recalled.        

&ldquo;We told him Pascual is our ambassador,&rdquo; the official said, &ldquo;And that was that.&rdquo;        
