
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; The Obama administration, concerned for the safety of the Pakistani official who was assassinated on Wednesday, tried in the weeks before his killing to secure an armored car and beef up protection for him, an American official said Thursday.        

Last month the cabinet minister, Shahbaz Bhatti, told the State Department during a visit to Washington that his opposition to Pakistan&rsquo;s strict blasphemy laws had brought a stream of death threats, said the official, Leonard A. Leo, the chairman of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom.        

Mr. Bhatti, 41, the minister of minorities and the only Christian in the cabinet, was worried that his life would be in danger if he was reappointed in a government reshuffle. After considerable political jockeying, Mr. Bhatti was included in the smaller cabinet that emerged in mid-February, and extremists warned they would kill him, Mr. Leo said in a telephone interview.        

The effort by the State Department to provide an armored car became mired in bureaucratic detail and was hindered by strained relations between Pakistan and the United States caused by the arrest in January of a C.I.A. contractor accused of murdering two Pakistanis, Mr. Leo said.        

Mr. Bhatti&rsquo;s premonition of his death at the hand of extremists came true on Wednesday, when he was shot in his car on the way to a cabinet meeting. His killers claimed to be affiliated with the Taliban.        

The assassination was the second in two months of a prominent Pakistani official who favored reform of the blasphemy laws. In January, a government bodyguard shot the governor of Punjab Province, Salman Taseer, an outspoken critic of the blasphemy provisions. Mr. Taseer, like Mr. Bhatti, argued that the blasphemy laws were used to persecute minorities in a society that is 95 percent Muslim.        

While Western leaders raised concerns on Thursday about Pakistan&rsquo;s willingness to stand up to the extremists, the government of President Asif Ali Zardari struck a defensive tone.        

In a meeting with the cabinet on Thursday, Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani said Mr. Bhatti&rsquo;s killers were determined to &ldquo;defame&rdquo; Pakistan. A widely read newspaper, Jang, carried a headline saying the murder was a &ldquo;heinous conspiracy against Pakistan&rdquo; and suggested that it was a result of American pressure on Pakistan to combat terrorism.        

The interior minister, Rehman Malik, appeared to blame Mr. Bhatti&rsquo;s lax attitude toward his own security for his death, an argument that contradicted Mr. Bhatti&rsquo;s requests for more protection.        

Mr. Malik, who also called the assassination a conspiracy, said the minister had been supplied with a 15-member security team that included four Christians.        

In an effort to put some distance between the killing and the Interior Ministry &mdash; the government office that oversees internal security &mdash; Mr. Malik said the responsibility for providing an armored car for Mr. Bhatti lay with the cabinet division, part of the prime minister&rsquo;s department.        

Mr. Bhatti, like Mr. Taseer, became a target of extremists after campaigning for repeal of the death penalty for Pakistanis convicted under the blasphemy law.        

Mr. Bhatti was disheartened, associates said, when the governing Pakistan Peoples Party, which was founded on secular principles in the 1960s, retreated under pressure from conservative religious forces and dropped all proposals for reforming the laws.        

In an editorial on Thursday, the leading English-language newspaper, Dawn, denounced &ldquo;an extremist mindset that has, with the sponsorship of some institutions of the state, spread far and wide.&rdquo;        

There were scattered expressions of frustration with the unwillingness of the government to take on extremism.        

&ldquo;The people of this state are waiting for a loud, clear shrill slogan of &lsquo;no more,&rsquo; to which I trust people in the millions will respond with a big &lsquo;yes,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said Ijaz Khan, a professor of international relations at the University of Peshawar. &ldquo;This country needs a vision, commitment and courage all put in one.&rdquo;        
