
MEXICO CITY &mdash; Marisol Valles Garc&iacute;a, the young mother who took the job of police chief in her violence-ravaged town when nobody else would, has not been to work in three days. On Friday, it appeared she might not be planning to come back soon.        

A human rights official in Chihuahua State said that Ms. Valles might have been threatened and crossed into Texas. But her bosses said she asked for a few days of leave to attend to her baby son, who had been ill.        

Gustavo de la Rosa Hickerson, who is in charge of the Ciudad Ju&aacute;rez office of the state human rights commission, said he had spoken to someone who had accompanied Ms. Valles to the border and watched her cross the bridge. He did not know if she had crossed alone or with family.        

&ldquo;We are trying to reach her to help her,&rdquo; said Mr. de la Rosa, who said that he had not spoken to her and that he was trying to confirm reports that she had been threatened.        

But officials in Praxedis G. Guerrero, where Ms. Valles was appointed police chief last October, when she was 20, said they had no reason to be suspicious.        

&ldquo;She is still our colleague,&rdquo; said Andr&eacute;s Morales Arreola, the town hall secretary in Praxedis. &ldquo;In her talks with the mayor, she had not shown any sign of receiving threats,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Morales said he had tried to call Ms. Valles on Friday, but had not been able to reach her.        

What is clear is that the situation in Praxedis, about 60 miles southeast of Ciudad Ju&aacute;rez, was not auspicious for Ms. Valles&rsquo;s job security when she became police chief. The town is one of a group of farming towns in the Valley of Ju&aacute;rez hugging the Texas border that has been swept by drug violence as gunmen from the Sinaloa and Ju&aacute;rez cartels battle over smuggling routes.        

One of her predecessors as police chief had been beheaded. The week Ms. Valles took the job, a local politician and his son in a neighboring small town were ambushed and killed.        

With her unlined features and chunky glasses, Ms. Valles, who is studying for a criminology degree, looks every inch the student, not a police chief in one of the most violent places in Mexico. Reporters from around the world trekked to meet her.        

In a January interview, Ms. Valles said that her task was not to take on drug traffickers &mdash; that is the job of the better equipped federal police and the army &mdash; but instead to focus on preventive measures and petty crimes like public drunkenness, bicycle theft and domestic violence.        

She did not carry a gun, or even wear a uniform, preferring jeans and a powder-blue sweatshirt for the interview. Still, she was attuned to the danger around her. The sole remaining police officer, also a young woman, in the neighboring town of Guadalupe Distrito Bravos, had recently been kidnapped and was still missing.        

&ldquo;Yes, it&rsquo;s worrisome,&rdquo; Ms. Valles said. &ldquo;But at the same time I always see hope in what we&rsquo;re doing.&rdquo;        
Randal C. Archibold contributed reporting.
