
RAS AJDIR BORDER CROSSING, Tunisia &mdash; The flow of migrant workers fleeing Libya into Tunisia slowed drastically on Thursday and Friday, but aid workers said they worried the decline could mean that Libyan officials were harassing or blocking workers who wanted to leave the country.        
The latest images from Libya, along with pictures going back to the beginning of the unrest. View photos »

About 1,800 migrants crossed from Libya into Tunisia on Thursday, down from as many as 15,000 daily arrivals earlier in the week, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. A similar number crossed Friday, many of them immigrants from sub-Saharan Africa.        

Refugees who made it to Tunisia said they had to cross military checkpoints, where they endured searches and often the confiscation of telephones, cameras and electronic memory cards before being allowed to leave Libya. More than a million foreign workers are thought to remain in Libya, and many are presumed to be seeking to escape, given the country&rsquo;s continuing turmoil.        

&ldquo;We find it very odd that the numbers have fallen so dramatically in the last couple of days,&rdquo; said Melissa Fleming, a spokeswoman for the refugee agency. She noted that phone calls to the agency from foreigners seeking help had not declined despite the drop in numbers of those making it to Tunisia.        

Inside Libya, &ldquo;everything is shut down,&rdquo; she said, adding that without work migrants had little reason to stay.        

At the border crossing here, migrants said dozens of military checkpoints lined the roads west of Tripoli, all of them operated by pro-government forces who have been systematically confiscating electronic devices.        

&ldquo;From what people have told us,&rdquo; said Ms. Fleming, those forces &ldquo;don&rsquo;t want any pictures getting out, and they want a certain picture of what&rsquo;s going on inside.&rdquo;        

Some migrants have told aid workers with the International Organization for Migration that &ldquo;certain people have been retained&rdquo; at checkpoints, said Jean-Philippe Chauzy, an agency spokesman.        

&ldquo;I still don&rsquo;t understand why certain people are being stopped and others not,&rdquo; Mr. Chauzy added.        

He said he worried about the tens of thousands of sub-Saharan Africans thought to remain in Libya, where they have long been treated as an underclass.        

&ldquo;The vast majority of them are still there, inside,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Because they can&rsquo;t leave their homes, because they&rsquo;re scared.&rdquo;        

Many of the refugees in Tunisia were reluctant to recount specific episodes of violence, but described Libya as descending into lawless chaos.        

&ldquo;I lost the life I had, so I came here,&rdquo; said El Sedik Yahya Mohammed, 26, a tall Sudanese man in a black leather jacket, bleached jeans and dusty white loafers. &ldquo;We didn&rsquo;t know what our future would have been.&rdquo;        

He and a dozen other Sudanese fled from Zawiyah, the northwestern city where soldiers loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi fought to wrest control from rebel forces on Friday. Pro-government forces at several checkpoints outside the city confiscated the migrant workers&rsquo; cellphone memory cards and erased telephone messages, Mr. Yahya Mohammed said.        

&ldquo;Those are their orders,&rdquo; he said. But the soldiers had made no attempt to block them from leaving, he said.        

While pressure eased at the border crossing on Friday, the situation grew more difficult at the transit camp four miles up the road as migrants arrived there in droves from the border station. Nearly 10,000 Bangladeshi workers, their bulging suitcases dragging behind them or balancing on their heads, made the trek in the dusty gravel along the roadside on Friday.        

While food, water and tents were plentiful at the camp, and more supplies continued to be shipped in by governments and international aid organizations, sanitation was posing a growing problem as trash and human waste piled up; the site had only about a dozen latrines. Unicef was to ship in several dozen toilets in the coming days, and other groups were seeking to provide more for the 12,500 migrants thought to be at the camp or the border crossing.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s getting worse and worse,&rdquo; said Fay&ccedil;al Dchicha, a worker with the International Organization for Migration and the head of a local Tunisian development organization. &ldquo;And we have to expect more arrivals.&rdquo;        

About 210,000 people have fled Libya since protests set off violent repression there last month, according to estimates from the United Nations. More than 95,000 have passed into Tunisia, and slightly fewer into Egypt. About 4,500 have fled to the south and west, crossing the borders with Algeria and Niger.        

Airlift operations coordinated by European governments and international aid groups continued Friday, repatriating thousands as the United States sent two planes loaded with aid, including blankets, plastic sheeting and water containers, according to the State Department.        
