
FRANKFURT &mdash; Arid Uka, the 21-year-old man suspected of killing two American airmen this week, has told investigators that he was seeking revenge for the deployment of Americans in Afghanistan after watching radical Islamist videos on the Internet, German authorities said Friday.        

Prosecutors say that Mr. Uka, who is also accused of wounding two others in the attack on an American military bus at Frankfurt airport on Wednesday, had tried to kill more servicemen but failed to do so only because his gun jammed.        

&ldquo;The bus was waiting at the terminal, and one serviceman after the other got on it,&rdquo; said a German security official, who was not authorized to speak publicly . Mr. Uka asked the last one for a cigarette, &ldquo;then he asked the soldier if they were heading to Afghanistan.&rdquo;        

When the serviceman answered yes, the official said, Mr. Uka shot him with a handgun in the back of the head.        

&ldquo;He then entered the bus, shouted &lsquo;God is the greatest&rsquo; and opened fire and killed the driver with a shot in the head and injured two other soldiers,&rdquo; the official said.        

When Mr. Uka held his gun to the head of a fifth man and pressed the trigger twice, it jammed because a cartridge had snagged inside. The serviceman then chased and caught Mr. Uka outside the bus. German police soon arrested him.        

According to investigators familiar with the case, Mr. Uka appeared to have acted alone and said he was motivated to carry out the attack after seeing a video the day before that he claimed showed American soldiers raping a girl in Afghanistan.        

&ldquo;This video does indeed exist,&rdquo; the security official said, &ldquo;but we don&rsquo;t know yet if this really took place or was just a propaganda video.&rdquo;        

Peter Brustmann, the senior Frankfurt police detective on the case, said Friday that Mr. Uka acknowledged wanting to &ldquo;perform this act when a chance came along. He wanted to kill American servicemen being deployed to Afghanistan. That was why he carried his weaponry with him.&rdquo;        

On his Facebook page, Mr. Uka had a link on February 15 to a 4:42 minute-long Youtube video, with pictures of detainees in Guantanamo, chanting in Arabic with German subtitles: &ldquo;I can not stand this life of humiliation.&rdquo; The video also features pictures of fighters and the clattering of machinegun fire.        

Mr. Uka was born in Kosovo and grew up in Frankfurt. He had applied for German citizenship and was in the process of getting it. He lived with his parents and two brothers in a two-bedroom apartment.        

In an interview, Murat Uka, the suspect&rsquo;s father, said, &ldquo;I heard what the prosecutor said on television, but I can still not believe it. It is like a bad dream and we are waiting to wake up.&rdquo;        

The family had been at the airport on Wednesday to pick up another family member, who had arrived from Kosovo.        

&ldquo;We had no idea about anything, until the police came,&rdquo; said Mr. Uka&rsquo;s father, a 56-year-old roofer, adding that the police searched the apartment and took several items, like computers, cell phones and books.        

&ldquo;Arid had never in his life anything to do with the police, so it really came as a bigger shock because he was always a good boy,&rdquo; the father said.        
