
PARIS &mdash; A long fight over the estate of the chess champion Bobby Fischer appears to have reached its endgame, with a court ruling that a Japanese woman is indeed his widow and heir.        

A district court in Iceland, where Mr. Fischer spent the last years of his life, ruled Wednesday that Miyoko Watai, a pharmacist and the president of the Japan Chess Association, had been married to Mr. Fischer and was therefore entitled to inherit his estate. Mr. Fischer, who died in January 2008, left no will; his estate is said to be worth about $2 million.        

Mr. Fischer&rsquo;s nephews, Alexander and Nicholas Targ, who also filed a claim to the estate, plan to appeal the ruling to the Icelandic Supreme Court, said their lawyer. &ldquo;The question is whether the so-called wife of Bobby, Miyoko, has submitted enough documents that he was married,&rdquo; the lawyer, , Gudjon Olafur Jonsson said Friday. &ldquo;My clients say that that the documents were not sufficient.&rdquo;        

Mr. Fischer lived with Ms. Watai in Japan from 2000 to 2004, when he was detained while trying to travel to the Philippines because his United States passport had been revoked. The United States sought to have him extradited from Japan to face charges of breaking a trade embargo against Yugoslavia in 1992, when he played a chess match against Boris Spassky.        

Ms. Watai said she and Mr. Fischer had married in September 2004, while he was fighting extradition; he apparently hoped that as the spouse of a Japanese citizen, he would be allowed to stay in the country. That tactic was unsuccessful, but Iceland made Mr. Fischer a citizen, and he was allowed to move there in March 2005. According to several of Mr. Fischer&rsquo;s friends in Iceland, Ms. Watai, who remained in Japan, often traveled to Iceland to spend time with him.        

After Mr. Fischer&rsquo;s death, a protracted legal battle erupted over his estate. In addition to Ms. Watai and the Targ brothers, a Filipino woman named Marilyn Young also laid claim to the estate, saying that her daughter, Jinky, was Mr. Fischer&rsquo;s child.        

To test that claim, last summer Mr. Fischer&rsquo;s body was exhumed and a paternity test conducted. It came back negative.        

Ms. Watai&rsquo;s claim to the estate was initially denied by an Icelandic court, though she had supplied a copy of her marriage license certified by the Japanese Embassy. Ms. Watai&rsquo;s lawyer said that the court had asked for additional documentation to prove that it was Mr. Fischer she had married. &ldquo;The process was a bit difficult because at this time Bobby Fischer had lost his passport,&rdquo; the lawyer, Arni Vilhjalmsson said. &ldquo;They had to confirm who he was.&rdquo;        
