
LONDON &mdash; The London School of Economics announced late Thursday that an independent inquiry would examine all of the university&rsquo;s dealings with Libya after its director resigned amid an uproar over a major donation from a Libyan charity and a training contract with the Libyan government.        

The inquiry is to be led by a prominent jurist, Harry Woolf, the former Lord chief justice of England and Wales.        

The renowned university has been in tumult for nearly two weeks, with students protesting a recent donation of nearly a half-million dollars to the school&rsquo;s Global Governance program by a charity headed by one of the university&rsquo;s graduates, Seif al-Islam Qaddafi, a son of the Libyan dictator. The uproar grew on Thursday, after The Times of London reported on a leaked diplomatic cable posted on the WikiLeaks Web site noting that the university had agreed to run a training program for elite Libyan civil servants for $3.6 million.        

On Tuesday, with questions being raised about whether Mr. Qaddafi&rsquo;s doctoral dissertation had been plagiarized, the university&rsquo;s council decided to divert the $488,000 donation from the Qaddafi charity to establish a scholarship for North African students. But the council declined an offer to resign from the school&rsquo;s director, Sir Howard Davies. Late Thursday, with news of the government contract raising fresh questions about Mr. Davies judgment, the council met again and accepted his resignation.        

Mr. Davies acknowledged in his resignation letter that he had also acted as a financial adviser to the Libyan government and said that the uproar over the school&rsquo;s dealings with Libya had forced him to conclude that it would &ldquo;be right for me to step down, even though I know that this will cause difficulty for the institution I have come to love.&rdquo; He added, &ldquo;The short point is that I am responsible for the school&rsquo;s reputation, and that has suffered.&rdquo;        

Charlotte Gerada, president of the student union, who was at the Thursday meeting, said in an interview: &ldquo;What really tipped the balance was the revelation that the L.S.E. was training Libyan bureaucrats. That was just the last straw. They weren&rsquo;t just coming to the school. This was a bespoke course. In all honesty, it looked sleazy.&rdquo;        

In the leaked cables, American diplomats were told in September 2009 by Libya&rsquo;s National Economic Development Board that the board was &ldquo;co-operating with the U.K. government and the London School of Economics, among other U.K. institutions, on an exchange program to send 400 &lsquo;future leaders&rsquo; of Libya for leadership and management training.&rdquo;        

In an interview with the BBC on Friday morning, Mr. Davies said that he remained uneasy about his decision to accept the donation from the Gaddafi International Charity and Development Fund and about having acted as a financial consultant to the Libyan government. In 2007 the university received a payment of $50,000 after Mr. Davies gave advice to the country&rsquo;s sovereign wealth fund.        

&ldquo;The more I thought about it, there were these two things which I found hard to defend,&rdquo; he said.        

The controversy began on Feb. 21, when Mr. Qaddafi made a televised speech warning protesters that his father&rsquo;s supporters would fight &ldquo;to the last bullet&rdquo; and that &ldquo;rivers of blood&rdquo; would flow in the country. Students then occupied the faculty dining room and Mr. Davies&rsquo;s office.        

The inquiry the university announced Friday is also expected to examine accusations that portions of Mr. Qaddafi&rsquo;s 2007 doctoral dissertation may have been plagiarized or ghost-written.        

On Thursday, the consulting firm Monitor Group, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, acknowledged in a statement that part of the work for which it had been paid a fee of $250,000 a month by the Libyan government included helping Mr. Qaddafi with his dissertation.        

The company also set up meetings between British and American academics and Libyan officials. Among those taking part were Anthony Giddens, the former head of the London School of Economics and an adviser to former prime minister Tony Blair, and the Harvard professor Joseph Nye, who is also thanked in the acknowledgments section of Mr. Qaddafi&rsquo;s dissertation.        

Sachin Patel, editor of The Beaver, the student newspaper at the London School of Economics, said he thought it was &ldquo;highly likely we will see other resignations in the next days and weeks.&rdquo; Noting that student government elections were also held on Thursday night, Mr. Patel said that all of the winning candidates were &ldquo;very vocal about the need to set up an ethical investment policy&rdquo; for the school.        
