
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi counterattacked with brutal force on Friday, battling rebel forces on two fronts, firing on unarmed protesters in front of international news media and leaving the rebels seeking his ouster in disarray.        

His militia&rsquo;s actions seemed likely to stir renewed debate over international intervention to limit his use of military power against his own citizens, possibly by imposing a no-flight zone.        

About 30 miles outside the capital, the elite Khamis Brigade, a militia named for the Qaddafi son who commands it, surrounded the rebel-controlled town of Zawiyah and opened fire with mortars, machine guns and other heavy weapons, witnesses said, in two separate skirmishes.        

The first was arguably provoked by rebels who tried to attack the better-equipped militia because it was blocking rebel supporters from entering the town, the witnesses said. But the second, described as a &ldquo;massacre&rdquo; by rebel witnesses, took aim at a group of unarmed protesters who attempted to march through the militia lines toward the capital.        

A rebel making a count at the Zawiyah hospital said that at least 35 rebels and an unknown number of militia soldiers died in the fighting, with more than 60 rebels missing and more than 50 wounded. Among the dead, rebels said, was Col. Hussein Darbouk, a defected Libyan officer who had been commanding rebel forces in the town.        

&ldquo;We killed a lot of their people, but obviously they have more power than us, to be quite honest,&rdquo; said one rebel, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.        

Others spoke of violence directed against unarmed civilians.        

&ldquo;I cannot describe the enormity of the violence they are committing against us,&rdquo; one resident said in a telephone interview, with gunfire in the background.        

By nightfall there were contradictory reports about the fate of the city. A spokesman for the government said its forces had retaken Zawiyah. &ldquo;It is liberated this afternoon,&rdquo; said the spokesman, Majid al-Dursi, &ldquo;and we are going to take you there tomorrow to see for yourself.&rdquo;        

But in interviews throughout the night, rebels said they still controlled the city up to its gates, though some said they worried about the night ahead &mdash; especially after midnight, one witness said, after the electricity was cut off and the town went dark.        

Around the same time as the afternoon battle in Zawiyah, two truckloads of government security officers showered hundreds of protesters with tear gas in the Tripoli suburb of Tajura. A handful of foreign correspondents and television news crews were in their midst, and many protesters saw their presence as a shield.        

&ldquo;This is the first time they have used gas,&rdquo; one veteran of the protests told a journalist as he retreated. &ldquo;When you leave they will shoot us with machine guns.&rdquo;        

But the militias did not wait. Moments later, with news cameras still rolling, they unleashed bursts of Kalashnikov fire. Sporadic gunfire rang out for over an hour.        

A government spokesman later said the militia had fired into the air, but two doctors at the demonstration said that at least two people were wounded. The protesters, who had planned to stage a sit-in at the mosque, quickly scattered.        

On the other front in what increasingly appears to be becoming a civil war, rebels fought Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces in a fierce, daylong battle for the eastern town of Ras Lanuf, the site of a military base and an oil terminal.        

The road north of town thundered with explosions, and all day long, trucks mounted with guns and swarming with rebel fighters raced from the city of Brega, about 25 miles to the east, to the front. The better armed Qaddafi forces hammered the rebels with mortars and rocket-propelled grenades, and witnesses said the wounded kept arriving into the night at the Brega hospital.        

There was a huge explosion outside Benghazi, the country&rsquo;s second-largest city and the cradle of the revolution. A rebel spokesman said it occurred at an ammunition storage facility, and it was unclear whether the explosion was caused by an airstrike or some other attack, or an accident.        
Kareem Fahim contributed reporting from Benghazi, Libya; Lynsey Addario from Agella, Libya; and Neil MacFarquhar from Cairo.
