
SANA, Yemen &mdash; A rebel group that signed a cease-fire with the government last year said the Yemeni military fired artillery at some of its members who were staging a peaceful antigovernment protest in a northern city, killing two. The government confirmed that there was violence, but said that forces fired at the rebels only after they tried to storm a military post and that no one died.        

The rebels have been staging small protests for weeks, trying to capitalize on the antigovernment protests elsewhere in the country, where demonstrators have demanded that President Ali Abdullah Saleh follow the example of leaders in Tunisia and Egypt and step down. But until Friday, the protests in the rebels&rsquo; northern stronghold ended without violence.        

No matter which version of events is true, the episode could spark renewed tensions between the government and the rebels, the Houthis, at a time when Mr. Saleh is already facing multiple crises, including the protests that have roiled this capital city, the port city of Aden and other areas.        

The protests have weakened Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s grip on power, with an influential tribal sheik&rsquo;s abandoning the ruling party last week and 10 Parliament members also resigning from the party to protest the government&rsquo;s violent crackdown that has killed more than 25 people, the majority in Aden, according to Amnesty International and witnesses. On Friday, another member of Parliament, Ali al-Amrani, joined that group.        

Tens of thousands of antigovernment demonstrators continued their sit-in here outside Sana University, where the numbers of protesters have swelled in recent days. Mr. Amrani announced his resignation at the gathering, praising the &ldquo;youth revolution for change and overthrowing the regime.&rdquo;        

Mr. Saleh, who has been in power for 32 years, has made several concessions since the unrest began, including saying he would step down in 2013, but the protesters want him to leave immediately.        

A dueling demonstration here, led by government supporters, also continued on Friday, with people from pro-Saleh areas outside the capital camping in tents in the main square.        

The details of the clash with the Houthis in the north were difficult to verify because the government prohibits the news media from traveling there.        

In a telephone interview, a Houthi spokesman, Abu Hashem, said thousands of people had been participating in the antigovernment demonstration in the city of Harf Sufyan when they passed a government post and came under fire. Mr. Hashem said it was unclear if the government forces were using tanks or other weapons.        

But according to an official government statement, a local security official in Harf Sufyan said that a group of armed men tried to overrun a military post Friday morning. The statement said both sides exchanged gunfire that wounded three attackers and four soldiers, two of whom remained in critical condition.        

The security official said there were no peaceful demonstrations in the vicinity of the military post.        

The war with the Houthi rebels began in 2004. The two sides signed a cease-fire last February, although there had been periodic clashes since then.        
