
WASHINGTON &mdash; Cuban state television announced Saturday that the argument phase of the trial of an American government contractor, Alan Gross, charged with crimes against the state, had ended. A verdict is expected in the coming days. If convicted, Mr. Gross faces up to 20 years in prison.        

The ailing Mr. Gross, 61, was detained in December 2009 when, according to Cuban authorities, he was distributing satellite telephone equipment to Jewish groups on the island that would have allowed them access to the Internet, which is widely restricted by the Cuban government.        

Mr. Gross had been sent to Cuba as part of a semicovert U.S.A.I.D. program aimed at weakening the government. American officials contend that his activities did not amount to breaking the law. But Havana has long decried the programs as an infringement on its sovereignty, and many political analysts believe President Ra&uacute;l Castro is using Mr. Gross&rsquo;s detention to send that message to Washington.        

&ldquo;Under Cuban law it seems pretty black and white that what Mr. Gross was doing was illegal,&rdquo; said Phil Peters, an expert on Cuba at the Lexington Institute, a nonpartisan policy group. Referring to the U.S.A.I.D. program, Mr. Peters added, &ldquo;It put Mr. Gross in a world of trouble.&rdquo;        

The detention has been a serious sore point in relations between the United States and Cuba. It came at a time when President Obama had pledged to open new channels of engagement with the Cuban people. Even after Mr. Gross&rsquo;s arrest, however, President Obama continued with his policy of engagement, lifting limits on remittances for people with relatives on the island and loosening restrictions on travel for scholars, artists and business groups.        

Although Mr. Gross faces a stiff sentence, most political observers expect him to be released on humanitarian grounds. The contractor has lost some 90 pounds since he was detained, and his daughter had a double mastectomy after a cancer diagnosis late last year.        
