
BERLIN &mdash; German officials halted sales from 4,700 small farms on Friday and pulled millions of eggs from the shelves after dioxin was discovered in feed for chickens and pigs and the authorities announced that the contamination might have started months ago. The news set off a scramble in countries that import food from Germany, with two banning the sale of some animal products.        

The contamination occurred when a manufacturer shipped tainted fat for use in animals&rsquo; food pellets.        

German officials said the levels of the toxin dioxin in meat and eggs was likely to be too low to affect human health. But the episode, which was expected to cost German farmers tens of millions of dollars, was already raising questions about the rigor of food testing in Germany and the strength of food safety regulations in the European Union.        

The scandal also threatened to widen with an announcement on Friday from the German agriculture ministry that it had evidence that the manufacturer might have begun shipping the dioxin-laced fat in March &mdash; months before it admitted to what it called a one-time problem. The ministry said the company might have been shipping the fat despite test results in March that might have alerted it to the problem.        

Food safety concerns have been on the rise worldwide with increased globalization and several high-profile scandals, including in China in 2008, when tens of thousands of babies were sickened after companies added melamine to milk products, making them appear to have more protein than they did.        

The contamination in Germany was discovered recently by local government inspectors randomly testing food.        

The manufacturer, Harles & Jentzsch, told the German news media that the problem occurred when it mixed waste from biofuel production into animal feed, assuming it was safe. The company described it as a limited episode and said it had notified the government when it discovered there was a problem.        

The European Commission health spokesman, Frederic Vincent, said that tests of some eggs from the affected German farms had been found to contain up to five times the legal European Union limit for dioxin, which can cause cancer, according to The Associated Press. But Mr. Vincent said those levels would not pose a risk to human health.        

The government has been able to test only a small amount of the fat so far. Of the 30 samples examined, 10 showed excessive levels of dioxin, with at least some up to 77 times the legal amount.        

Germany&rsquo;s Agriculture and Consumer Protection Ministry said the order to halt sales from thousands of farms was a precaution until more complete investigations were carried out.        

On Friday, South Korea and Slovakia halted the sale of some animal products from Germany, while Britain and the Netherlands were investigating the extent of contamination in products containing German eggs. Britain&rsquo;s Food Standards Agency issued a statement on Thursday saying, &ldquo;These eggs were mixed with other noncontaminated eggs to make pasteurized liquid egg.&rdquo;        

But the agency added, &ldquo;The mixing of the eggs will have diluted the levels of dioxins, and they are not thought to be a risk to health.&rdquo;        

The United States Department of Agriculture said Friday that it was working with Germany to determine if any affected pork products might have been exported to the United States. Germany is not eligible to ship poultry and eggs to the United States.        

Prosecutors in the northern state of Schleswig-Holstein, where Harles & Jentzsch is located, have begun an investigation into the company.        

In a country where food safety scares can sometimes lead to hysteria or panic buying, regional authorities and the federal government moved quickly to reassure the public.        

John Dali, the European Union&rsquo;s health commissioner, called for stricter regulation on animal feed to protect consumers and farmers throughout the bloc.        

&ldquo;In the coming weeks, I will explore with our E.U. partners and stakeholders ways to further strengthen our monitoring processes of dioxin in feed,&rdquo; Mr. Dali said in a statement.        

The German Farmers&rsquo; Association has called for the feed producers to compensate farmers for their losses, expected to top $52 million a week.        

Ilse Aigner, the German agriculture minister, said, &ldquo;Whoever puts the existence of hundreds of companies and the health of consumers at risk must be held accountable.&rdquo;        

In 1999, motor oil contaminated with dioxin was detected in animal feed in Belgium, and sewage sludge was found to have been deliberately added to animal feed in France.        
William Neuman contributed reporting from New York.
