
MANAMA, Bahrain &mdash; The leaders of Bahrain&rsquo;s opposition movement said Sunday that they would not be mollified by offers of money and jobs, raising the prospect of a protracted standoff between protesters and the embattled government of this strategically important Persian Gulf island nation.        

&ldquo;This is about dignity and freedom &mdash; it&rsquo;s not about filling our stomachs,&rdquo; said Ebrahim Sharif, a former banker who helped lead a protest on Sunday at the gates of a government building.        

Protesters in Bahrain have held daily demonstrations for the past three weeks, undeterred by a government crackdown that killed seven people. The protests continued on Sunday, with thousands of people gathering in Manama&rsquo;s Pearl Square, the epicenter of the movement.        

Bahrain&rsquo;s Interior Ministry announced over the weekend that it was seeking to hire 20,000 people, a measure it said was designed to benefit job seekers and improve security in the country, which is home to a United States naval base.        

The oil-rich countries of the gulf, led by Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, are also reportedly considering a plan to provide billions of dollars to Bahrain and Oman as part of an effort to address social problems and quell protests.        

The recent spike in oil prices has given Saudi Arabia, the world&rsquo;s largest oil producer, and its neighbors more scope for handouts and subsidies, part of a longstanding tradition of trading cash for domestic peace.        

As protests have spread across the Arab world, the Persian Gulf countries have opened their wallets more than usual.        

King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia last month announced $37 billion worth of pay raises, unemployment checks and other benefits. The king of Bahrain, Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, offered 1,000 dinars, about $2,600, for each family. In January, the government of Kuwait said each citizen would receive the equivalent of $3,500. And last week the sultan of Oman decreed that anyone without a job would be eligible for a monthly stipend of $375.        

But in Bahrain and Oman, monetary concessions have yet to assuage protesters.        

More than 100,000 people &mdash; about one in five Bahraini citizens &mdash; joined a protest in Manama on Friday where many shouted &ldquo;Down, Down Hamad!&rdquo; The king&rsquo;s family, which is Sunni, has ruled the Shiite-majority country for more than two centuries.        

Smaller protests have also continued in Sohar, a northern industrial city in Oman, which is ruled by Sultan Qaboos bin Said.        

&ldquo;Poor people took the money, but are still insisting on getting political reform,&rdquo; said Abdul Jalil Khalil Ebrahim, a senior member of Wefaq, the largest opposition party in Bahrain.        

Mr. Ebrahim says future payments in Bahrain by regional governments will be diminished by corruption and may not reach the people who need them. In addition, the cash does not address the central demands of protesters &mdash; for democracy.        

&ldquo;They are throwing slogans to absorb the anger of people,&rdquo; Mr. Ebrahim said of the government, which is controlled by Bahrain&rsquo;s royal family. &ldquo;But the core of this is political, not financial.&rdquo;        

In response to e-mailed questions, Maysoon Sabkar, a spokeswoman for Bahrain&rsquo;s government, said that support from the gulf countries and the initiative to create jobs at the Interior Ministry were &ldquo;not aimed at ending protests in Bahrain, but they do form part of an overall program to make necessary improvements for the benefit of all.&rdquo;        

Ms. Sabkar reiterated that the government&rsquo;s main focus was a proposal for a national dialogue.        

The opposition has refused to negotiate until the government, led by the king&rsquo;s uncle, Prime Minister Khalifa bin Salman al-Khalifa, steps down. The prime minister has been in power 40 years.        

The opposition says it plans to ratchet up pressure on the government in the coming weeks. The protests have damaged tourism and the financial industry, said Mr. Sharif, the former banker, who now heads a secular opposition party known as Wa&rsquo;ad.        

&ldquo;We will see every week another activity that will take the momentum higher,&rdquo; Mr. Sharif said in an interview on Sunday. &ldquo;We are attacking peacefully all the institutions of the state.&rdquo;        
