
ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast &mdash; Rebels opposed to the strongman Laurent Gbagbo seized a town near the Liberian border on Sunday, a rebel spokesman said, in a further sign of Ivory Coast&rsquo;s possible slide toward civil war.        

A top commander of Gbagbo-allied forces in the west, near the border, declined to comment, but the head of a leading civil society organization in the region confirmed that the town of Toul&eacute;pleu had fallen to the rebels, extending an advance in which they have taken several small towns on the Liberian frontier in the past 10 days.        

Meanwhile, a weeklong campaign of looting and burning in Abidjan aimed at the homes of ministers allied with Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s rival, Alassane Ouattara, continued Sunday, underscoring the growing lawlessness in this sprawling economic capital.        

The standoff prevailing here since Mr. Ouattara won a presidential election in November, according to most of the international community, and Mr. Gbagbo refused to step aside has taken an increasingly violent turn.        

Mr. Ouattara, who has been trapped in an Abidjan hotel surrounded by United Nations peacekeepers, has appointed a parallel government, but it has little real power.        

Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s efforts to remain in power have turned sharp-edged, even as broad economic sanctions imposed by the West have stifled his revenues. Human rights groups and others have documented a steady campaign of abductions and killings aimed at his opponents since early December.        

Last week, his forces fired into a crowd of unarmed female demonstrators, killing at least seven.        

In the past few days, militant youth groups loyal to Mr. Gbagbo, and supported by his security forces, have broken into about 10 homes of Ouattara ministers, many in the upscale Cocody district, plundering clothing, valuables and appliances, officials in Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s government said Sunday.        

The houses were largely vacant because the ministers have been blockaded in the Hotel du Golf with Mr. Ouattara.        

Mobs of civil servants, meanwhile, camped outside downtown banks, clamoring to be paid in a country where cash has grown increasingly scarce.        

The rebel advance in the west, the agriculturally rich region where much of the country&rsquo;s lucrative cocoa crop is grown, represents an escalation of a low-level insurgency by fighters who never demobilized after the country&rsquo;s 2002 civil war. Their allies still control the northern half of the country, where they have de facto administrative control.        

While their ties to Mr. Ouattara are loose, they are fiercely opposed to Mr. Gbagbo.        

Although Toul&eacute;pleu has only 14,000 people, its loss would make it the third town in the region to fall to the rebels in the past week.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a big defeat for Gbagbo and his forces,&rdquo; the rebel spokesman, Lacine Mara, said in a telephone interview from the regional capital, Man. &ldquo;Our objective is to establish the rule of law in Ivory Coast. Mr. Gbagbo lost the elections. His troops, all they do is take it out on civilians.&rdquo;        

A commander of the Front for the Liberation of the Greater West, a 10,000-strong militia allied with Mr. Gbagbo, declined to comment on the fighting or confirm the loss of Toul&eacute;pleu. &ldquo;I am unable to help you out,&rdquo; the commander, Denis Maho Glofiei, said by telephone.        

But the head of a leading war victims assistance group in the region, Issa Koma, confirmed that the town was under rebel control.        

The head of the United Nations human rights office in the western prefecture of Du&eacute;kou&eacute;, Jean-Marie Kalama, confirmed the clashes around Toul&eacute;pleu. The United Nations says more than 70,000 people have fled the fighting into Liberia, with an 80 percent increase in refugees since Feb. 24.        

The urban fighting in Abidjan, meanwhile, had a different cast, as mobs of students erected roadblocks around the city and ransacked houses.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s idiotic,&rdquo; said Amadou Coulibaly, a Ouattara spokesman. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not by pillaging our houses that they are going to stop us.&rdquo;        
