
TOKYO &mdash; Japan&rsquo;s foreign minister resigned Monday over illegal campaign donations, dealing another blow to the struggling government of Prime Minister Naoto Kan.        

The foreign minister, Seiji Maehara, said he had received 250,000 yen, or about $3,000, in donations since 2005 from a South Korean resident in Japan. Campaign laws bar politicians from accepting donations from foreign citizens.        

Mr. Maehara announced his intention to step down at a hastily called news conference on Sunday night, a few hours after visiting Mr. Kan to convey his decision. The resignation was accepted on Monday.        

Mr. Maehara, 48, is a hawkish member of the governing Democratic Party who has widely been seen as being next in line to replace Mr. Kan as prime minister. His resignation over such a seemingly minor infraction is a measure of the increasingly weak position of Mr. Kan, whose public approval ratings have fallen into the high teens.        

Mr. Kan, who took office in June, faces an uphill battle in Parliament to pass a series of bills related to next year&rsquo;s budget before the new fiscal year begins April 1. Perhaps the most crucial of those bills is one authorizing new government bonds to finance the Japanese government&rsquo;s huge deficits.        

If he fails, Mr. Kan could be forced to call a new election or resign, which would make him the fifth Japanese prime minister in a row to be in office for a year or less. The succession of weak leaders has hobbled Japan&rsquo;s efforts to deal with chronic economic stagnation, a ballooning national debt and a rapidly aging population.        

With opposition parties in control of the upper house of Parliament, Mr. Kan would seem to have few prospects for breaking the political gridlock. The largest opposition party, the Liberal Democrats, has vowed to block bills to force an early election.        

The Democrats ended the Liberal Democrats&rsquo; virtual postwar monopoly on power with a landmark election victory nearly two years ago. But the Democrats have since made little progress in their vows to end Japan&rsquo;s sclerotic postwar order and break the grip of the nation&rsquo;s bureaucracy.        

One reason for the Democrats&rsquo; dwindling public support has been a series of political funding scandals involving Mr. Kan&rsquo;s predecessor as prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama, and the party kingmaker, Ichiro Ozawa. A desire to avoid yet another funding scandal could be behind Mr. Maehara&rsquo;s decision to resign.        

Mr. Maehara may also have felt compelled to resign after being one of the party&rsquo;s leading critics of Mr. Ozawa, whose money scandals have threatened to split the Democrats.        

It was unclear who would succeed Mr. Maehara. Some news reports said that Takeaki Matsumoto, a relatively unknown lawmaker who holds the No. 2 job at the Foreign Ministry, was a possible replacement. On Monday, Yukio Edano, the chief cabinet secretary, was asked to temporarily take up the responsibilities of foreign minister.        

Mr. Maehara&rsquo;s resignation deprives the Kan government of one of the architects of its current foreign policy, which has taken a tougher stance toward China. Mr. Maehara had also called for keeping Japan close to the United States while building up its own military capabilities.        
