
MOGADISHU, Somalia &mdash; After several days of fighting, Somali and African Union troops have captured the border town of Bulo Hawo, military officials said.        

Somali officials also said they had taken more territory in the capital, Mogadishu, and the government issued an offer to pay any militants willing to switch sides.        

The southwestern town of Bulo Hawo, which borders Kenya and Ethiopia deep in rebel-held territory, has changed hands several times. Government forces had last taken the town in October from Shabab rebels.        

As a government offensive intensified in the last few days, thousands of civilians have fled into Kenya, where there are large Somali refugee camps.        

The government recaptured the town on Saturday, Defense Minister Abdihakim Mohamoud Fiqi announced at a news conference on Saturday.        

There were reports that Ethiopian troops had joined Somali forces in the attack, but President Sheik Sharif Sheik Ahmed said that Ethiopia had only provided logistical support.        

&ldquo;No Ethiopian army were involved the in the ongoing government offensive, but they have given our army logistical support,&rdquo; he said Friday.        

Mr. Fiqi also announced a new program to pay rebels to switch sides and buy their guns are market prices.        

&ldquo;We promise that every person who joins from the government from the Shabab side will be given money for his gun and a monthly salary and any other necessary assistance,&rdquo; he said.        

He did not specify how much the former rebels would be paid.        

In fighting in the capital on Friday and Saturday, government forces allied with African Union troops moved the front line forward, pushing the Shabab out of one neighborhood and killing 13 militants, Mr. Fiqi said.        

African Union forces also thwarted coordinated attacks on the former Defense Ministry building on Saturday, the African Union force said. In a statement, the force said it had destroyed a &ldquo;jeep flying a black flag&rdquo; that was heading to the gate of the compound, &ldquo;killing all suicide bombers inside.&rdquo; The Shabab rebels often fly a black flag.        

The African force also repelled a simultaneous attack with small and medium weapons, inflicting &ldquo;serious casualties&rdquo; on the rebels. One African Union soldier received a minor injury.        

The Defense Ministry building had only been recaptured by government and African Union forces two weeks earlier. Since then, it has served as a based for Burundian members of the African Union force.        

Brig. Gen. Maurice Gatereste, commander of the Burundi contingent, called the attack &ldquo;an act born out of frustration and desperate desire&rdquo; to recapture the compound.        
