
WASHINGTON &mdash; President Obama plans to nominate Gary F. Locke, the commerce secretary and one of the highest-ranking Chinese-Americans in the administration, as the next American ambassador to China, administration officials said Monday. Mr. Locke, 61, would succeed Jon M. Huntsman Jr., who is stepping down next month to explore a bid for the Republican nomination for president.        

Mr. Locke, a former governor of Washington, was both the first Chinese-American commerce secretary and the first Chinese-American governor, serving for two terms, from 1997 to 2005.        

He was born in Seattle, the son of immigrants from Hong Kong, and traces his Chinese ancestry to southern Guangdong Province.        

Before going to Washington, Mr. Locke built a reputation as an expert on trade relations with China. While governor, he made several trade trips to China on behalf of Washington, which is often referred to as the nation&rsquo;s most trade-dependent state, as the manufacturing base of Boeing, among other exporters.        

After leaving the governor&rsquo;s office, Mr. Locke helped run the China practice at a law firm in Seattle, Davis Wright Tremaine. He also helped organize a visit to Washington State in 2006 by China&rsquo;s president, Hu Jintao. He is one of two Chinese-Americans in the Cabinet, along with Steven Chu, the energy secretary.        

The news of Mr. Locke&rsquo;s appointment was reported on Monday by ABC News. The White House did not return a call seeking comment. Mr. Locke&rsquo;s appointment would need to be confirmed by the Senate.        

Like Mr. Locke, Mr. Huntsman was a governor of a western state, Utah. Mr. Huntsman learned to speak Mandarin Chinese from his time as a Mormon missionary in Taiwan. But Mr. Huntsman, a Republican, has emerged as a potential rival to Mr. Obama &mdash; a turn of events that has led to a few awkward moments.        

Mr. Obama was asked about Mr. Huntsman&rsquo;s future in January at a White House news conference with Mr. Hu, while Mr. Huntsman sat in the front row. Mr. Obama said he was sure Mr. Huntsman would be successful &ldquo;in whatever endeavors he chooses in the future.&rdquo; Then, grinning, he added, &ldquo;And I&rsquo;m sure that him having worked so well with me will be a great asset in any Republican primary.&rdquo;        

Some critics have questioned whether Mr. Huntsman should remain in his post, even temporarily, with political rumors swirling around him.        

Last month, he was recognized at an antigovernment rally in Beijing, and asked by people in the crowd whether he wanted to undermine the Chinese government. He said he had been out with his family and was merely observing the gathering.        
