
BAGHDAD &mdash; Two political parties that led demonstrations in Baghdad over the past two weeks said Monday that security forces controlled by Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki had ordered them to close their offices.        

The actions, which the government said were merely evictions, came amid growing concerns that Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s American-backed government is using force and other measures to stifle dissent in this fragile democracy, where tens of thousands of demonstrators have seized on the upheaval sweeping the Arab world to rally for government reforms and better services.        

Officials for the Iraqi Nation Party and the Iraqi Communist Party said in interviews that dozens of armed security forces had come to their offices here Sunday, two days after another round of demonstrations.        

Though the parties do not have any seats in Parliament, they are outspoken critics of Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s government. They called the evictions illegal efforts to weaken them.        

&ldquo;He is breaking the Constitution; he is breaking the law,&rdquo; said Mithal al-Alusi, the leader of the Iraqi Nation Party and a former member of Parliament, referring to Mr. Maliki.        

Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s cabinet said there was no political motive behind the evictions, which it called part of a longstanding plan to return publicly owned buildings to government use.        

&ldquo;The Constitution guarantees the activity of all political parties, and what was said about banning the Iraqi Communist Party is untrue,&rdquo; the cabinet said in a statement.        

One of Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s top advisers, Ali al-Moussawi, said the Ministry of Defense was &ldquo;in the need of these buildings now.&rdquo;        

The party officials said that members of Iraq&rsquo;s federal police force, on orders from Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s office, arrived at their offices on Sunday and ordered them to leave.        

Although the Communists were told their buildings were being requisitioned for government use, Mr. Alusi said that he received no explanation on why he was being evicted. He said he would try to persuade Mr. Maliki and his colleagues to reconsider the order.        

Mr. Alusi said that senior members of Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s Dawa Party spoke with him five days ago and urged him to align with them. But Mr. Alusi demurred, saying that he had already given interviews standing behind the protesters and had sent his members into the streets to march with them. &ldquo;We support the demonstrations,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We are in the streets with our people.&rdquo;        

Jassin Helfi, a Communist Party leader, said that at 8:30 a.m. on Sunday about 60 security personnel came to the party&rsquo;s headquarters and the office of the party&rsquo;s newspaper.        

They said they had received an order from the Baghdad Operation Command, a special brigade controlled by Mr. Maliki, saying the party had to close its offices within 24 hours, Mr. Helfi said.        

The security officers, Mr. Helfi said, did not have any documentation and did not provide an explanation for why the party had to close its offices.        

Party officials demanded some sort of documentation and the forces returned about an hour later with a letter signed by Mr. Maliki, he said.        

Last week, Mr. Maliki met privately with Communist leaders and echoed his public statements about the protests, saying that insurgents and terrorists were using the protests to undermine the government.        

&ldquo;The objective of the meeting was to try and convince us not to participate in the demonstrations, and when we did, our punishment was the order to close our offices,&rdquo; Mr. Helfi said. &ldquo;That doesn&rsquo;t reflect Maliki&rsquo;s speech about the right of the Iraqis to protest.&rdquo;        

Critics said the orders from Mr. Maliki appeared to be his latest effort to crack down on dissenting voices behind demonstrations that have called for anticorruption reforms, better public services and more accountability from leaders.        

&ldquo;This is part of the violations of public freedoms and human rights,&rdquo; said Hanaa Edwar, an activist with the civil society group Al Amal. &ldquo;They feel that these demonstrators are terrorists. Political parties not loyal to their policies are being attacked. And for what?&rdquo;        

The evictions came as a few hundred protesters in Baghdad observed the first anniversary of Iraq&rsquo;s national elections with a &ldquo;day of regret.&rdquo; Violent &ldquo;day of rage&rdquo; rallies this month ended with nearly 20 demonstrators dead and dozens wounded and arrested.        

In Tahrir Square, a traffic circle and park that has become a focal point for the protesters, about 200 people stood behind yellow police tape and shouted, &ldquo;We want our rights!&rdquo; and vented their disillusionment at Iraq&rsquo;s leaders.        

&ldquo;We had a hope for the best,&rdquo; said Rana Hadi, 24, who said she voted for Mr. Maliki and his coalition. &ldquo;But we were wrong. Nothing happened. Nothing changed.&rdquo;        

Although bombings and power failures are still daily occurrences, violence has dropped sharply over the past year, with 184 people killed across the country last month. Electricity production and oil output have both risen.        

But a year after the elections and three months after Iraq&rsquo;s leaders ended a long political standoff and formed a government, Mr. Maliki has not completed his government and is still personally overseeing the powerful army and police forces.        

Cracks continue to form that could undermine the partnership government. On Monday, eight members of the multisectarian Iraqiya coalition announced that they were splitting off to form their own party, a new fracture in a large coalition backed by many of Iraq&rsquo;s Sunni minority.        

In Tahrir Square, some demonstrators dyed their index fingers red and thrust them into the air, a bitter echo of the purple-stained fingers that smiling Iraqi voters, emerging from the polling stations, had waved on Election Day.        
Yasir Ghazi, Duraid Adnan and Khalid D. Ali contributed reporting.
