
LONDON &mdash; The British government on Monday revealed embarrassing details about a British mission that was apparently meant to reinforce relations with opposition leaders in eastern Libya, but that ended with eight Britons being handcuffed and detained on a military base for two days.        

In a statement to the House of Commons, Foreign Secretary William Hague said that because of a &ldquo;serious misunderstanding&rdquo; over the role of the Britons &mdash; six soldiers and two Foreign Office officials &mdash; in eastern Libya, the eight had left the country. They were on their way to Malta.        

&ldquo;Last week I authorized the dispatch of a small British diplomatic team to eastern Libya, in uncertain circumstances which we judged required their protection, to build on these initial contacts and to assess the scope for closer diplomatic dialogue,&rdquo; Mr. Hague said, speaking of the Interim National Council, based in Benghazi and made up of opposition leaders.        

&ldquo;They were withdrawn yesterday after a serious misunderstanding about their role, leading to their temporary detention,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;The situation was resolved, and they were able to meet&rdquo; the council&rsquo;s president, Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, a former Libyan justice minister.        

Libya&rsquo;s foreign minister, Musa Kusa, seized on the episode as proof that the Western powers were trying to split Libya. &ldquo;The English are yearning for the colonial era of the past,&rdquo; Mr. Kusa said. &ldquo;The first nations who started getting in touch with the secessionists were the English, also the French and the Americans.&rdquo;        

The Labour opposition was also quick to criticize the government of Prime Minister David Cameron.        

&ldquo;I believe I speak for many when I say that the news on Sunday that British diplomatic and military personnel were being held was seen as just the latest setback for the U.K. and raises further serious questions about ministers&rsquo; grip and response to the unfolding events in Libya,&rdquo; Douglas Alexander, Labour&rsquo;s foreign affairs spokesman, said.        

Mr. Alexander then asked whether &ldquo;if some new neighbors moved into the foreign secretary&rsquo;s street, he would introduce himself by ringing the doorbell, or instead choose to climb over the fence in the middle of the night.&rdquo;        

The government has also been criticized for its slow and seemingly chaotic efforts to evacuate British citizens stranded in Libya at the onset of the fighting. One government plane, for instance, broke down before setting off and remained grounded for 10 hours at Gatwick Airport.        

&ldquo;After the events of this weekend and following the flights fiasco, twice in as many weeks ministerial decisions have generated an embarrassment that could all too easily have become a tragedy,&rdquo; Mr. Alexander said.        

The weekend&rsquo;s mission was meant to make contact with opponents of the Libyan government. But according to British news reports, soon after the group entered the country by helicopter, its members were accused of being mercenaries, seized, handcuffed and taken to an opposition military base.        

The government has denied claims that the men were intelligence officers.        

To make the situation worse, the British ambassador&rsquo;s pleading exchange with a spokesman for the opposition council was intercepted. The Libyan government provided copies of the conversation to the BBC, which broadcast it Sunday, and to about 130 members of the foreign news media in Tripoli.        

In the recording, the British ambassador, Richard Northern, was heard attributing the incident to a &ldquo;misunderstanding&rdquo; and appealing for the men&rsquo;s release. In response, the Libyan opposition spokesman told Mr. Northern that the group had made a &ldquo;big mistake coming in with a helicopter.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hague told Parliament, &ldquo;We intend to send further diplomats to eastern Libya in due course.&rdquo;        
David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from Tripoli, Libya
