
JERUSALEM &mdash; Israel&rsquo;s departing intelligence chief said he believes Iran will not be able to build a nuclear weapon before 2015 at the earliest, Israeli news media reported Friday, in a revised and surprisingly upbeat assessment of Tehran&rsquo;s nuclear capabilities.        

The new assessment could reduce international fears of a confrontation over Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program, at least temporarily. Israel has warned that it might launch airstrikes on Iran&rsquo;s nuclear enrichment sites, and many fear that Tehran&rsquo;s retaliation could set off a regional war.        

The assessment, which pushed back other Israeli estimates by a year or more, was based on the obstacles Iran has faced, including technical difficulties and covert action against its nuclear program by intelligence agencies, the Israeli news reports said.        

Iran has long maintained that its nuclear program is for peaceful purposes, but Israeli, American and European officials believe it is intended to produce nuclear weapons. Last year, the United Nations, the United States and the European Union approved a tough new round of economic sanctions on Iran after diplomatic efforts to contain Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program failed.        

Two of Israel&rsquo;s major newspapers, Yediot Aharonot and Maariv, gave prominent coverage to the retirement of the intelligence chief, Meir Dagan, in their Friday editions, highlighting his achievements on the Iranian front after eight years as director of Mossad, Israel&rsquo;s intelligence service.        

Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program is believed to have suffered numerous setbacks recently, but any Israeli role in those problems is not publicly known.        

One of Iran&rsquo;s top nuclear scientists was killed and another wounded in late November when assailants on motorcycles attached bombs to the sides of their cars in Tehran. President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad accused Western governments and Israel of being behind the attacks.        

Part of the Iranian nuclear program was said to have been corrupted by the Stuxnet computer worm, a damaging computer program believed to have been created by a foreign government. The United States also has a covert program to undermine Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program.        

Israeli predictions for Iran&rsquo;s ability to make a nuclear bomb, which Israel considers an existential threat, have gradually lengthened in recent years.        

In the early 2000s, Israeli intelligence branches spoke of Iran&rsquo;s making a bomb before the end of the decade. As recently as 2009, Israel&rsquo;s defense minister, Ehud Barak, said he thought Iran could do it by 2011. Last month, Moshe Yaalon, Israel&rsquo;s minister of strategic affairs, said he believed Iran was at least three years away from a nuclear bomb.        

About a year ago, Mr. Dagan told a parliamentary committee that Iran would not have the ability to fire a nuclear missile until 2014, Yediot Aharonot reported. He is said to have based his latest estimate on an assumption that no further preventive actions are taken.        

Top American military officials said last April that Iran could produce bomb-grade fuel for at least one nuclear weapon within a year, but would most likely need two to five years to manufacture a workable atomic bomb.        
 Robert F. Worth contributed reporting from Washington.
