
SOCHI, Russia &mdash; Less than 250 miles separate the skating arenas being built here for the 2014 Winter Olympics and the home of a suicide bomber who killed 37 people at a Moscow airport in January. A little farther on is Chechnya, site of two civil wars and a still seething Muslim insurgency. In a neighboring region, three tourists on a ski trip were shot to death recently, and local resorts were closed as soldiers searched in vain for the assailants.        

The host nations for the Olympic Games inevitably worry about terrorism. But a glimpse at a map shows why the 2014 Winter Olympics, to be held in this Russian resort on the Black Sea, seem to be facing security concerns unlike any Games in recent memory.        

Sochi lies at the foot of the Caucasus Mountains, the same region that since the Soviet collapse two decades ago has yielded so much turmoil in Russia. In fact, skiing events will be held on those mountains, albeit to the west of the majority-Muslim provinces that have spawned extremist groups.        

It is not only internal strife. The city of Sochi directly abuts Abkhazia, one of two breakaway regions of Georgia that set off a brief war between Russia and Georgia in 2008. (The Olympic Park itself is only about five miles from the border.)        

Abkhazia has declared its independence, with staunch support from Russia and its military, and senior Georgian officials have responded by calling for a boycott of the Olympics.        

International Olympic Committee officials have expressed confidence in Russia&rsquo;s ability to ensure that the Games are safe, even as fears have risen sharply in recent weeks with a spate of attacks.        

The Russian government has repeatedly stressed that it is devoting enormous amounts of money and resources to Olympic security. Senior Russian officials say they have many years of experience in killing, detaining, or, at a minimum, bottling up Muslim militants in the Caucasus.        

In an interview, a deputy prime minister, Dmitri N. Kozak, acknowledged that such groups would be likely to try to step up their activities as the Olympics drew closer. But he played down the significance of Sochi&rsquo;s location, saying that the terrain was so difficult to traverse that it was easier to travel by plane from Moscow &mdash; about 850 miles &mdash; than over land from Chechnya.        

&ldquo;Concerning geography, I would say that it is an illusion that there is more access to Sochi for terrorists,&rdquo; Mr. Kozak said. &ldquo;Sochi is isolated from the rest of the Caucasus &mdash; Chechnya and other such regions &mdash; by mountains that are not easily passable.&rdquo;        

He said the Sochi Olympics would be a target for extremist groups around the world, not just those from the Caucasus. &ldquo;Today, distance for terrorist organizations does not have much meaning,&rdquo; he said.        

Yet, the Jan. 24 suicide bomb attack at the international arrivals terminal in Moscow&rsquo;s showcase Domodedovo Airport seems to be weighing heavily on Olympic preparations, having raised fears that Muslim extremists from the Caucasus are turning their attention to foreigners in order to damage Russia&rsquo;s image around the world.        

Soon after, the governor of the region around Sochi, Aleksandr N. Tkachev, called a public meeting to upbraid local officials for not doing enough to safeguard Olympic sites during construction, especially in light of the airport attack. He said reports from intelligence officials and investigators painted &ldquo;an extremely disturbing picture.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;If we do not build a solid wall of security, not only for the athletes and guests at the Olympics, but also for Sochi residents, then we risk losing everything,&rdquo; Mr. Tkachev said. &ldquo;But for now, unfortunately, there is an enormous distance between what must be and the current reality.&rdquo;        

The mood darkened even more on Feb. 18, when three tourists from Moscow who were on a ski trip to Mount Elbrus, the highest peak in Europe, were gunned down by people suspected of being Muslim extremists who pulled over their vehicle.        

&ldquo;A serious danger now exists for Sochi,&rdquo; said Vadim M. Mukhanov, an analyst at the Center for Caucasus Studies in Moscow. &ldquo;If before, the goal of the radical Islamic underground was to attack the police and security services, recently their slant has changed, and they have started going after tourists. And that is a very disturbing trend.&rdquo;        

The rising tensions in the Caucasus are also threatening to spill into the international arena. A senior Russian lawmaker, Aleksandr P. Torshin, last week accused Georgia of organizing the Domodedovo bombing, though he did not provide any proof. The actual bomber was a 20-year-old from a village in Ingushetia, a region next to Chechnya.        

Mr. Torshin maintained that Georgia, under President Mikheil Saakashvili, wanted to foment instability in Russia. Other officials have gone further and insisted that Mr. Saakashvili hopes to turn the Olympics into a public relations disaster for Russia.        

Georgian officials have called such charges ludicrous.        

In Sochi late last month, the Russian government sought to demonstrate that it was heeding warnings about possible increased terrorist activity. At the Olympic Park, security officials used metal detectors to screen all workers and visitors. Trucks and other heavy equipment were searched and tagged with global positioning devices when they entered the site so they could be monitored.        

At the skiing areas in nearby Krasnaya Polyana, the FIS European Cup was conducting test skiing events. Police officers were stationed throughout the slopes, with some even guarding pylons that held aloft the cables for ski lifts. Competitors and spectators were required to wear badges and had to go through checkpoints. The races occurred without incident.        

Throughout Sochi, the municipal government has installed thousands of video cameras so that it can respond more quickly to security problems. One of the city officials who oversee the system, Iles P. Dzaurov, just returned from London, host of the 2012 Summer Olympics, where he observed the security precautions there.        

Standing before a bank of giant video screens with feeds from across the city, Mr. Dzaurov said he understood why people were nervous. But he contended that the city would be ready.        

&ldquo;There are no grounds for concern,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We are on guard for anything that occurs, and we have a lot of experience doing this.&rdquo;        
