
GOMA, Democratic Republic of the Congo &mdash; As violence increases before southern Sudan&rsquo;s expected independence this summer, a satellite image emerged of a razed village in the contested region of Abyei, offering a rare glimpse of fighting there.        

Whitened ash is all that remains of several hundred buildings that burned to the ground in the village, Tajalei, satellite imagery taken on Sunday shows. A mix of charred areas and untouched ground suggested an intentional assault.        

Tajalei is at least the third village in the Abyei area to be attacked since Feb. 27, when fighting broke out after a rebel militia aligned with Arab nomads attacked villages and the police, southern officials said. The officials said that more than 100 people had died in the clashes, including many police officers.        

Control of Abyei, a region with elements of both Arab and African culture, remains one of the most difficult issues to be resolved between the north and south, both of which claim the land.        

The satellite image recalled scenes from Sudan&rsquo;s long civil war, when southern Sudanese villages were regularly razed by marauding Arab militias from the north. Abyei town was burned to the ground during north-south clashes in 2008.        

The north, which armed militias during the civil war, is now accused of supplying Arab militias in the border area in an effort to weaken the southern government. The north has said that southern officials have no evidence of its current involvement in the instability around Abyei.        

The United Nations on Monday acknowledged the episode in Tajalei, but said officials could not get to the village to verify what had happened.        

The image was provided by the Satellite Sentinel Program, an advocacy group conceived by the actor George Clooney in coordination with the Enough Project. The group said the image was evidence that the north was trying to destabilize the country.        

&ldquo;Satellite imagery combined with on-the-ground analysis is pointing to a deliberate attempt to subvert peace,&rdquo; said John Prendergast, a co-founder of the Enough Project. &ldquo;If mediators and concerned governments acquiesce to this strategy, it would legitimize local population-clearing efforts and would be a recipe for a wider war.&rdquo;        

Abyei residents and the Satellite Sentinel Project say the Tajalei attackers were Arab nomads known as Misseriya, accused of being backed by the northern government.        

Officials in Abyei said that the police had received warning of a planned attack on Tajalei and that they had evacuated its roughly 2,000 residents, many of whom headed to Abyei town, on Friday. The next day the attackers came, setting the town ablaze, the officials said in telephone interviews.        

Officials said a mentally handicapped resident had died; the United Nations said it had not independently confirmed the casualty.        

Abyei residents said the recent fighting in the villages of Maker and Todach had left them more vulnerable.        

During the fighting there &ldquo;we lost many police,&rdquo; Akanon Ajuong, a resident of Abyei town, said in a telephone interview. &ldquo;That is why in Tajalei we didn&rsquo;t have enough police to defend the people.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;They destroyed the police station, some tukul huts and watering holes for animals,&rdquo; Mr. Ajuong said.        

&ldquo;Right now it is O.K.,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;but maybe they will attack again.&rdquo;        

The United Nations said Monday that it could not confirm the details of the attack in Tajalei, particularly who the attackers were.        

&ldquo;We sent out a patrol to verify the facts on the ground, but the patrol was not permitted to get to the village, where the bulk of the houses allegedly were,&rdquo; said Hua Jiang, a United Nations spokeswoman in Sudan.        

She added that it was southern Sudanese forces, not northerners, who were restricting access to the site. &ldquo;We are going to make another attempt tomorrow,&rdquo; she said.        

In more violence in the south, 56 people were killed Sunday in clashes between militia and southern soldiers in Upper Nile state, according to Reuters.        
