
FRANKFURT &mdash; In the eyes of his family and friends, Arid Uka was a model youth: never in trouble with the police, unlike many other young men in his predominantly immigrant neighborhood in Frankfurt.        

In 2005, he and some classmates won a government prize for a school project on how to prevent violence in society and posed proudly with Gerhard Schr&ouml;der, then the chancellor of Germany. The young man, who was from Kosovo, helped his mother at home, cleaned floors, took out the trash and even gave her half his salary for the pilgrimage to Mecca.        

Mr. Uka, 21, was a devout Muslim who prayed five times a day, but also liked to play video games on a PlayStation and watch &ldquo;The Simpsons&rdquo; with his brothers, 27 and 12.        

&ldquo;He was always thinking about others first and then about himself,&rdquo; said his mother, Fevzije, 53. According to her, he wanted to become an engineer, have a family and live a normal life.        

But last Wednesday, that vision of normal life vanished, after Mr. Uka was arrested in connection with an attack on an American military bus at Frankfurt airport that killed two American airmen and wounded two other men. German security officials said Mr. Uka was motivated by anger about the United States&rsquo; deployment in Afghanistan. It was the first terrorist attack on German soil in the decade since Sept. 11.        

One of the dead, as well as the two wounded, were members of a security team en route to Afghanistan, according to the United States Air Force. The other man killed was stationed at Ramstein Air Base and was the driver of the bus.        

Mr. Uka&rsquo;s 27-year-old brother, Hastrid, said Arid had never shown hatred toward anyone. The two brothers arrived with their mother in Germany when Arid was 4 years old; their grandfather was an imam in their native Kosovo, but they had been raised to respect other religions; Hastrid&rsquo;s girlfriend is Jewish, and all three would go to the movies.        

The family was proud that Mr. Uka went to high school. &ldquo;Our dream was to buy a house and live all together with our families one day,&rdquo; said Hastrid Uka, who like his father is a roofer.        

Whether Mr. Uka actually finished high school is unclear. He told his family that he had been unable to get an engineering job at a big chemical company last year, so he did social service at the Green Crescent, a Frankfurt group that cares for elderly Muslim immigrants with no family.        

Moustafa Shahin, head of the Green Crescent, said he had a school report for Arid Uka only for the 2007-8 year.        

&ldquo;He was a hard-working person. He did not talk much,&rdquo; Mr. Shahin said. &ldquo;He was very loved by the patients and was always on time for the job.&rdquo;        

In December 2010, Mr. Uka told Mr. Shahin he was quitting because he needed another job to support his family. He then went to work at the post office.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s incomprehensible what happened here,&rdquo; Mr. Shahin said. &ldquo;It is totally opposite to how we have known him.&rdquo;        

At the Uka home, the phone rang continuously.        

&ldquo;I am trying to find an answer but I can&rsquo;t,&rdquo; said Arid&rsquo;s father, Murat Uka, asking a reporter whether the dead men had families, of what age. &ldquo;We are so sorry,&rdquo; he and Hastrid repeated.        

Mr. Uka was born in Kosovska Mitrovica, in the former Yugoslavia, but his brother Hastrid said they had known the area only from vacations. A family video showed Mr. Uka there last year with his mother and younger brother, Kosovar. Mr. Uka, a tall, thin man with shoulder-length hair, smiled shyly into the camera. &ldquo;He didn&rsquo;t like to be filmed much,&rdquo; his mother said, explaining that she sometimes had to take his picture by surprise.        

In their district, Sossenheim, second-generation immigrants often face problems in school or finding a job. But, Hastrid Uka said, &ldquo;We had a good childhood, and our friends came from all nationalities and religions.&rdquo;        

His father added, &ldquo;Our children were brought up as Muslims, but also as people who respect others no matter what religion they have.&rdquo;        

According to German security officials and prosecutors, the Internet may have played a major role in Mr. Uka&rsquo;s radicalization. His Facebook page hints at a side of him his family apparently did not know. He posted a link to a jihadist battle hymn: &ldquo;I can no longer stand this life of humiliation among you. My weapon is ready at all times.&rdquo;        

A German security official who is involved in the investigation but not authorized to speak about it said that Arid Uka had been friends with men known for their radical interpretation of Islam.        

But Boris Rhein, the interior minister for the state of Hesse, where the airport is, said there was no evidence that the suspect was part of a larger group, though he added that there was evidence he had singled out United States military personnel for ideological reasons.        

According to the prosecutor in the case, Mr. Uka told investigators that he had acted alone and that he had decided to carry out the attack after seeing a video on YouTube that apparently showed American soldiers raping a girl in Afghanistan. There is indeed a video that was posted recently on several jihadist forums and is still available that shows men in United States uniforms appearing to rape a young woman.        

His family said they first heard about the video from the news media. &ldquo;We had no idea about this &mdash; but maybe my brother thought it is true and he lost it,&rdquo; Hastrid Uka said.        

In Washington, a Pentagon spokesman called the YouTube video the work of extremists. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s clearly part of a propaganda video and contains no reference to when or where the video was shot,&rdquo; said Col. David Lapan, the spokesman. &ldquo;How does one determine if it&rsquo;s authentic and/or investigate?&rdquo;        

Hastrid Uka said the family saw his brother on Monday for a brief visit, the first since his arrest, adding that he seemed calm and like his normal self.        

One day, when the shock is past, Murat Uka said he would have more questions for his son. &ldquo;I want to ask Arid if he has really done it,&rdquo; he said, with tears in his eyes. &ldquo;I will ask him, &lsquo;My son, why did you kill?&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        
Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington.
