
SANGIN, Afghanistan &mdash; More American forces have died in this mountainous, hauntingly beautiful Taliban narcotics center than in any other place in the nearly 10-year-old war &mdash; 29 Marines in the last five months alone. In December, the Pentagon was so worried that helicopters might come under fire, that it canceled plans for Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates to visit.        

But after some recent improvements in security, Mr. Gates ventured here for a quick visit on Tuesday to bear witness to the losses and to what he called the &ldquo;dramatic turnaround&rdquo; in Sangin over the past few months. His highly personal remarks, hitting a tone more and more common as he comes to the expected end of his tenure this year as defense secretary, also underscored the precariousness of the gains in Sangin &mdash; and across Afghanistan &mdash; as the Obama administration makes the first moves toward extracting itself from the war.        

&ldquo;This district was one of most dangerous, not just in Afghanistan, but maybe the whole world,&rdquo; Mr. Gates told the men and women of the Third Battalion, Fifth Marines, at Forward Operating Base Jackson, or F.O.B. Jackson for short. Every day, he said, &ldquo;I monitor how you&rsquo;re doing, and every day you return to your F.O.B. without a loss, I say a little prayer,&rdquo; adding, &ldquo;And I say a prayer on the other days as well.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gates&rsquo; aides said afterward that he had asked them to keep track of the daily losses in Sangin once the toll started mounting in October, shortly after the battalion was deployed to the area. They now report the losses from the district, which is in Helmand Province in southern Afghanistan, at the secretary&rsquo;s end-of-day meeting at the Pentagon.        

In November, Second Lt. Robert Kelly, 29, was killed here, in the blast of a homemade bomb. He was the son of the man chosen to be Mr. Gates&rsquo; new senior military adviser, Lt. Gen. John Kelly.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m the one that signed the orders that sent you all here,&rdquo; Mr. Gates told the Marines, who were gathered outside in view of the mountains and a winding river below the base. &ldquo;I visit your wounded brothers at Bethesda; I write the condolence letters to the families of your fallen, and so I feel a tremendous sense of responsibility for each and every one of you.&rdquo; He referred to the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md.        

Mr. Gates is in Afghanistan to take part in discussions on how many United States troops should be withdrawn in July, the start of reductions ordered by President Obama. Mr. Gates has offered no numbers, but on Tuesday he said for the first time that there were unlikely to be American withdrawals in July from the hard-fought areas of the south &mdash; Helmand and Kandahar Provinces. Currently, there are about 100,000 American service members in the country.        

In Sangin, Lt. Col. Jason Morris, who leads about 900 Marines as the battalion commander, told reporters that the poppy fields and opium processing laboratories in the area had historically provided about 50 percent of the financing for the Taliban leadership in Quetta, across the border in Pakistan.        

But the Marines have made inroads and killed roughly 400 insurgents since October, Colonel Morris said. He said he was preparing for the Taliban to reassert itself in a new round of fighting after a winter lull.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re expecting the violence to pick up in the next few weeks,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The indicators we have are that the insurgents have started moving forces in here.&rdquo; He said he anticipated that insurgents would use more homemade bombs and attempt assassinations of local Afghan officials, part of what he called a Taliban strategy to avoid direct contact with United States forces and their superior firepower.        

Prospects in the meantime appear uncertain for a peace deal made two months ago between Sangin&rsquo;s largest tribe and the Afghan government, which was heralded in January as crucial to American progress in the area.        

On Tuesday, Mr. Gates also traveled to a village in the Arghandab District of Kandahar Province, where a fledgling program to arm local Afghan police officers is under way. In an attempt to show that the United States is making progress there as well, Mr. Gates strolled for 15 minutes without body armor, although surrounded by a heavily armed security force, down a dirt road to the village of Tabin, where he met with eight new police recruits.        

The program, begun three months ago, was at first opposed by President Hamid Karzai, who feared it would create antigovernment militias. But American commanders pressed for it, as a way to encourage Afghan men to defend their own villages. So far, 4,500 officers have enrolled.        

Back in Sangin, Mr. Gates compared the Marines&rsquo; fight to legendary battles like Guadalcanal. &ldquo;Your success has come at a terrible price,&rdquo; he said.        
