
JERUSALEM &mdash; Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu declared definitively on Tuesday that he would maintain an Israeli military presence along the Jordan River under any future arrangement involving the Palestinians, buttressing a known policy with a demonstrative visit to that area of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.        

Mr. Netanyahu said the Israeli military presence east of any future Palestinian state was all the more necessary, given the tumult rocking the Middle East. The visit came as Israeli officials were floating the idea of a peace initiative for an interim arrangement toward a two-state solution, instead of the previously stated goal of a final accord on Palestinian statehood by fall.        

The Israeli statements of intent, rejected by the Palestinians, were likely to further stymie any progress between the sides. Peace talks were suspended five months ago.        

Mr. Netanyahu, referring to the upheaval in the Arab world as &ldquo;a political and security earthquake which we have not seen the end of,&rdquo; said, &ldquo;In this situation, more than ever, we need to ensure that we have solid security foundations upon which to defend the state of Israel.        

&ldquo;Our security border is here, on the Jordan River,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and our line of defense is here.&rdquo;        

He warned that if this line were broken, the Israeli heartland would become vulnerable to the infiltration of terrorists, missiles and rockets.        

Mr. Netanyahu&rsquo;s aides have not offered details on what kind of interim arrangement he is considering, though it is widely assumed to involve some transfer of West Bank territory to Palestinian Authority control and temporary borders for a provisional Palestinian state. Officials say that Mr. Netanyahu is planning a major policy speech, possibly to be delivered in the United States this spring.        

In an interview published in The Wall Street Journal on Tuesday, Israel&rsquo;s defense minister, Ehud Barak, said that Mr. Netanyahu was likely to offer the Palestinians temporary borders for a provisional state before tackling other core issues, like the fate of Palestinian refugees and rival claims to Jerusalem.        

Mr. Barak said that Israel might seek extra security assistance from the United States of up to $20 billion, but could not seek pledges of aid without making a &ldquo;daring&rdquo; peace offer.        

The Palestinians, who want a complete Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank, have repeatedly rejected both a long-term Israeli military presence in the Jordan Valley and the idea of a provisional state.        

However, the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, has expressed readiness for the presence of a third party, like an American-led NATO force, on the borders of a Palestinian state.        

Mr. Abbas commented over the weekend on the reports of a possible Israeli offer.        

At a news conference in the West Bank city of Ramallah, he said, &ldquo;We know that there was an idea in the past that called for a state with provisional borders, and if this idea is proposed again, we will not accept it.&rdquo;        
