
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; With airstrikes, armor and artillery, military units loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi hammered the rebels seeking his ouster in battles along the eastern Mediterranean coast and in the besieged western city of Zawiyah on Tuesday, as a new report documented how badly the insurgents lagged the Qaddafi forces in equipment and capabilities.        

Qaddafi forces battered the rebel-held city of Zawiyah for a fifth day. With land lines, cellphones and the Internet down, and journalists barred from the area, it was impossible to tell whose flag flew over the central square as darkness fell.        

Fighting was also reported in the rebel-held city of Misratah, Libya&rsquo;s third largest, about 100 miles east of Tripoli.        

The Libyan air force, dominated by members of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s native tribe, renewed its strikes on rebel positions around the coastal oil city of Ras Lanuf. Rebels had taken control of the city days ago, when they appeared to be moving briskly westward.        

On Tuesday they were struggling to regroup after losses the night before, so that they might move again toward the Qaddafi stronghold of Surt, west of Ras Lanuf on the road to Tripoli.        

Rebel fighters &mdash; including an increasing number of professional soldiers &mdash; prepared themselves for a government drive to recapture Ras Lanuf. All afternoon, reinforcements in the form of dozens of white Toyota pickup trucks mounted with heavy machine guns and antiaircraft guns streamed in from the opposition-controlled east.        

The battles unfolded in an atmosphere of rumors and uncertainty in the capital, where reliable information was increasingly scarce and unrealistic propaganda increasingly plentiful. Unconfirmed reports circulated of peace proposals that could involve Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s giving up power.        

The only basis for the reports appeared to be televised remarks by a former prime minister suggesting, without elaboration, that both sides should negotiate, as Colonel Qaddafi had suggested before. By the end of the day, both sides had vigorously denied making or receiving any overtures of any kind.        

President Obama and the British prime minister, David Cameron, agreed in a phone call on the shared objective of &ldquo;the departure of Qaddafi from power as quickly as possible,&rdquo; the White House said in a statement, adding that they would &ldquo;press forward with planning, including at NATO, on the full spectrum of possible responses, including surveillance, humanitarian assistance, enforcement of the arms embargo and a no-fly zone.&rdquo;        

In the Middle East, the Gulf Cooperation Council has already endorsed a no-flight zone, and speaking in Washington, a representative of the Arab League said it was expected to support the idea as well. Britain and France are working on a United Nations resolution to authorize a no-flight zone, though it is unclear that such a measure could gain needed support from Russia and China, which are traditionally leery of military intervention.        

Western leaders have stressed the need for international support before undertaking a no-flight zone, so they do not appear to be meddling. Colonel Qaddafi has already begun attacking the idea of Western airstrikes as a form of colonialism.        

A report released Tuesday by the International Institute for Strategic Studies, a London-based group known for its assessments of relative military strength, underscored the challenge facing the rebels. Colonel Qaddafi &ldquo;has long neglected the military formations in the east; the dilapidated bases and installations there contrast sharply with the well-kept barracks and tank parks outside Tripoli,&rdquo; the report said, relying in part on satellite images to compare the number and make of tanks and other equipment. &ldquo;This goes a long way toward explaining why the momentum generated by the revolution has yet to overwhelm pro-regime forces.&rdquo;        

Air power is Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s biggest advantage, the report found, noting that so far the rebels appeared unable to use bases and planes they captured in the east. Planes and helicopters give the Qaddafi forces an additional advantage, the report said, in moving ammunition and supplies, a crucial factor given the length of the Libyan coast between the rebel stronghold of Benghazi and the capital, Tripoli.        

The rebels obtained &ldquo;an extensive collection of surface-to-air missiles&rdquo; from defecting bases in the east, the report noted, but have been unable to get them to the front lines, where they might counter Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s Russian-made warplanes.        

Still, despite the weapons advantage, the report noted that the Qaddafi forces appeared lacking in morale. &ldquo;In recent skirmishes in small coastal towns the rebels have easily repelled the pro-government forces&rsquo; largely uncoordinated attacks with the most rudimentary of weapons,&rdquo; the report said. &ldquo;The loyalty of the air force has also been called into question as many bombs have been reportedly dropped miles from their targets.&rdquo;        

In an interview with the pan-Arab news channel Al Arabiya on Monday night, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s son Saadi appeared to pull back the curtain on some Qaddafi sibling rivalry &mdash; a weighty issue because his sons command private militias, play major roles in the government and own communications companies and other businesses. Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s son Muatassim, considered a hard-liner, is national security adviser, while his brother Seif al-Islam has campaigned for more open government and become Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s heir apparent.        
Kareem Fahim contributed reporting from Ras Lanuf, Libya, and Anthony Shadid from Benghazi, Libya.
