
BANGKOK &mdash; Rescuers in Vietnam began an urgent effort on Tuesday to capture and treat an old and ailing turtle that lives in a landmark lake in Hanoi and is revered as the city&rsquo;s spiritual symbol.        

Thousands of onlookers jostled at the edge of the tree-fringed lake as divers and boatmen tried to wrestle the huge turtle onto an artificial island where an elaborate &ldquo;turtle hospital&rdquo; had been created with a holding pen and filtered water tank.        

But the rescuers lost their quarry, as the turtle, which weighs about 440 pounds, ripped through their net and plunged deeper into the cold and murky water and disappeared. Seemingly fruitless efforts continued throughout the day.        

The turtle, which scientists say could be more than a century old, is revered as the incarnation of a mythical creature that snatched a magic sword from a 15th-century king and returned it to its divine owners beneath the water, giving the lake its name, Hoan Kiem, or Lake of the Returned Sword. Romantics say the turtle is that legendary creature, believing it to be more than 600 years old.        

For months, scientists and officials have argued over how to save the turtle, whose shell has become gouged and whose flesh is raw with wounds, raising fears of infection from the pollution that has fouled the lake. Some blame an infestation of small turtles called red-eared sliders. It surfaces from time to time, then quickly disappears as cars and motorbikes whirl past, bathing the modern lakeside in the white noise of traffic. Such appearances have grown more common as his condition has deteriorated.        

Though some experts warned that disturbing the solitary creature could cause him further harm, alarm over his condition prompted an urgent effort to determine and treat his ailments.        

&ldquo;The turtle is old and weak and if it is not protected, it may die at any time,&rdquo; said Ha Dinh Duc, an independent scholar who has spent the last 20 years studying the Hoan Kiem turtle.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know why authorities have kept saying they need more time to work out a solution,&rdquo; he told the local news media in January. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid when they are finally able to do something, it would be too late.&rdquo;        

The urgency comes primarily from the serious and possibly infected wounds that have been observed when the turtle surfaces, said Douglas Hendrie, a wildlife crime specialist with a private Vietnamese conservation agency called Education for Nature &mdash; Vietnam.        

&ldquo;The second reason is simply, it&rsquo;s an old turtle,&rdquo; Mr. Hendrie said by telephone from Hanoi. &ldquo;The third thing is, of course, pollution. The lake is hopelessly polluted.&rdquo; With these three factors, he said, &ldquo;the odds are not good&rdquo; for its survival.        

Hoan Kiem Lake, surrounded by weeping willows and other foliage, lies at the heart of the city, its curved red bridge leading to a tiny island with a temple. Visitors surround it throughout the day, eating ice cream or staring out at the water from benches.        

But like many of Hanoi&rsquo;s other small lakes, Hoan Kiem has shrunk as development has encroached, and debris and pollution have decreased its depth with a deep layer of sludge.        

Experts say the turtle could be even more than a century old. Turtles have been known to live to the age of 175, said Timothy McCormack, a coordinator at the Cleveland Metroparks Zoo&rsquo;s Asian Turtle Program, a network that seeks to develop and promote turtle conservation efforts in Asia.        

While Mr. Duc insists that the Hoan Kiem turtle is unique, a species of its own, scientists generally agree that it is one of just four members of its species, Rafetus swinhoei. There is a second in another lake in Hanoi and two more in a zoo in China.        

Mr. McCormack watched Tuesday morning as six boats and two divers with two nets struggled to land the powerful turtle.        

&ldquo;When you&rsquo;re down to the last four animals,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;the options are running out.&rdquo;        
