
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Security forces working for Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi physically abused and psychologically terrorized three British Broadcasting Corporation correspondents for 21 hours after they were detained trying to reach the scene of a bloody battle in a city just 30 miles from the capital, the journalists reported Wednesday night.        

They said they were beaten with fists and rifles, hooded and subjected to mock executions. And they said that while in custody at a military barracks they saw other victims, many of them from the city they were trying to reach, Zawiyah, who had suffered from torture far worse.        

One of the journalists, Feras Killani, a correspondent for BBC Arabic, told his news organization that he saw &ldquo;evidence of torture&rdquo; on the faces and bodies of others in the prison.        

Another correspondent, Goktay Koraltan, said: &ldquo;I cannot describe how bad it was. Most of them were hooded and handcuffed really tightly, all with swollen hands and broken ribs. They were in agony. They were screaming.&rdquo;        

On Thursday, The Guardian said that one of its correspondents in Libya had been missing for two weeks. The newspaper reported that the correspondent, Abdul-Ahad, had entered the country from Tunisia and was last heard from when he was on the outskirts of Zawiyah, west of the capital, Tripoli, which has seen fierce fighting in the past few days. The Guardian said it had been in touch with Libyan officials in Tripoli and London asking for their help in finding the correspondent.        

The episodes come as Western powers are weighing the steps, potentially including the imposition of a no-flight zone, to deter Colonel Qaddafi from applying excessive violence against Libyan civilians as he tries to quell a three-week revolt trying to end his four decades in power.        

The BBC report adds to testimony from Libyan opponents of the Qaddafi government as well as refugees fleeing the country that Libyan security forces have routinely tortured those in their custody. The United Nations is looking into reports of abuses.        

Residents of Zawiyah have described heavy casualties during a five-day siege of their town. Many of the roughly 130 foreign journalists whom the Libyan government has invited to Tripoli have tried to visit the town, and the few who have made it have reported wounded bodies, fresh graves and damaged buildings.        

Like the other foreign journalists invited to Tripoli by the Libyan government, the BBC correspondents had been promised a chance to move and report freely. They said they were stopped at one of many checkpoints on the road, where they showed identification. Where other journalists have been turned back, they were taken captive.        

&ldquo;We were lined up against the wall,&rdquo; said Chris Cobb-Smith, the third correspondent. &ldquo;I was the last in line &mdash; facing the wall.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I looked and I saw a plainclothes guy with a small submachine gun,&rdquo; Mr. Cobb-Smith continued. &ldquo;He put it to everyone&rsquo;s neck.&rdquo; He said the man &ldquo;put the gun to my neck and pulled the trigger twice. The bullets whisked past my ear.&rdquo;        

The correspondents said Mr. Killani, who is of Palestinian descent, was accused of being a spy and beaten repeatedly. His captors told him they did not like his reporting on events in Libya, the correspondents said.        

Mr. Killani said four of the other detainees in the barracks &ldquo;were in a very bad situation.&rdquo; He added: &ldquo;One of them said he had at least two broken ribs. I spent at least six hours helping them drink, sleep, urinate and move from one side to another.&rdquo;        

One of correspondents managed to conceal a mobile phone he used to notify the BBC, which successfully pressed the Libyan government for the correspondents&rsquo; release.        
