
MOSCOW &mdash; Under extremely tight security, Ukraine has sent 110 pounds of highly enriched uranium, a significant portion of its Soviet-era stock, to Russia for disposal or storage, officials announced Friday.        

The material, taken from research reactors, was moved by plane in December  in specially designed casks as part of President Obama&rsquo;s effort to reduce the chances that  nuclear material might be diverted or stolen.        

Ukraine&rsquo;s president, Viktor F. Yanukovich, agreed at a  meeting convened by Mr. Obama in April to give up his country&rsquo;s highly enriched uranium, which can be used to build nuclear weapons. In May, Ukraine shipped 123 pounds of highly enriched uranium by train to Russia, and officials said they hoped that the rest of the country&rsquo;s stock would be exported by the end of 2012.        

In a statement issued by the White House on Friday, Mr. Obama praised Mr. Yanukovich.        

&ldquo;This action brings us all one step closer to securing all vulnerable nuclear materials,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said. &ldquo;These actions represent continued Ukrainian leadership in making sure that nuclear weapons never fall into the hands of a terrorist, and working toward a world without nuclear weapons.&rdquo;        

Ukraine, a former Soviet republic, renounced nuclear weapons after the Soviet collapse in 1991, turning them over to  Russia.        

But research reactors in Ukraine continued to maintain stocks of highly enriched uranium, and the Obama administration worked with Mr. Yanukovich&rsquo;s government to replace that material with low-enriched uranium, which officials said  could not be easily used for weapons.        

The United States also provided Ukraine with  safety equipment, according to the National Nuclear Security Administration in Washington, which helped coordinate the transfer.        

The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry said in a statement that, &ldquo;Ukraine has proven that it remains a consistent and reliable participant in multilateral efforts to strengthen the nuclear nonproliferation regime.&rdquo;        
