
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; To show how the party led by President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe uses brute force against its opponents, Elton Mangoma, a cabinet minister in the country&rsquo;s troubled power-sharing government, rolled up a pant leg during a recent interview at his home to reveal scars from a 2007 police beating that he said shattered his kneecap.        

&ldquo;If South Africa, the African Union and the international community fold their arms, then Zimbabwe can descend into chaos,&rdquo; warned Mr. Mangoma, a leader in the Movement for Democratic Change, or M.D.C., the party that fought Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s rule for a decade before regional leaders pressured it into governing with him for the past two years.        

On Thursday, the police came again for Mr. Mangoma, the minister of energy and power development, who now stands accused of criminal abuse of office in a deal to procure fuel &mdash; charges he denied through his lawyer.        

Also on Thursday, Zimbabwe&rsquo;s Supreme Court &mdash; viewed by many as partial to Mr. Mugabe, 87 &mdash; invalidated the 2008 election of a speaker of Parliament from the Movement for Democratic Change.        

The day&rsquo;s events provided yet more evidence of Zimbabwe&rsquo;s rapidly deteriorating political situation.        

&ldquo;The fact of the matter is that Zimbabwe is in a crisis,&rdquo; Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai, leader of the Movement for Democratic Change, said in a statement on Thursday.        

Mr. Tsvangirai, who in March 2007 was badly beaten at the same police station where Mr. Mangoma said he was beaten, cited signs of what he called a campaign by Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s party, ZANU-PF, to &ldquo;promote chaos and fear in the country&rdquo;: 73 meetings of the M.D.C. banned or disrupted by the police in recent weeks; assaults on Mr. Tsvangirai&rsquo;s supporters in the slums of the capital, Harare, and in the countryside; a propaganda onslaught against him and his party in the state-controlled media; and the arrest and jailing of M.D.C. leaders and activists opposed to Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s 31-year rule.        

Mr. Tsvangirai, who won more votes than Mr. Mugabe in a March 2008 general election but withdrew before a June runoff after widespread attacks on his supporters, contended that members of his party were being hounded by a police force and criminal justice system controlled by Mr. Mugabe.        

&ldquo;But ZANU-PF cadres and securocrats who murdered people in the run-up to the 27 June election are roaming free,&rdquo; Mr. Tsvangirai said. He said Mr. Mangoma and six activists accused of treason after watching videos of the uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia were &ldquo;innocent victims of a barbaric and senseless dictatorship.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s supporters said that the activists were plotting to overthrow him. Jonathan Moyo, a member of ZANU-PF&rsquo;s Politburo, wrote in the Feb. 27 Sunday Mail, a state-controlled newspaper, that with the uprisings in North Africa, &ldquo;no doubt vigilance has become the order of the day all around.        

&ldquo;Only God knows why these hopeless copycats, whose death wish is to be arrested at the Harare Gardens and be charged with treason in accordance with the rule of law they love preaching about, honestly think they can do an Egypt or Libya in Zimbabwe,&rdquo; Mr. Moyo wrote.        

ZANU-PF&rsquo;s crackdown seems driven by anxiety about revolutions against autocratic rulers sweeping North Africa and the Middle East, as well as by the party&rsquo;s own push for elections this year &mdash; elections that leaders of the Movement for Democratic Change have warned could lead to another violent and discredited election.        

In interviews in recent days, spokesmen for both Mr. Mugabe and his party have said that the elections must happen this year.        

But South Africa, tasked by regional leaders with brokering Zimbabwe&rsquo;s power-sharing deal, is pushing back against Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s rush to the polls with unusual vigor that marks a surprising break with its long and much criticized &ldquo;quiet diplomacy&rdquo; in responding to its neighbor&rsquo;s decade-long economic and political decline.        

In a statement on March 1, Marius Fransman, the deputy minister in South Africa&rsquo;s Department of International Relations and Cooperation, said South Africa and the region took the position that any election held before Zimbabweans adopted a new constitution through a referendum would violate the power-sharing agreement.        

Told that ZANU-PF officials had said there would be an election this year, Lindiwe Zulu, a special adviser to South Africa&rsquo;s president, Jacob Zuma, said in a recent interview that pulling one off that soon would take a miracle. And on a recent visit to Zimbabwe, Ms. Zulu said, Mr. Zuma&rsquo;s team plainly voiced concern about a recurrence of violence and intimidation.        

&ldquo;If they are going to have an election by October, they would have to do a 360-degree turnaround at high speed,&rdquo; she said.        

Even more forceful comments came from South Africa&rsquo;s deputy president, Kgalema Motlanthe, who acknowledged the harsh realities confronting his own country, where more than a third of working-age people are jobless and often resent the estimated two million Zimbabweans who have settled here to escape their devastated homeland.        

Mr. Motlanthe called for the next Zimbabwean elections to be a watershed in the country&rsquo;s history, free of violence and observed by international monitors from the region and Europe, his spokesman, Thabo Masebe, confirmed.        

&ldquo;It is the will of the Zimbabwean people which must determine the future of Zimbabwe as a country, and it is in our interest as a country that indeed we proceed in that direction,&rdquo; Mr. Motlanthe said last week. &ldquo;Because if we fail and Zimbabwe implodes, literally the border between Zimbabwe will disappear and we will sit with all the problems.&rdquo;        
