
RAS LANUF, Libya &mdash; The momentum shifted decisively Thursday in an uprising that has shaken Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s four decades of rule, as rebels fled from this strategic refinery town under a sustained land, air and sea assault by government forces.        

The fighting was a stark illustration of the asymmetry of the conflict, pitting protesters turned rebels against a military with far superior arms and organization and a willingness to prosecute a vicious counterattack against its own people.        

Usually ebullient rebels acknowledged withdrawing Thursday, even as the fledgling opposition leadership in Benghazi scored diplomatic gains with France&rsquo;s recognition of it as the legitimate government and senior American officials&rsquo; promise to talk with its leaders.        

&ldquo;We are coming,&rdquo; Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s son, Saif al-Islam, told reporters in Tripoli.        

Western nations took new steps to isolate the Qaddafi government, but the measures stopped well short of any sort of military intervention and seemed unlikely to be able to reverse the momentum.        

The cautious response underscored what is at stake in a race against time in the most chaotic and unpredictable of the uprisings to shake the Arab world &mdash; whether the opposition can secure more international recognition and a no-flight zone to blunt Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s offensive before rebel lines crumble in the coastal oil towns west of Benghazi.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s tough these days,&rdquo; said Mohammed al-Houni, a 25-year-old fighter at the front. &ldquo;There is no comparison between our weapons and theirs. They&rsquo;re trained, they&rsquo;re organized. They got their training in Russia and I don&rsquo;t know where. We&rsquo;re not an army, we&rsquo;re the people and even if we had weapons, we wouldn&rsquo;t even know how to use them.&rdquo;        

Only days ago, rebels were boldly promising to march on Surt, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s hometown, then on to Tripoli, where opposition leaders predicted its residents would rise up. But the week has witnessed a series of setbacks, with a punishing government assault on Zawiyah, near the capital, and a reversal of fortunes in towns near Ras Lanuf, whose refinery makes it a strategic economic prize in a country blessed with vast oil reserves.        

There was a growing sense among the opposition, echoed by leaders in opposition-held Benghazi and rebels on the front, that they could not single-handedly defeat Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces.        

&ldquo;We can&rsquo;t prevail unless there&rsquo;s a no-fly zone,&rdquo; said Anis Mabrouk, a 35-year-old fighter. &ldquo;Give us the cover and we&rsquo;ll go all the way to Tripoli and kill him.&rdquo;        

That seemed unlikely, though. Even without warplanes, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government could still marshal far superior tanks, armor and artillery, along with the finances and organization to prosecute a counteroffensive. Given the disarray, some rebels took pride in their success in holding the lines at Ras Lanuf as long as they had. Soviet-made warplanes struck Brega, more than 100 miles from the front line on the road that resupplies the rebels, as well as several spots on the way to Ras Lanuf.        

At noon, a rocket slammed into an unfinished mosque there, sending clouds of dust over dozens of worshipers and incensing fighters who condemned it as a sacrilege.        

&ldquo;God is greater than the bombs!&rdquo; people recalled shouting after the rocket detonated. &ldquo;God is greater than Muammar el-Qaddafi. God is greater than any criminal!&rdquo;        

From the minaret, the mosque&rsquo;s loudspeaker, unsilenced by the attack, blared the words of the cleric. &ldquo;When you side with God,&rdquo; he intoned, &ldquo;he will support you.&rdquo;        

At the same time, a bomb detonated just yards from the hospital, unleashing scenes of chaos. Fighters shot randomly &mdash; and ineffectually &mdash; into clear skies, sirens howled and two ambulances speeding from the hospital crashed into each other. Doctors and staff evacuated the hospital, leaving behind the body of a civilian who they said was shot in the head by snipers loyal to Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces firing from the beach.        
Reporting was contributed by Kareem Fahim from Benghazi, David D. Kirkpatrick from Tripoli, Alan Cowell from Paris and Steven Lee Myers from Washington.
