
BRUSSELS &mdash; European leaders on Friday agreed to examine &ldquo;all necessary options&rdquo; &mdash; including armed intervention &mdash; to protect civilians should the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, escalate attacks on rebel-held territories.        

The statement, from an emergency European Union summit meeting, made no specific reference to calls led by France and supported by Britain for a no-flight zone. Speaking to reporters after the meeting, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany said she was &ldquo;fundamentally skeptical&rdquo; of military action.        

&ldquo;The only countries that want a no-fly zone are Britain and France,&rdquo; said a European diplomat, insisting on anonymity because of the delicacy of the issue. &ldquo;Germany is against.&rdquo;        

Still, Friday&rsquo;s statement called on Colonel Qaddafi to quit, did not rule out military intervention by Europeans, and reiterated suggestions from American and European diplomats that such a move would require a clear legal basis, regional support and a clear motive.        

Those conditions are not close to being met, but Europe is trying to ready itself if Colonel Qaddafi unleashes such violence that both the United Nations Security Council and the Arab League believe they must step in.        

&ldquo;This is about planning for any eventuality,&rdquo; said another European diplomat. &ldquo;Such that, if the situation deteriorates further, we would not be waiting three weeks or more to respond.&rdquo;        

Some diplomats hope that by talking of &ldquo;all necessary options&rdquo; they can deter further attacks by Colonel Qaddafi.        

President Nicolas Sarkozy of France said that he and the British prime minister, David Cameron, had asked what would happen if peaceful civilians came under heavy attack. &ldquo;Do we watch the pictures or do we act?&rdquo; Mr. Sarkozy asked.        

Mr. Cameron said: &ldquo;The truth is, Qaddafi is still on the rampage, waging war on his own people, and at the moment there is no sign of this ending. We simply do not know how bad this could get, or what horrors already lie hidden in the Libyan desert.&rdquo;        

Tensions within the European camp appeared to have been worsened by France&rsquo;s decision on Thursday to grant de facto recognition to a Libyan opposition group.        

Friday&rsquo;s statement said that Colonel Qaddafi was &ldquo;no longer an interlocutor&rdquo; for the European Union, and described the transitional national council in Benghazi as &ldquo;a&rdquo; &mdash; rather than the &mdash; &ldquo;political interlocutor.&rdquo; Mrs. Merkel said that that &ldquo;doesn&rsquo;t imply recognition as the only partner for talks, but it is a partner.&rdquo;        

Mr. Sarkozy has sought to take the lead in European policy on North Africa after a series of embarrassments over French links to the ousted governments in Tunisia and Egypt. On arrival in Brussels on Friday, he suggested that France and Britain were considering airstrikes in Libya.        

One European Union official, speaking of the group&rsquo;s statement, said: &ldquo;Sarkozy fought hard to get a reference to no-fly zones in the conclusions. But Merkel was against, and others said that this was for NATO, and that this was not the forum.&rdquo;        

Earlier the diplomat who spoke of divisions over a no-flight zone said that for now the idea was unlikely to gain the support of the United Nations Security Council or the Arab League, making it politically contentious.        

He said that it also ran risks of causing civilian casualties and that its effectiveness would be doubtful, because smaller aircraft and helicopters were more difficult to keep out of the skies. Meanwhile, he added, there was little concrete evidence of deliberate attacks on civilians that could be a basis for intervention, as opposed to attacks on military bases.        
