
JOS, Nigeria (Reuters) &mdash; Security forces in the central Nigerian city of Jos seized a truck laden with bomb-making equipment on Friday, less than three months after explosions tore through Christmas Eve celebrations.        

Sectarian violence in the region, where the mostly Muslim north meets the largely Christian south, has killed at least 200 people since the attacks in late December and the security forces are on high alert before national elections scheduled for next month.        

Charles Ekeocha, a spokesman for a joint military and police task force, said the truck was carrying fuses, detonators and a large amount of ammonium nitrate, a fertilizer that can be used to make improvised explosive devices.        

&ldquo;The vehicle was intercepted at our checkpoint coming from Kaduna to Jos very late in the night,&rdquo; Mr. Ekeocha told reporters. Kaduna is north of Jos.        

The tensions around Jos are rooted in decades of resentment between indigenous groups, mostly Christian or animist, and settlers from the Muslim north who have been competing with them for control of fertile farmland and economic and political power.        

Plateau State, of which Jos is the capital, is seen as a potential flashpoint in the weeks leading up to the presidential, parliamentary and state governorship elections.        

Three people were killed and 21 wounded last week by an explosive device thrown from a car at a governing party election rally in the town of Suleja near Abuja, the capital.        

There have also been fire bomb attacks on opposition party offices and campaign rallies in Bayelsa State in the southern oil-producing Niger Delta.        

The candidate of the governing party, the People&rsquo;s Democratic Party, has won every presidential election since the end of military rule 12 years ago, and President Goodluck Jonathan, who is the first head of state from the Niger Delta, is widely considered the front-runner.        

But he is resented in parts of the north because, if he wins, he will be serving what would have been the second term of the late President Umaru Yar&rsquo;Adua, a northerner who died last year.        
