
BRUSSELS &mdash; Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates sharply rebuked the United States&rsquo; allies on Friday for preparing to effectively abandon Afghanistan, threatening what he described as tenuous progress in the nearly decade-old war.        

In a deliberately undiplomatic speech to NATO defense ministers, Mr. Gates called on European allies to put aside their domestic politics and work with the United States to secure the &ldquo;semblance of normalcy&rdquo; that he said was emerging in some parts of Afghanistan.        

&ldquo;Frankly, there is too much talk about leaving and not enough talk about getting the job done right,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Too much discussion of exit and not enough discussion about continuing the fight. Too much concern about when and how many troops might redeploy and not enough about what needs to be done before they leave.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gates made clear that the initial American troop withdrawals ordered for July by President Obama would be limited, perhaps to no more than several thousand troops. Pointedly, he told NATO that &ldquo;we will not sacrifice the significant gains made to date, or the lives lost, for a political gesture.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gates made the remarks in a closed session at NATO headquarters to representatives of the 48 nations that contribute troops to Afghanistan. The Pentagon provided a transcript of his remarks.        

There was no immediate reaction from the allies, and it remains unclear how much they will be swayed by Mr. Gates&rsquo;s words. Their main business at the session was an expected endorsement of a proposal for transferring some districts in Afghanistan to Afghan control, part of a plan to pass responsibility for security to the Afghan government by 2014.        

The defense secretary&rsquo;s speech was aimed at a Europe where the war, a retaliation for the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, that was supposed to be over in months, has become more and more unpopular. Mr. Gates mentioned no specific countries, but two important nations that have announced or are considering withdrawals are Germany and Britain. Between them they have 13,900 troops in Afghanistan. The United States has about 100,000 soldiers in the country.        

The German Parliament voted in January to begin withdrawing its 4,900 soldiers by the end of this year, the first time that Germany, which has the third-largest number of troops in Afghanistan, set a time frame for bringing its men and women home. Britain, which has the second-largest contingent, about 9,000 troops, said in December that it was &ldquo;possible&rdquo; that its forces would start leaving this year.        

Poland has said it will bring its 2,600 troops home by 2012 and Canada is scheduled to pull its 2,800 troops out by the end of this year. Last year, the Netherlands became the first NATO country to end its combat mission in Afghanistan when it withdrew its 1,900 forces.        

Mr. Gates obliquely criticized NATO leaders for fueling a rush to the exits and what he said was undermining a commitment the allies made to Afghan security at a conference last year in Lisbon. &ldquo;Unfortunately, some of the recent rhetoric coming from capitals on this continent is calling into question that resolve,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Gates did not specify what remarks he was referring to, although opposition parties have been vocal in support of a pullout, particularly in Germany. Most German troops are based in northern Afghanistan, a presence that includes the cities of Kunduz and Mazar-i-Sharif.        

Mr. Gates acknowledged that the allies faced intense political pressures at home to get out of Afghanistan, but he said that the United States was spending $120 billion a year on the war and, like the allies, had suffered more casualties in 2010 than in any other year of the war. &ldquo;America is willing to do the lion&rsquo;s share of the burden,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;but we cannot do it alone.&rdquo;        

Although American troops do most of the fighting in Afghanistan, the United States relies on the European allies to provide trainers for the Afghan National Army and the police, a critical mission if the Afghans are to defend their own country by 2014. NATO is still 750 trainers short of what it promised after President Obama committed an additional 30,000 American combat troops to Afghanistan in late 2009.        

&ldquo;Trainers are the ticket to transition,&rdquo; Mr. Gates told NATO. Mr. Gates called on the allies to fill the gaps and to collectively give $1.5 billion each year to building up the Afghan security forces.        

Echoing his top military officials in Afghanistan, Mr. Gates drew a positive picture of recent progress in the country, even though there is significant concern among American battlefield commanders that the gains are tactical and not sustainable once the United States forces leave.        

&ldquo;The Taliban control far less territory than they did a year ago,&rdquo; Mr. Gates said. &ldquo;They are increasingly demoralized, and their ability to operate is increasingly downgraded.&rdquo; He said that some normalcy had returned to the violent Taliban heartland of Helmand and Kandahar Provinces in the south and that marketplaces were increasingly linked by more secure roads.        

He said there would be fierce fighting in the months ahead, just as the United States had predicted, accurately, virtually every spring since the war began. But this time, Mr. Gates asserted, &ldquo;our forces will have home field advantage.&rdquo;        

American military officials have not offered any specific numbers of troops to be withdrawn in July, but they say they will not come from any one part of the country. Instead, they say there will be a &ldquo;thinning&rdquo; of noncombat troops, with some support personnel sent home. Some combat troops will be transferred from relatively stable areas to more violent districts where the United States is pursuing the Taliban and trying to gain ground.        
