
MANAMA, Bahrain &mdash; As security forces and pro-government vigilantes beat back protesters here, Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates arrived Friday on an unannounced visit to offer American support to the royal family and prod the king and the crown prince toward talks with protesters demanding more democracy.        

His visit took place against a backdrop of large and continuing protests across numerous Arab capitals on Friday, with neither repression nor government concessions stemming the tide of anger and demands for change.        

The region&rsquo;s protests were for the most part peaceful, although there were scattered reports of injuries.        

Here in this tiny Persian Gulf kingdom, security forces firing what protesters said were rubber bullets and pro-government Sunni vigilantes wielding sticks and swords beat back a rump group of several hundred protesters who were among the tens of thousands of Shiite demonstrators who were planning to march toward a particularly sensitive area: the Royal Court in Riffa, the preferred residential neighborhood for the ruling family and the Sunni Muslim elite. Its manicured lawns and wide streets contrast sharply with the narrow alleyways and raw cinder-block houses where many of the majority Shiite Muslims live.        

The Interior Ministry issued a statement before the march warning that security forces would deploy in force to prevent it, given the &ldquo;level of sectarian tension that threatens Bahrain&rsquo;s social fabric.&rdquo; Afterward, it issued another statement saying it had fired just eight tear gas canisters to repulse a rump force of marchers.        

The protesters told a different story, saying they had been met with stones and clouds of tear gas. The Ministry of Health issued a statement saying 32 people were treated for injuries, mostly bruises or tear gas inhalation, at the Salmaniya Medical Complex, with an unspecified number treated elsewhere.        

In his Friday sermon, Sheik Isa Qassim, the most senior Shiite cleric, said the king was falsely depicting the demand for basic rights as a rift between sects.        

&ldquo;Our demands are political ones, and have nothing to do with demands for a sect or segment of society,&rdquo; he said at Friday Prayer, according to an English translation distributed afterward. &ldquo;We are demanding democracy.&rdquo;        

In Saudi Arabia, the monarchy deployed a huge police presence to stop any protests from coalescing outside mosques, the sites of the weekly collective prayers that have helped fuel major protests throughout the region since the Arab uprising began in December. The Libyan government used the same tactic in Tripoli.        

The region&rsquo;s biggest mass of demonstrators turned out in Sana, the capital of Yemen, with about 100,000 participating in a sit-in to demand that President Ali Abdullah Saleh step down.        

Two were killed in Tunisia and more than 20 were wounded in protests in a Tunisian mining town, but the issues seemed to be economic, not political.        

Antigovernment rallies of varying sizes occurred in Iraq, Jordan and Kuwait.        

Mr. Gates is to meet in Bahrain on Saturday with the king, Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, and the crown prince, Sheik Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa. After weeks of prodemocracy protests &mdash; at times more than 100,000 people have massed in the streets &mdash; the royal family has pledged to enter a dialogue with the demonstrators after an initial crackdown killed seven people.        

So far the dialogue has not happened. But in contrast to the uprisings in Egypt and Libya, Washington has continued to back the government of the Sunni royal family, to the growing consternation of the largely Shiite protesters.        

On Friday a senior American military official said the administration remained optimistic and patient. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re still a little bit in the talks-before-the-talks period, but we&rsquo;re hoping the dialogue will start soon,&rdquo; said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity under ground rules imposed by the Pentagon. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think anybody expects you&rsquo;re going to have democracy overnight.&rdquo;        

Obama administration officials say King Hamad listened to the president when  he urged the king to pull back his security forces from the protesters and so has earned the right to try to manage reform on his own. Human rights activists remain skeptical about the prospects.        

Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was in Bahrain two weeks ago, but Mr. Gates is the first cabinet secretary to visit since the protests began. Geoff Morrell, the Pentagon press secretary, said that Mr. Gates would be playing &ldquo;more of a diplomatic role&rdquo; on the trip compared with his usual talks here focused on national security and defense. Bahrain is the home of the United States Navy&rsquo;s Fifth Fleet.        

In Cairo, Tahrir Square had the smallest turnout in weeks. Protest organizers had initially declared this Friday a day off as a way of thanking the governing military council for replacing the prime minister with a new one more to their liking. But they reconsidered, given their sense of urgency over a March 19 vote on proposed constitutional amendments as well as Muslim-Christian clashes this week that left 13 people dead.        

&ldquo;We always talk about Muslims and Christians being one hand, but that&rsquo;s not true,&rdquo; said a man named Akram, who was nervous to be criticizing the military and so did not give his last name. &ldquo;Why doesn&rsquo;t the military do more for us? People always say the army is supposed to be so good, but that is garbage.&rdquo;        

Many Egyptians of all stripes are convinced that people they call counterrevolutionaries opposed to changing the government system are provoking the sectarian violence to deflect attention from criticism of proposed constitutional amendments that would allow for quick parliamentary and presidential elections.        

Also Friday, the public prosecutor ordered the detentions of the four former senior Interior Ministry officials on charges of ordering the violence that left several hundred protesters dead in the days before President Hosni Mubarak&rsquo;s fall, the official Middle East News Agency reported.        

In Yemen, President Saleh had tried to head off the protest by making his biggest concession yet a day earlier. He said the country would be turned into a parliamentary system by the end of 2011, with power evolving away from the presidency.        

Protesters said the only step they would accept was for Mr. Saleh to step down. At least 10 protesters were wounded in Aden by security forces, and three others in Sana were hurt by government supporters pelting them with stones and bottles, according to local reports.        

In Saudi Arabia, several hundred took to the streets in Riyadh and in a couple of towns in its eastern province, where both the kingdom&rsquo;s Shiite minority and its oil reserves are concentrated.        

Security forces flooded major cities and particularly squares where protesters had planned to gather, quickly dispersing the crowds, and at least 20 people were arrested, according to human rights advocates and residents.        
Elisabeth Bumiller reported from Manama, and Neil MacFarquhar from Cairo. Laura Kasinof contributed reporting from Sana, Yemen, Liam Stack from Cairo, and Scott Sayare from Tunis.
