
RAS LANUF, Libya &mdash; Forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi trumpeted their retaking of the rebellious city of Zawiyah near the capital and pressed toward the country&rsquo;s largest refinery here Friday, as rebel lines began to crumble before an onslaught of airstrikes, tank and artillery fire, and relentless siege.        

Plumes of smoke turned clear skies a somber gray after warplanes struck a fuel-storage tank at the refinery and fighters set a dozen tires on fire in a futile attempt to provide cover. Rumors tumbled through dwindling crowds of fighters that spies were among them, and volleys of antiaircraft fire seemed aimed more at lifting people&rsquo;s flagging spirits than at bringing down the warplanes that sent rebels scurrying for cover behind sand dunes.        

The setbacks were the clearest sign yet of the momentum Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government has seized as it tries to crush the greatest challenge to his nearly 42 years of idiosyncratic rule. Through fear and intimidation, he has silenced protests in Tripoli, ravaged Zawiyah, where the rebels had once delivered the revolt to his doorstep, and brought himself within striking distance of a series of strategic oil towns in eastern Libya.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re exposed here,&rdquo; said Yusuf Ibrahim, a lieutenant colonel from Benghazi who deserted to the rebel ranks and has tried to coordinate defenses here. &ldquo;There are no trenches. Do you see any trenches here? This is a wide-open space, and anything is possible.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This isn&rsquo;t an army,&rdquo; he added.        

The advances of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces raised questions of what strategy he might be pursuing in the aftermath of the three-week revolt. Eastern Libya remains tentatively but almost uniformly in opposition hands, and tens of thousands turned out for Friday Prayer, where a cleric urged patience with the revolt. But with the fall of Ras Lanuf and Zawiyah, Colonel Qaddafi is on the verge of retaking installations that refine nearly 90 percent of Libya&rsquo;s oil production, pumped from the largest reserves in Africa.        

In the afternoon, the government drove foreign journalists to a macabre spectacle in Zawiyah, 30 miles from the capital. Less than two weeks ago, the city was firmly in rebel hands, and thousands of residents celebrated in the central square, adorned with the opposition flag and defended by defected soldiers armed with antiaircraft guns.        

On Friday, after days of house-to-house searches and attacks with tanks and artillery, the government proved it had at last recaptured the square. Soldiers in mismatched uniforms blocked reporters from leaving the square, but the devastation told its own story.        

The apartment buildings and businesses ringing the square were in ruins: broken windows, collapsed walls and balconies, artillery holes everywhere. Mangled street lamps, flattened by tanks, lay across the sidewalk. The corner of the town mosque had been blown in and the top of its minaret knocked off. The speaker for the call to prayer was dangling by a wire; behind it was a tangled heap of burned-out vehicles.        

Green and white streamers covered badly damaged buildings where Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces had hastily painted over murals of the rebels&rsquo; tricolor flag. Bulldozer tracks crossed patches of sandy dirt where rebels had buried some of their dead, and flag-waving supporters of the Libyan leader milled about.        

In interviews, his supporters all offered the same testimony: The Libyan Army had liberated the town from foreign terrorists. Several insisted, despite the evidence, that there had been little or no violence. Two somber men said it was too dangerous to talk, and a government minder escorting journalists called the experience &ldquo;extraterrestrial.&rdquo;        

Even as momentum shifted, it was still hard to envision Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces retaking Benghazi without a far more devastating battle than the one Zawiyah witnessed. Even now, his forces seem stretched, and the advance has proceeded slowly. The city of 700,000 has been the headquarters of the opposition, which has sought to set up a state in waiting and already won recognition from France as Libya&rsquo;s government.        

Tens of thousands prayed outside the courthouse in Benghazi, the largest crowd for Friday Prayer in weeks, during a service watched over by men with rocket-propelled grenade launchers. A man in the gathering held a pleading sign: &ldquo;No civil war in Libya. It&rsquo;s a war for freedom.&rdquo; Another sign lauded the &ldquo;heroes&rdquo; of Zawiyah.        
Anthony Shadid reported from Ras Lanuf, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Tripoli, Libya. Kareem Fahim contributed reporting from Benghazi, Libya.
