
OTTAWA        

MICHAEL IGNATIEFF may have written 17 books, gained some fame on British television as a serious thinker and led a human rights center at Harvard. But all that appeared to count for little when he laced up his skates and headed out on the 19th-century canal this city uses as a giant ice rink.        

After spending most of his adult life outside of Canada, Mr. Ignatieff, 63, returned home six years ago with the ambitious goal of becoming prime minister. If current political speculation is correct, he will finally have a chance this spring to put his case before the Canadian people.        

But as he skated through a bitter wind on the Rideau Canal with 10 children and a gaggle of adults for a photo opportunity, no one approached him or even waved. In a random sampling, few of the skaters that day even knew his name.        

Perhaps they did not recognize him in his hockey jersey and headband.        

For all he has tried, Mr. Ignatieff has yet to connect closely with the average Canadian, and in the next few months, as he tries to lead the Liberal Party back to power, he will find out once and for all whether he ever will.        

In an interview, Mr. Ignatieff (pronounced ig-NAT-ee-ef) openly acknowledged that his previous life &mdash; which included leading BBC camera crews into Balkan war zones and helping shape America&rsquo;s debate over the invasion of Iraq as director of the Carr Center for Human Rights Policy at Harvard, had not fully prepared him for the battle of electoral politics.        

&ldquo;It is, by a country mile, the most difficult thing I&rsquo;ve ever tried to do,&rdquo; Mr. Ignatieff said last week in the grand paneled parliamentary office that comes with his title of Leader of Her Majesty&rsquo;s Official Opposition. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve done a lot of things. I&rsquo;m proud of them. But this one is just at another level of sheer difficulty. It takes everything out of you.&rdquo;        

Even without an election call, the governing Conservative Party has already flooded &ldquo;Hockey Night In Canada&rdquo; and other popular shows with attack ads portraying Mr. Ignatieff as an interloper who is filled with patronizing contempt for his birthplace.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t care what they say about me, that&rsquo;s not the issue,&rdquo; Mr. Ignatieff said. &ldquo;There came a moment at Harvard when I thought that I had to decide: do I want to be a spectator, or teacher, in someone else&rsquo;s country? I was frustrated by the fact that you could keep writing these articles and nothing would happen. It was time to come home and take responsibility. I don&rsquo;t want to get on my high horse about it but there was something there, existentially.&rdquo;        

ASSUMING authority is something of a theme in Mr. Ignatieff&rsquo;s family history. His father, George, who left Russia at the age of 6 and ultimately became a prominent diplomat in Canada, was the son of the last czar&rsquo;s education minister and a princess. His mother, Alison, came from a family whose members helped lay out the route for the transcontinental railway that stitched the country together and played leading roles in creating Canada&rsquo;s modern education system. Even for a country with a tightly connected elite, it is an unusually illustrious history. But Canada is also a country where politicians with even the vaguest hint of self-importance are more likely to be mocked on satirical television programs than revered, potentially making his family history a political liability. It is a problem, Mr. Ignatieff said, that he is willing to bear.        

&ldquo;The egalitarianism which makes us very vigilant about public officials is a very good thing,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not just idle social compassion. This is what makes this place go.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ignatieff said that Canada fared much better than the United States during the recession because its sense of egalitarianism has led to a stronger public education system, public health care, tighter regulation of business and a wider range of social programs. Those programs, he argues, have been steadily eroded by the Conservative government that came to power in 2006.        

Like many of the ancestors in his mother&rsquo;s family who went abroad, Mr. Ignatieff concluded that he would never be fully a part of life in either of his adopted homes in London and Cambridge, Mass.        

&ldquo;I know quite a bit about expatriation,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;You always hit a glass ceiling.&rdquo;        

In Britain, that realization came when he was told that he would not be given a television project because he was Canadian. In the United States, it was more a matter of gradual alienation. Mr. Ignatieff said he found the debates in the last decade about stem cell research, abortion and public health care almost baffling.        

&ldquo;What are they arguing about?&rdquo; he recalled thinking. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to overstate this, as I love American politics. But you do come up that it&rsquo;s not your home.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
SELLING his social vision over that of Stephen Harper, the Conservative prime minister, has not been easy. He was appointed Liberal leader in late 2008, but soon discovered how hard it is for opposition leaders to set the agenda or even to attract news media attention. On a visibility scale, they rank somewhere between vice presidents and lieutenant governors.        

During his four years at Harvard, Mr. Ignatieff was known for his hawkish policy positions. That culminated in an article for The New York Times Magazine in 2003 in which he supported the Iraq invasion. It was a position so out of line with Canadian thinking that even Mr. Harper, who otherwise enthusiastically embraces the use of Canada&rsquo;s military, backed away from it as the invasion soured.        

In 2007, Mr. Ignatieff acknowledged that he was wrong in another article for the same magazine. But the episode may blunt his effectiveness in foreign affairs during any election campaign, even though he has a clear advantage in knowledge and experience over Mr. Harper. An economist by training, Mr. Harper rarely left Canada before taking office.        

Neither man is a natural campaigner. But while Mr. Harper usually restricts himself to tightly controlled events and audiences, Mr. Ignatieff has been actively seeking hands to shake and questions to answer. He spent most of last summer traveling the country in a chartered bus, a dry-run campaign that he said he enjoyed.        

&ldquo;They want to poke you. They want to see what you&rsquo;re made of,&rdquo; Mr. Ignatieff said of voters. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re very demanding and extremely well informed. Sometimes it&rsquo;s a bit scary.&rdquo;        

When Mr. Ignatieff first returned to Canada, he was instantly, and perhaps predictably, compared with Pierre Elliott Trudeau, the former Liberal prime minister whose charismatic leadership many Liberals still hope to recapture.        

Both men were latecomers to elected politics, equally at ease speaking French or English, and both might be fairly described as public intellectuals. Not tweedy intellectuals but handsome, fit and more youthful in appearance than their ages would suggest.        

But it is an analogy that soon falls flat. Mr. Trudeau, for the most part, remained in Canada and was active in political debates and causes long before seeking election. He was so well known by the time he became prime minister in 1968 that his ability to draw crowds was known as Trudeau-mania.        

For Mr. Ignatieff, the first step will be simply to introduce himself to Canadian voters. While he was untying his skates at the end of the photo opportunity last month, a small crowd did gather and some excitement built &mdash; Justin Trudeau, the 39-year-old son of the former prime minister and, for now at least, a Liberal member of Parliament from Montreal, had shown up.        
