
CAIRO &mdash; The Arab League asked the United Nations Security Council on Saturday to impose a no-flight zone over Libya in hopes of halting Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s attacks on his own people, providing the rebels a tincture of hope even as they were driven back from a long stretch of road and towns they had captured in the three-week war.        

The extraordinary move by the 22-nation bloc &mdash; an extremely rare invitation for Western military forces on Arab territory &mdash; increases the pressure on the Obama administration, which has been reluctant to intervene in a war that could turn out to be prolonged and complex.        

However, by inviting the West to take such action, it also clears the way for the United States and Europe to press for a strong Security Council resolution and to counter the objections of China and Russia, which traditionally oppose foreign intervention in a country&rsquo;s internal disputes.        

But the United States has not said whether it would pursue a resolution, and it was far from clear that, even if action were forthcoming, it would be enough to stall the march of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s troops eastward. As the rebels withdrew from the strategic oil town of Ras Lanuf 100 miles east to Brega, and by nightfall on to Ajdabiya, superior government forces pressed their advantage on an insurgency that began as a disparate protest movement and, despite efforts to build a government and an army, remained chaotic, splintered and largely leaderless.        

The government sweep intensified pleas from the rebels for Western military support. Abdul Hafidh Ghoga, the vice chairman of the rebels&rsquo; shadow government, the Libyan National Council, said a no-flight zone would give the rebels a fighting chance against Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s better organized and better equipped military.        

&ldquo;We feel we have the right to ask for help,&rdquo; he said in the rebel&rsquo;s eastern stronghold of Benghazi, Libya, where a cheer went up when the Arab League vote was announced. &ldquo;If the international community chooses to play the role of bystander, we will have to defend ourselves.&rdquo;        

Even if the Security Council authorized the measure, American officials have said it would be warranted only if it appeared that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces were effectively relying on warplanes. A no-flight zone, they have said, would have little effect against helicopters or artillery, both of which the Libyan government has used extensively.        

The White House, in a statement on Saturday, said it welcomed the Arab League decision, &ldquo;which strengthens the international pressure on Qaddafi and support for the Libyan people.&rdquo; But the statement did not mention a no-flight zone.        

The defense secretary, Robert M. Gates, has largely dismissed such a zone as ineffective and ill-advised. Other administration officials have said that the level of violence in Libya would have to approach the scale of that in Rwanda or Bosnia in the 1990s before the United States would engage militarily.        

An effective no-flight zone would require a leading Western role. No one else, with the possible exception of Russia, has the level of military sophistication, firepower and surveillance ability it would take to first disable Libyan air defenses, and then enforce the zone.        

American officials also said that the Arab League would have to do more than endorse action &mdash; it would have to participate in it, too. &ldquo;That doesn&rsquo;t mean they have to fly airplanes,&rdquo; one official said, &ldquo;but there is much they can do, from providing airfields to gas and maintenance.&rdquo;        

At the Security Council, a diplomat from one member nation said the Arab League decision was &ldquo;helpful, but there are quite a lot of reservations around the council table still.&rdquo;        

The objections, including some from Russia and China, have centered on questions about whether the need for a no-flight zone has been demonstrated, and whether it has a strong legal basis and clear regional support.        

The Arab League action checked one condition off the list, the diplomat said, but the others remain unsettled.        

The Europeans have also been divided and have said that Arab League backing was critical to their ultimate decision. The European Union&rsquo;s foreign policy chief, Catherine Ashton, was expected in Cairo on Sunday to discuss the no-flight decision with the Arab League.        
Ethan Bronner reported from Cairo, and David E. Sanger from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Kareem Fahim from Benghazi, Libya; Neil MacFarquhar from Cairo; and Lynsey Addario and Tyler Hicks from Brega, Libya.
