
MANAMA, Bahrain &mdash; In the wake of a violent clash between protesters and Bahrain&rsquo;s security forces and pro-government vigilantes, Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates warned this tiny kingdom&rsquo;s ruling family on Saturday that &ldquo;baby steps&rdquo; toward reform would not be enough to meet the political and economic grievances sweeping the region.        

Mr. Gates also cautioned Bahrain&rsquo;s king and crown prince during two hours of meetings in Manama, Bahrain&rsquo;s capital, that if the reform process was prolonged, the United States feared that Iran would become involved and create more chaos.        

&ldquo;I expressed the view that we had no evidence that suggested that Iran started any of these popular revolutions or demonstrations across the region,&rdquo; Mr. Gates told reporters afterward on his plane. &ldquo;But there is clear evidence that as the process is protracted, particularly in Bahrain, that the Iranians are looking for ways to exploit it and create problems.&rdquo; He added, &ldquo;Time is not our friend.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gates did not offer any details of the evidence he cited.        

Despite his warnings, Mr. Gates said he was convinced that the king, Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, and the crown prince, Sheik Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa, were serious about reform and starting a dialogue with protesters demanding more democracy. The immediate problem, Mr. Gates said, was that the main opposition party in Parliament had not agreed to conditions for the talks &mdash; an obstacle that the crown prince appeared to address in comments to reporters traveling with Mr. Gates.        

&ldquo;There are people far, far more conservative than I,&rdquo; the crown prince told reporters at the Sakhir Palace in Manama. &ldquo;I by no means am on the right of the political spectrum, and they need to sit down and talk. I&rsquo;m hopeful that they will join the dialogue without preconditions.&rdquo;        

The crown prince also said that &ldquo;at the end of the day we all are going to have to live in the same country together and talk to one another.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gates, the highest-ranking member of the Obama administration to visit Bahrain since the protests started last month, was in the kingdom to reassure the rulers of Washington&rsquo;s support, but also to prod them toward change. To the consternation of the largely Shiite protesters, Washington has continued to back the government of the royal family, whose members are Sunni.        

Administration officials say that the king listened when President Obama asked him to pull back his security forces at the start of the protests, when seven demonstrators were killed, and has earned the administration&rsquo;s support to try to undertake reform on his own.        

On Friday night, as Mr. Gates arrived, security forces firing what protesters said were rubber bullets and pro-government Sunni vigilantes wielding sticks and swords beat back a group of several hundred protesters near the royal palace in Riffa, a residential neighborhood for the ruling family and the Sunni Muslim elite. The protesters said they had been met with stones and clouds of tear gas. The Interior Ministry said in a statement that it had fired eight tear gas canisters, and the Ministry of Health said 32 people were treated for injuries, mostly bruises or tear gas inhalation.        

Mr. Gates was not near any of the protests on Friday, and the area was largely deserted by the time he passed by in his motorcade on the way to the palace on Saturday.        

The main protest area in Bahrain, Pearl Square, a traffic roundabout, was also peaceful on Saturday morning. Young men and families relaxed in the tent city that has sprung up at the roundabout, where graphic pictures of the seven killed demonstrators are prominently displayed.        

Mr. Gates said he told the king and crown prince that with pro-democracy protests sweeping the region &mdash; in Bahrain alone, as many as 100,000 demonstrators have massed in the streets &mdash; there could not be a return to the status quo. Mr. Gates said he told them that change &ldquo;could be led or it could be imposed.&rdquo; He added, &ldquo;Obviously, leading reform and being responsive is the way we&rsquo;d like to see this move forward.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gates was in Bahrain, the home of the Navy&rsquo;s Fifth Fleet, at the end of a weeklong trip to Afghanistan, Germany and Belgium. At NATO headquarters in Brussels on Thursday, he remained strongly resistant to imposing a no-flight zone over Libya, and NATO all but rejected the idea.        

But Mr. Gates, who has said that imposing a no-flight zone would be complicated and would require air strikes on Libya&rsquo;s air defense system, appeared to soften his position in his remarks on his plane on Saturday.        

&ldquo;If we are directed to impose a no-fly zone, we have the resources to do it,&rdquo; Mr. Gates said. &ldquo;This is not a question of whether we or our allies can do this. We can do it. The question is whether it&rsquo;s a wise thing to do.&rdquo;        
