
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Fighting escalated between antigovernment protesters and security forces on Saturday, and four people were reported killed, even as President Ali Abdullah Saleh promised the White House that he would not use violence against the demonstrators.        

At least three people were killed here in the capital, and a 14-year-old boy was killed in a protest in the south, witnesses said.        

The American ambassador here, Gerald M. Feierstein, warned that the situation had become &ldquo;dangerous&rdquo; and urged both sides to pursue negotiations.        

The confrontations came a day after the largest protest yet in the three-week uprising, when an estimated 100,000 people staged a sit-in in Sana demanding the ouster of Mr. Saleh, who has ruled for more than three decades.        

The numbers had dwindled to about 10,000 by early Saturday morning, when the police moved in with water cannons to try to demolish tents set up by protesters outside Sana University. Then the shooting started.        

&ldquo;We finished our morning prayers, and then they rushed at us with a water cannon and then live bullets and tear gas,&rdquo; said Sadeq al-Haijazy, an unemployed protester, his head bandaged after he was hit by a thrown rock. &ldquo;But we are staying here until we die.&rdquo;        

Plainclothes pro-government forces with Kalashnikovs fired from the rooftops and upper floors of nearby apartment buildings. At least some of the shooting appeared to be with rubber bullets.        

Some protesters retaliated by throwing rocks toward the security forces, which included about 200 soldiers and plainclothes forces, breaking pieces of stone from a barrier that soldiers had previously used to block the protests.        

&ldquo;They wanted to push us back off this street,&rdquo; said Abdel Kader al-Mamari, an engineer standing in a puddle left over from the water cannon barrage. &ldquo;They don&rsquo;t understand that what we want is to change the regime.&rdquo;        

Hundreds of people were wounded in the clash, at least 13 of them by live fire, according to doctors at a nearby mosque that is serving as a field hospital. Volunteer medical staff members there rigged up intravenous drips and bandaged wounds.        

The doctors said two people had been killed by live ammunition. A third person, a female bystander, was fatally shot in another part of the city, European Union security officials said.        

There were also clashes in the southern port city of Mukalla, where a 14-year-old boy was killed by security forces, according to local reports.        

An American Embassy statement on Saturday urged the Yemeni government, an American ally, to investigate the reports of violence. It rejected accusations &ldquo;that the U.S. has somehow condoned the use of violence by any side.&rdquo;        

It urged both sides to negotiate. On Friday, John O. Brennan, President Obama&rsquo;s top counterterrorism adviser, telephoned Mr. Saleh, urging that &ldquo;representatives of all sectors of the Yemeni opposition should respond constructively to President Saleh&rsquo;s call to engage in a serious dialogue to end the current impasse,&rdquo; a White House statement said.        

Mr. Saleh &ldquo;reiterated his hope that the opposition will engage immediately in a dialogue with the government as well as his public assurance not to use violence against peaceful demonstrators,&rdquo; the statement said.        

But some protesters on Saturday angrily rejected the idea that they should talk with a government that was shooting at them.        

&ldquo;The White House tells us to have dialogue, what is the use?&rdquo; said Riyadh al-Selwy, a student holding an onion to his nose to ease the sting of tear gas. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s been 33 years. We want democracy like you,&rdquo; he told an American reporter.        
