
NAKAMINATO, Japan &mdash; While nuclear experts were grappling with possible meltdowns at two reactors after the devastating earthquake and ensuing tsunami in northern Japan, the country was mobilizing a nationwide rescue effort to pluck survivors from collapsed buildings and rush food and water to hundreds of thousands of people without water, electricity, heat or telephone service.        

Entire villages in parts of Japan&rsquo;s northern Pacific coast have vanished under a wall of water, and many communities are cut off, leaving the country trying to absorb the scale of the destruction even as fears grew over the unfolding nuclear emergency.        

Japanese news media estimates of the death toll from the natural disasters ranged from 1,300 to 1,700, but the total could rise. Many communities were scrambling to find the missing; in the port town of Minamisanriku, nearly 10,000 people were unaccounted for, according to the public broadcaster NHK. Much of the northeast was impassable, and by late Saturday rescuers had not arrived in the worst-hit areas.        

Most of the deaths were from drowning, but Japan&rsquo;s Self-Defense Forces and firefighters were working to prevent a higher toll, rushing up the coast in helicopters and struggling to put out fires burning in industrial complexes or sweeping through Japan&rsquo;s many vulnerable wooden homes.        

Hundreds of thousands of people were being evacuated from the flooding and quake damage, as well as the threat of radiation exposure around the nuclear plants in Fukushima Prefecture.        

To aid in the rescue efforts, the United States, which has several military bases in Japan, is sending in helicopters and destroyers. It is also sending an aircraft carrier, the Ronald Reagan, which has the ability to act as a hospital as well as to convert seawater into drinking water, said a spokesman for the Navy&rsquo;s Seventh Fleet in Japan.        

Japan had clearly learned the lessons of the devastating Kobe earthquake of 1995, when the government refused to accept offers of international help early enough, leading to criticism that some of the 6,000 deaths could have been avoided.        

Severe aftershocks continued to rock a traumatized country. The United States Geological Survey recorded 90 quakes off the eastern coast on Saturday alone, five of them with magnitudes larger than 6.0. Kyodo News reported more than 125 aftershocks since Friday afternoon&rsquo;s earthquake.        

The continual swaying and rolling of the ground deepened the disorientation of a nation accustomed to disaster, but which has not experienced anything on this scale for generations.        

Around two nuclear plants along the northern coast of Honshu Island where cooling systems had failed for five reactors, the Japanese authorities were evacuating people and handing out iodine. Some experts believe iodine can help head off long-term effects of radiation exposure, including thyroid cancer.        

The breadth of the natural disasters and the potential for untold nuclear damage pose new challenges for a fragile government that has struggled with political scandals, continued economic woes and public frustration over its inability to weaken entrenched bureaucrats.        

Aerial photographs of ravaged coastal areas showed a string of cities and villages leveled by the power of the tsunami. Plumes of black smoke rose from burning industrial plants. Stranded ships bobbed in the water. Town after town reported that parts of their population were unaccounted for. Survivors gathered on rooftops, frantically shouting or signaling for help.        

With phone service cut throughout the area, some radio and television stations broadcast pleas from people trying desperately to find their family members or at least to assure them that they were alive. &ldquo;This is Kimura Ayako in Sapporo, looking for the Tanakas in Soma,&rdquo; one caller said. &ldquo;We are O.K. Please tell us your location.&rdquo;        

Hatsue Takahashi of Onagawa in Miyagi Prefecture sent out a message on NHK Education TV to Rina Takahashi in the same town: &ldquo;Hang on,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll go there to meet you.&rdquo; And Sachiko Atara of Iwaki city called out across the airwaves in hopes of reaching Hideharu Komatsu in Sendai: &ldquo;We are all O.K., waiting for your contact.&rdquo;        
Martin Fackler reported from Nakaminato, and Mark McDonald from Tokyo. Reporting was contributed by Yasuko Kamiizumi and Michael Wines from Tokyo, Nelson Schwartz from New York, Thom Shanker from Washington, and Makiko Inoue from Nakaminato.
