
JALAPA, Mexico &mdash; They were out looking for cattle thieves in the rolling pastures of this small town, bumping along in their police truck on a remote road, talking about nothing, when bright lights snapped them to attention.        

Headlights in the distance from an approaching car and behind it another, and another, and another. A caravan of four luxury sedans fast approaching on a road rarely traveled at night.        

Was it a large family? Bandits? Drug traffickers? Suddenly the officers faced a choice: Do we stop them and risk a shootout, or live with the mystery?        

&ldquo;They would have been able to shoot quicker,&rdquo; Officer Lorenzo L&oacute;pez said later, after letting the caravan pass. &ldquo;By the time we would have realized it, we would have already been flying to heaven as little angels.&rdquo;        

In the age of the drug war, local policing is often the biggest gap in slowing the spread of criminal networks, whose battles for turf and clashes with federal and state authorities have claimed 34,000 lives in the past four years.        

President Felipe Calder&oacute;n has proposed essentially doing away with municipal police forces like Jalapa&rsquo;s, folding them under the command of the 31 state police forces as a way to standardize training, tamp down corruption and boost professionalism.        

But with the proposal stalled in the Mexican Congress &mdash; some legislators object to giving the state police too much power, given their own corruption and links to organized crime &mdash; its future is unclear.        

So a number of mayors have sought to prop up their forces on their own.        

Some simply want armed men at their beck and call, a Mexican congressional report asserted last year, while others believe the local forces, with proper training and equipment, know their communities best.        

Here, the mayor, a former engineer in Mexico City who returned home at the urging of a priest, has won plaudits from the state human rights commission for trying to bring reform to the town.        

Still, the crime gangs can be persuasive.        

Under an ultimatum known as &ldquo;plata o plomo&rdquo; &mdash; silver or lead &mdash; they have abducted or killed scores of officers across Mexico in the past several years and corrupted an untold number with bribes.        

&ldquo;It is pretty calm here right now,&rdquo; said Jos&eacute; Ram&oacute;n Hern&aacute;ndez, 33, who joined the police because there were few other options for work. &ldquo;We realize drug dealing and traffic is all around us though. We don&rsquo;t investigate that. It&rsquo;s not our role, but we hope we don&rsquo;t get caught up in something connected to that.&rdquo;        

Under Mexican law, state and federal authorities investigate drug trafficking offenses and other serious crimes. In much of the country, the local police mostly handle the little cases, rousting the town drunk, breaking up bar fights, protecting the delivery of pension checks.        

In this farming town, their weapons are old, some of the rifles dating from the Vietnam War era and the six-shooters even older. Gas is carefully rationed among the four or five trucks, and the salary is about $400 a month, leading most of the officers to side jobs like ranching.        

Despite the relative quiet, suspicious vehicles and people pass through and a recent spate of violence near the town has the police at once bracing for an unexpected clash while hoping to avoid it.        

&ldquo;With six shots, would you take on a gang?&rdquo; asked Ovidio Cornelio, a police commander here.        

Jalapa, a collection of villages with a total population of 33,000, sits along drug and migrant smuggling routes leading north from Guatemala, and is dominated primarily by the Zetas, one of the country&rsquo;s most violent crime groups. The violence in surrounding Tabasco State pales in comparison with that of areas along the border with the United States, but the recent rash of kidnappings and unsolved killings in nearby towns has alarmed the community.        

&ldquo;The country is trying to halt something that cannot really be halted,&rdquo; Mayor Luis F. Dey&aacute; Oropeza said. &ldquo;There is too much social discontent.&rdquo;        

After taking office a year ago, the mayor set about rebuilding a department he said had fallen into disarray, with its 150 officers not expected to work for their checks and bribes tolerated.        
Janet Jarman contributed reporting.
