
AJDABIYA, Libya &mdash; Military forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi advanced Sunday on this anxious town, a strategic linchpin on the doorstep of the opposition capital Benghazi and within grasp of a highway crucial to recapturing the eastern border and encircling the rebellion with heavy armor and artillery.        

After another day of headlong retreat, this time from the refinery and port at Brega, one town west of here, the rebels prepared for what some called a last stand at Ajdabiya, taking refuge in military barracks where they stacked ammunition boxes six deep, positioned a handful of tanks and tried to bring order to a jumble of small artillery and antiaircraft guns. Bulldozers built berms three feet high near a pair of green, metal arches that mark the town&rsquo;s entrance.        

The fate of Ajdabiya, an eastern town of 120,000 near the Mediterranean coast, may prove decisive in the most violent and chaotic of the uprisings that have upended the Arab world. Under a sky turned gray by a menacing sandstorm, the rebels valiantly vowed victory but acknowledged the deficit posed by their weapons and pleaded for a no-flight zone that seemed a metaphor for any kind of international help.        

&ldquo;Our retreat is a tactic,&rdquo; said Said Zway, 29, a civil-engineer-turned-fighter, at Ajdabiya&rsquo;s entrance. &ldquo;We can wait until they impose a no-flight zone. If they don&rsquo;t, what can we do, my friend? We fight and die. God is with us, God willing.&rdquo;        

From its ecstatic beginning, Libya&rsquo;s uprising has taken a darker turn, as Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces have recaptured Zawiyah, near Tripoli, and are now besieging Misurata, a commercial capital and an oasis of rebel control in the west. Officials in Tripoli talk with bluster, and a more sullen mood has settled over Benghazi, where reports of lawlessness grow.        

The United Nations Security Council this week may take up an Arab League call for a no-flight zone over Libya, a decision that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government on Sunday deemed an &ldquo;unexpected departure&rdquo; from the league&rsquo;s charter. The foreign ministers of major industrial nations are expected to consider the topic at a meeting in Paris on Monday. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton is to fly on to Egypt and Tunisia afterward, and is expected to meet with Libyan opposition leaders.        

But a front line that shifted eastward by the day and plunging morale here threatened to outpace a decision that still faces opposition from Russia and China and lacks the clear support of the United States and Europe.        

The debate abroad overshadowed the stark reality on the ground &mdash; planes alone have not defeated the rebels, but rather a relentless onslaught of tanks, artillery, helicopters and ships at sea has sent rebels hurtling back the past several days from a series of oil towns along Libya&rsquo;s virtually indefensible coastal plain.        

At the front, pleas for foreign help have grown by the day, from demands for a no-flight zone to growing calls for bombing of Libyan ships at sea, military bases and Bab al-Aziziya, the compound in Tripoli that serves as Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s headquarters.        

&ldquo;We demand intervention from America, from Britain, from France!&rdquo; shouted Wanis Kayhani, 42, a fighter waiting in a parked Toyota pickup near the front. &ldquo;I personally want them to send troops from abroad to stop this dictator. I swear to God almighty!&rdquo;        

&ldquo;No, no, that won&rsquo;t work!&rdquo; another fighter shouted.        

&ldquo;Whatever it takes,&rdquo; Mr. Kayhani replied.        

Libya&rsquo;s former interior minister, Gen. Abdel Fattah Younes, appeared unexpectedly before reporters in Benghazi on Sunday evening in his role as the new head of the rebel army and promised a vigorous defense of Ajdabiya, calling it a &ldquo;key&rdquo; city.        

Once a close ally of Colonel Qaddafi and head of the country&rsquo;s special forces, General Younes resigned his post in late February to join the rebels. He said that he had spent days at the front lines and acknowledged that opposition fighters had overextended: they advanced &ldquo;too far, too fast and did not protect the areas they gained,&rdquo; he said.        

Striking an optimistic note, though, he cast the setbacks as a strategic decision.        

&ldquo;War is a matter of advance and tactical withdrawal,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;What we are trying to do is lure him into an area where we can even the fight.&rdquo;        

Kareem Fahim contributed reporting from Benghazi, Libya, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Tripoli, Libya.
