
SANA, Yemen &mdash; In a sign of increasing tensions here in the Yemeni capital, clashes broke out on Sunday for the second consecutive day at an antigovernment demonstration, a continuous sit-in that has lasted for about three weeks.        

During clashes in the southern port city of Aden on Sunday, security forces shot and killed one protester, according to local news reports.        

In Sana, government supporters in plain clothes threw rocks and attacked demonstrators with jambiyas, traditional curved daggers, according to witnesses. They then fired at the protesters with automatic weapons. Nearby, security forces used tear gas and fired into the air to break up the fighting.        

Volunteer doctors at a makeshift medical clinic in a nearby mosque said that 10 protesters had injuries from live ammunition on Sunday, and about 10 others had other types of injuries. Dozens suffering from the effects of tear gas were lying on rugs around the mosque courtyard.        

Security forces used CN grade tear gas, which is stronger than the more common CS grade used by the United States. Some protesters have experienced severe symptoms like muscle spasms from its use.        

Sana&rsquo;s sit-in, which has swelled to include more than 10,000 protesters camped out in tents in front of Sana University, is one of many demonstrations throughout the country calling for President Ali Abdullah Saleh to step down.        

On Saturday, Mr. Saleh ordered the formation of a committee to investigate the attacks, according to the official news agency Saba.        

The Yemeni government has said that residents in areas surrounding the sit-in have complained that the demonstration has disrupted their lives.        

Yemen&rsquo;s political opposition, which has officially joined the protesters in calling for the president to leave, released a statement on Sunday that condemned the attacks and said it held the president &ldquo;personally fully responsible for the crimes and attacks.&rdquo;        

The American ambassador here, Gerald M. Feierstein, said the United States was &ldquo;opposed to the use of violence or force to interfere with the right of people to gather or to demonstrate or to express their views.&rdquo;        
