
MOSCOW &mdash; Voters in Russia went to the polls on Sunday in regional elections amid complaints by the opposition of ballot-stuffing and other violations by the governing party, United Russia.        

The vote is being watched as an indicator of public support for United Russia ahead of parliamentary elections in December and presidential elections in 2012. Polling by the Russian Public Opinion Research Center showed that support for United Russia slipped below 50 percent during the first months of the year, its lowest point since 2007.        

Boris V. Gryzlov, United Russia&rsquo;s leader, said high turnout and early returns reflected increasing faith in the party.        

&ldquo;This reflects the fact that the political system in our country, which was reformed with the participation of United Russia, is benefiting our voters, and they believe in it,&rdquo; he said, according the party&rsquo;s Web site. &ldquo;Compared to earlier elections in these regions, our level of support has seriously increased. This gives us the basis to expect a rise in support&rdquo; in coming parliamentary elections.        

Communist Party officials in the southern city of Saratov said Sunday that they had documented numerous violations, including unsanctioned rallies by pro-Kremlin groups, crude measures to block election observers&rsquo; views of ballot boxes and attempts to stuff as many as 1,000 ballots for United Russia.        

&ldquo;This is the first time we&rsquo;ve seen all the dirty tricks devised in the last 15 to 20 years used in the arsenal of United Russia and its prot&eacute;g&eacute;s,&rdquo; said Gennadi A. Zyuganov, the head of Russia&rsquo;s Communist Party, in remarks quoted on the party&rsquo;s Web site.        

A top United Russia official on Sunday acknowledged that ballot-stuffing on the party&rsquo;s behalf had been captured on video and that voters had received phone calls pressuring them to vote for the party, but he said the incidents had been staged by the opposition to frame United Russia.        

&ldquo;Such behavior of several opposition parties not only discredits the election system as a whole, but, in fact, discredits our country,&rdquo; Konstantin I. Kosachev, deputy chief of the party&rsquo;s general council, told the Interfax news agency. &ldquo;All this goes beyond the limits of political and civil decency.&rdquo;        

President Dmitri A. Medvedev has made repeated calls for greater political pluralism in Russia, and in 2009, he accused United Russia of illegally using government resources to ensure their re-election. Last month, that sentiment was echoed by Aleksei L. Kudrin, the finance minister, who said economic reforms would be impossible without &ldquo;the mandate of trust&rdquo; that comes from free and fair elections.        

Among the regions where United Russia may struggle to break the 50 percent threshold are Kaliningrad, which last year was the site of the largest antigovernment demonstration in recent memory, and Kirov, whose governor was a leader of the liberal opposition before taking the post.        

Disenchantment with United Russia may suppress turnout, but does not necessarily drive Russian voters to support the opposition. The strongest competitor, the Communist Party, is polling at a steady 8 percent, followed by the Liberal Democratic Party at 7 percent and A Just Russia at 5 percent, according to the Public Opinion Research Center&rsquo;s most recent poll. It had asked respondents whom they would support in federal parliamentary elections.        
