
TOKYO &mdash; A second explosion rocked a troubled nuclear power plant Monday, blowing the roof off a containment building but not harming the reactor, Japanese nuclear officials announced on public television.        

The explosion underscores the difficulties Japanese authorities are having in bringing several stricken reactors under control three days after a massive earthquake and a tsunami hit Japan&rsquo;s northeast coast and shut down the electricity that runs the crucial cooling systems for reactors.        

Operators fear that if they cannot establish control, despite increasingly desperate measures to do so, the reactors could experience full meltdowns, which would release catastrophic amounts of radiation.        

It was unclear if radiation was released by the explosion, but a similar explosion at another reactor at the plant over the weekend did release radioactive material.        

Live footage on public broadcaster NHK showed thick smoke rising from the building.        

Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano said that the release of large amounts of radiation was unlikely. But traces of radiation could be released into the atmosphere, and 600 people who remained within a 12 mile radius have been ordered to take cover indoors, he said.        

The country&rsquo;s nuclear power watchdog said readings taken soon after the explosion showed no big change in radiation levels around the plant or any damage to the containment vessel, which protects the radioactive material in the reactor.        

&ldquo;I have received reports that the containment vessel is sound,&rdquo; Mr. Edano said. &ldquo;I understand that there is little possibility that radioactive materials are being released in large amounts.&rdquo;        

In screenings, higher-than-normal levels of radiation have been detected from 22 people evacuated from near the plant, the nuclear safety watchdog said, but it is not clear if the doses they received were dangerous.        

Technicians had been scrambling most of Sunday to fix a mechanical failure that left the reactor far more vulnerable to explosions.        

The two reactors where the explosions occurred are both presumed to have already suffered partial meltdowns &mdash; a dangerous situation that, if unchecked, could lead to a full meltdown.        

The reactors are both at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station, where another reactor is also having difficulties.        

The Fukushima Daiichi plant and the Fukushima Daini power station, about 10 miles away, have been under a state of emergency.        

On Monday morning, Tokyo Electric, which runs both plants, said it had restored the cooling systems at two of three reactors experiencing problems at Daini. That would leave a total of four reactors at the two plants with pumping difficulties.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m not aware that we&rsquo;ve ever had more than one reactor troubled at a time,&rdquo; said Frank N. von Hippel, a physicist and professor at Princeton, explaining the difficulties faced by the Japanese.        

&ldquo;The whole country was focused on Three Mile Island,&rdquo; he said, referring to the Pennsylvania nuclear plant accident in 1979. &ldquo;Here you have Tokyo Electric Power and the Japanese regulators focusing on multiple plants at the same time.&rdquo;&ldquo;        

In what was perhaps the clearest sign of the rising anxiety over the nuclear crisis, both the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Russian authorities issued statements on Sunday trying to allay fears, saying they did not expect harmful levels of radiation to reach their territory.        

Late Sunday night, the International Atomic Energy Agency announced that Japan had added a third plant, Onagawa, to the list of those under a state of emergency because a low level of radioactive materials had been detected outside its walls. But on Monday morning, it quoted Japanese authorities as saying that the radioactivity levels at the Onagawa plant had returned to normal levels and that there appeared to be no leak there.        

&ldquo;The increased level may have been due to a release of radioactive material from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant,&rdquo; the agency said. The Onagawa and Daiichi plants are 75 miles apart. The operator of the Onagawa plant, Tohoku Electric Power, said that levels of radiation there were twice the allowed level, but that they did not pose health risks.        
Hiroko Tabuchi reported from Tokyo, and Matthew L. Wald from Washington. Michael Wines contributed reporting from Koriyama, Japan, and Ellen Barry from Moscow.
