
DJENN&Eacute; , Mali &mdash; Abba Maiga stood in his dirt courtyard, smoking and seething over the fact that his 150-year-old mud-brick house is so culturally precious he is not allowed to update it &mdash; no tile floors, no screen doors, no shower.        

&ldquo;Who wants to live in a house with a mud floor?&rdquo; groused Mr. Maiga, a retired riverboat captain.        

With its cone-shaped crenellations and palm wood drainage spouts, the grand facade seems outside time and helps illustrate why this ancient city in eastern Mali is an official World Heritage site.        

But the guidelines established by Unesco, the cultural arm of the United Nations, which compiles the heritage list, demand that any reconstruction not substantially alter the original.        

&ldquo;When a town is put on the heritage list, it means nothing should change,&rdquo; Mr. Maiga said. &ldquo;But we want development, more space, new appliances &mdash; things that are much more modern. We are angry about all that.&rdquo;        

It is a cultural clash echoed at World Heritage sites across Africa and around the world. While it may be good for tourism, residents complain of being frozen in time like pieces in a museum &mdash; their lives proscribed so visitors can gawk.        

&ldquo;The issue in Djenn&eacute; is about people getting comfort, using the right materials without compromising the architectural values,&rdquo; said Lazare Eloundou Assomo, the chief of the African unit of Unesco&rsquo;s World Heritage Center.        

Mr. Assomo ticked off a list of sites facing similar tension, including the island of St.-Louis in neighboring Senegal, the island of Lamu in Kenya, the entire island of Mozambique off the coast of the nation by the same name, or Asian and European cities like  Lyon, France.        

Here in Djenn&eacute;, the striking Great Mosque is what put the town on the map. It is the largest mud-brick structure in the world, so unique that it looks as if it might have landed from another planet, an imposing sand castle looming over the main square. The architectural style, known as Sudanese, is native to the Sahel.        

A trio of unique minarets &mdash; square, tapering towers topped by pointed pillars and crowned by an ostrich egg &mdash; dominate the facade. Palm tree boards poked into the mosque in rows like toothpicks create a permanent scaffolding that allows residents to swarm over the building to replaster the mud, an annual February ritual involving the entire town.        

Djenn&eacute; is the less famous but better preserved sister city to Timbuktu. Both reached their zenith of wealth and power in the 16th century by sitting at the crossroads of Sahara trade routes for goods like gold, ivory and slaves.        

The town was also a gateway that helped spread Islam regionally. When the king converted in the 13th century, he leveled his palace and built a mosque. Mali&rsquo;s French colonizers eventually oversaw its reconstruction in 1907.        

The Grand Mosque was again near collapse when the Agha Khan Foundation arrived to begin a $900,000 restoration project, said Josephine Dilario, one of two supervising architects. The annual replastering had more than doubled the width of the walls and added a yard of mud to the roof. It was too heavy, even with the forest of thick pillars inside the mosque supporting the high ceiling &mdash; one for each of the 99 names of God.        

In 2006, the initial restoration survey ignited a riot. Protesters sacked the mosque&rsquo;s interior, attacked city buildings and destroyed cars. The uprising was apparently rooted in the simmering tension among the 12,000 townsfolk, particularly the young, who felt forced to live in squalor while the mosque imam and a few prominent families raked in the benefits from tourism.        

The frustration seems to have lingered. While the mosque graces the national seal, residents here appear markedly more sullen about tourism than in many other Malian cities. They often glower rather than smile, and they tend to either ask for money or stomp off when cameras are pointed in their direction.        

With the mosque restoration nearing completion, the town is focusing attention on other critical problems &mdash; raw sewage and the restoration of the nearly 2,000 houses.        

&ldquo;There is a kind of tension, a difficulty that has to be resolved by not locking people into the traditional and authentic architecture,&rdquo; said Samuel Sidib&eacute;, the director of Mali&rsquo;s National Museum in Bamako, the capital.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;We have to find a way to evolve this architecture, to provide the basic necessities the community needs to live, and to do it in such a way that doesn&rsquo;t compromise the quality of the mud-brick architecture, the characteristic at the heart of the city&rsquo;s identity.&rdquo;        

More Photos &#x00bb;


Elhajj Diakat&eacute;, 54, and his brother inherited three houses from their father. Mr. Diakat&eacute;  hates bending over to navigate the cramped entryways, he said, and no room is big enough to accommodate a double bed. Worse, his wives and his brother&rsquo;s wives all want armoires, he said.        

But a Dutch-led restoration team working to save more than 100 houses ruled out expanding any rooms for armoires, he said. So Mr. Diakat&eacute; evicted them and tore down a fat interior wall graced by two narrow arches. The entire house collapsed. The Dutch restorer wept when she saw it, he said.        

Collapses are the main threat, because mud brick requires regular upkeep. Just four rainstorms washed away much of the newly restored plaster at the Grand Mosque, exposing the underlying cylindrical bricks, each about the size of a mayonnaise jar.        

But the natural materials needed &mdash; like rice husks or tree paste to make the bricks impermeable &mdash; have become so expensive that the art of hand-shaping the bricks almost died out.        

Djenn&eacute; occupies a small island amid the inland delta of the Niger River and its tributaries. The water was a rich source of mud, until it receded during an extended drought in the 1970s. Masons used more sand, weakening the bricks. Hungry residents also ate rice husks rather than build with them.        

Urban problems multiplied. A project to pipe water into the city failed to include drainage, so raw sewage fouls the unpaved streets. Trash dumps mar the river embankments. Garbage has even made its way into the bricks, with black plastic bags jutting from house walls. A faint rotting odor hangs in the background.        

Tourists complained, and in 2008 Unesco warned the city that something had to be done, said Fane Yamoussa, director of the city&rsquo;s cultural mission. Trash and sewage alone is not cause to be kicked off the World Heritage list, until they start affecting the architecture.        

The problem, said N&rsquo;Diaye Bah, Mali&rsquo;s tourism minister, is modernizing the town without wrecking its ambiance. &ldquo;If you destroy the heritage which people come to see, if you destroy 2,000 years of history, then the town loses its soul,&rdquo; he said.        

Djenn&eacute; residents take pride in their heritage and recognize that the Unesco list helped make their city famous. Yet they wonder aloud about the point of staying on it, given the lack of tangible gains, if they are forced to live literally in mud.        

Many homeowners want to keep the distinctive facades, but alter the interiors. Unesco guidelines prohibit the sweeping alterations they would like, however.        

Mahamame Bamoye Traor&eacute;, the leader of the powerful mason&rsquo;s guild, surveyed the cramped rooms of the retired river boat captain&rsquo;s house, naming all the things he would change if the World Heritage rules were more flexible.        

&ldquo;If you want to help someone, you have to help him in a way that he wants; to force him to live in a certain way is not right,&rdquo; he said, before lying on the mud floor of a windowless room that measured about 6 feet by 3 feet.        

&ldquo;This is not a room,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It might as well be a grave.&rdquo;        
