
BAGHDAD &mdash; A suicide bomber detonated a car packed with explosives outside a military headquarters on Monday in the city of Kanan, about 40 miles northeast of Baghdad, killing 11 Iraqi soldiers, according to local security officials.        

The attack demonstrated the tenuous security situation in the Sunni-dominated cities north of Baghdad where members of Al Qaeda&rsquo;s Iraq chapter have struck at pilgrims and military and police officials.        

&ldquo;There are some sleeper cells that are waking up and trying to attack innocent people,&rdquo; said Hassan Dellir, the head of the security committee for Diyala Province, where Kanan is located.        

Security officials said 16 Iraqi soldiers and 14 civilians were injured in the attack.        

The explosion came a day after Qaeda detainees clashed with security officials at a prison in Tikrit, just south of Kanan. The prison was severely damaged by fires in the clash, which killed a detainee and a prison officer and injured 12 others.        

The car bomb exploded around 6 a.m. Monday, leaving a six-foot-by-six-foot hole in the ground and severely damaging the military headquarters and a City Council building.        

Another car bomb was discovered several blocks away. The authorities safely detonated it, and a curfew was imposed in the city.        

&ldquo;I was on duty and went to another neighborhood and I heard the explosion and came back and found that I had lost my partners,&rdquo; said one soldier, Kamal Ahmed. &ldquo;Two of them were very close friends. Blood is everywhere, and parts of bodies are everywhere. I can still smell burning flesh.&rdquo;        

Another soldier, Mohammed Abed Anwar, said he was inside the military headquarters when the car exploded. He said a plume of smoke and dust engulfed the building.        

&ldquo;I fell and I heard my partners screaming for help and I could hear them moaning,&rdquo; Mr. Anwar said while sitting in an ambulance where he was being treated for leg and arm wounds. &ldquo;I almost died, and I saw my friends taking their last breaths.&rdquo;        
An employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Kanan, Iraq.
