
JERUSALEM &mdash; The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, expressed abhorrence on Monday over the killing of five members of a family in a Jewish settlement in the West Bank. The emphatic condemnation, delivered over Israel&rsquo;s public radio, came after Israel criticized the Palestinian leadership for what it considered to be an initially mealy-mouthed response.        

&ldquo;This act was abominable, inhuman and immoral,&rdquo; Mr. Abbas said in a rare interview with Israel Radio that was conducted in Arabic. Referring to the killing of three of the family&rsquo;s young children, including a baby, he added, &ldquo;Any person who has a sense of humanity would be pained and driven to tears by such sights.&rdquo;        

The victims, Udi and Ruth Fogel, and three of their children, ages 11, 4 and 3 months, were stabbed to death in their beds late Friday in Itamar, near Nablus in the northern West Bank. The assailants, who are still at large, are widely suspected to be local Palestinians.        

In the days since the attack, which shocked Israelis across the political spectrum, Israel has accused the Palestinian Authority of an indirect role in encouraging violence, citing incitement in the authority&rsquo;s schools, mosques and news media.        

Yossi Kuperwasser, a retired Israeli general given responsibility by the Israeli government for monitoring Palestinian incitements to violence and to hatred of Israel, said in a telephone interview that while Mr. Abbas and the Palestinian Authority prime minister, Salam Fayyad, had been careful in their words, &ldquo;they too encourage an atmosphere of terrorism.&rdquo;        

He noted, for example, that a senior Abbas aide had paid a call to the families of three Fatah militants killed by the Israeli military, conveying condolences from Mr. Abbas. Israel held the three responsible for the fatal shooting of a rabbi in the West Bank in December 2009. In addition, Israeli officials note, streets, summer camps and youth tournaments in the Palestinian Authority have been named for people who committed terrorist attacks.        

The new focus on incitement against Israel, together with Israeli dissatisfaction over the Palestinian response to the brutal attack, seemed to pose a question about the Israeli government&rsquo;s readiness to deal with Mr. Abbas as a serious peace partner &mdash; even though Mr. Abbas and Mr. Fayyad are widely considered moderates who have repeatedly said they would never resort to violence.        

Mr. Abbas rejected the claims about incitement in mosques, telling Israel Radio that the Palestinian Authority mosques have adopted a unified text for sermons, written by the minister of religious affairs. He called for a joint Israeli-Palestinian-American working committee to investigate claims that Palestinian Authority school textbooks incited violence.        

Mr. Fayyad was the first Palestinian official on Saturday to condemn the deaths in Itamar, saying, &ldquo;We utterly reject violence, and nothing justifies it.&rdquo;        

Mr. Abbas&rsquo;s office issued a statement later that day, through the Palestinian news agency Wafa, saying that he &ldquo;stressed his rejection and condemnation of all violence directed against civilians, regardless of who was behind it or the reason for it.&rdquo;        

Mr. Abbas also called the prime minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, on Saturday evening to express sorrow over the killings. But Israel said the Palestinian condemnation was hesitant and nonspecific. &ldquo;The weak and noncommittal condemnation of the Palestinian leadership is insufficient and unacceptable,&rdquo; Mark Regev, a Netanyahu spokesman, said Sunday. &ldquo;What is required is unequivocal language.&rdquo;        

Mr. Netanyahu told a meeting of his Likud Party members of Parliament on Monday that he attached great importance to Mr. Abbas&rsquo;s words of condemnation on Israel Radio, but that it was more important he say such things on Palestinian radio, Israel Radio reported.        

Mr. Kuperwasser suggested that Mr. Abbas&rsquo;s condemnation on Israel Radio still fell short. The Palestinian leader emphasized the horrific nature of the killing of the young children and the baby in Itamar, Mr. Kuperwasser said. But he criticized Mr. Abbas for not showing &ldquo;the same enthusiasm&rdquo; in condemning the deaths of the parents.        

&ldquo;His words hold great importance in my eyes,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;but it is more important that he say these things on Palestinian radio, not just Israel.&rdquo;        
