
PARIS &mdash; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton met late Monday with a leader of Libya&rsquo;s increasingly beleaguered opposition, but did so privately and without a public statement.        

The meeting reflected the Obama administration&rsquo;s struggle over how much support it would, or could, provide to the rebels seeking to overthrow Libya&rsquo;s leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

Mrs. Clinton met the opposition leader, Mahmoud Jibril, at her hotel here after attending a dinner with foreign ministers of the countries of the Group of 8, who discussed ways to increase pressure on Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government, including imposing a no-flight zone over Libyan territory. Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Jibril met for 45 minutes but did not appear publicly out of concern for his security, an aide said.        

Although aides to Mrs. Clinton said the foreign ministers shared a sense of urgency, they announced no new actions or proposals.        

The Arab League called over the weekend for action to halt Libyan airstrikes &mdash; without saying explicitly which countries would enforce it &mdash; but a senior administration official said early Tuesday that the Group of 8 ministers &ldquo;wanted further clarification of what it meant.&rdquo;        

The United States appears ambivalent about a new military operation in the Middle East, and other countries have outwardly opposed it, including Turkey, a fellow member of NATO.        

The Turkish prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, said a military intervention in Libya would be &ldquo;extremely unbeneficial.&rdquo;        

In Washington, President Obama again said it was time for Colonel Qaddafi &ldquo;to leave.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Obama, too, stopped short of promising specific new action.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s going to be very important for us to look at a wide range of options that continue to tighten the noose around Mr. Qaddafi and apply additional pressure,&rdquo; he said during an appearance with the Danish prime minister, Lars Loekke Rasmussen.        

&ldquo;And so we will be continuing to coordinate closely both through NATO as well as the United Nations and other international fora to look at every single option that&rsquo;s available to us in bringing about a better outcome for the Libyan people.&rdquo;        

The meeting between Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Jibril was the highest-level contact yet between the administration and the increasingly disorganized forces battling troops loyal to Mr. Qaddafi. Libyan troops continued to push back on Monday, using overwhelming military superiority to drive rebel forces from towns they seized after a popular uprising began last month.        

The meeting was meant as a show of support &mdash; but it was hastily scheduled at the last minute around Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s other meetings in Paris on Monday and was conducted entirely behind closed doors.        

Mrs. Clinton arrival in Paris began a trip that will include visits to Egypt and Tunisia, where she is expected to express support for democratic changes following the popular uprisings in those countries. Events in the region outpaced her schedule, though.        

Only hours before she met the foreign minister of the United Arab Emirates, Sheik Abdullah bin Zayed, here in Paris, the Emirates&rsquo; police forces joined Saudi troops in intervening to maintain security in Bahrain, a close American ally in the Persian Gulf that has been swept by similar popular protests.        

Standing beside Mrs. Clinton, Sheik Abdullah said the Gulf Cooperation Council, an alliance of the countries in the region, had intervened at the request of the Bahraini government &ldquo;to look at ways to help them defuse the tension in Bahrain.&rdquo;        

The United States has urged Bahrain&rsquo;s leader, Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, to negotiate with protesters demanding change and not use force to quash public demonstrations, a request he now seems to have disregarded.        

The United States had little advance warning of the intervention, one of Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s aides said.        

Mrs. Clinton appeared to refer only obliquely to events in Bahrain, saying she and Sheik Abdullah would discuss &ldquo;everything that is happening.&rdquo;        

In New York, the United Nations Security Council remained divided over whether to authorize a no-flight zone.        

Even supporters acknowledged that it might not be enough to deter Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s intensifying military and psychological campaign against the rebels.        

&ldquo;We would prefer to act as soon as possible,&rdquo; Gerard Araud, France&rsquo;s representative, said after a three-hour meeting behind closed doors.        

&ldquo;We would prefer that our partners on the Security Council would have the same sense of urgency we have.&rdquo;        

Russian officials, however, made it clear that serious questions remained, as did the leaders who met in Paris. They included how a potential no-flight zone would operate and who would enforce it.        

&ldquo;To say we need to act quickly, as fast as possible, but not to provide answers to those fundamental questions is not really helping, it is just beating the air,&rdquo; Russia&rsquo;s representative at the United Nations, Vitaly Churkin, said.        

&ldquo;You need to be sure any decision the council takes is not going to exacerbate the military-political situation in Libya.&rdquo;        
Dan Bilefsky contributed reporting from the United Nations.
