
WASHINGTON &mdash; The United States military is preparing to start withdrawing, as planned, as many as several thousand troops from Afghanistan in July.        

But the first Americans to come home this summer, fulfilling a pledge President Obama made when he committed 30,000 more service members to the war in late 2009, are expected to be engineers and support troops, rather than combat soldiers.        

Engineers, whose job is done after building barracks, runways and dining halls for the &ldquo;surge&rdquo; forces, are prized by commanders. But their departure would not diminish the coalition&rsquo;s fighting power as significantly as sending home troops whose full-time mission is combat.        

And it is a sign that even as the United States trumpets progress in Afghanistan, commanders are not confident enough to begin withdrawing significant numbers of ground combat forces.        

Officials said there would be no reduction this summer in combat troops in Helmand and Kandahar Provinces in the south, the location of some of the most intense fighting this year. Combat forces are likely to be shifted within those provinces, however.        

In Helmand Province, American troops could be moved from a stable area like Nawa, the biggest success story in the province, and placed in the still-violent Taliban narcotics center of Sangin in the north and beyond toward the critical Kajaki Dam.        

Commanders described this as a &ldquo;thinning&rdquo; of forces from less crucial areas and said it would allow engineers and other support personnel to be sent home first. But officials cautioned that a complicated assessment of troop numbers and mission priorities was still under way, and that no final decisions had been made.        

Next Monday, in the first step toward Afghans assuming responsibility for their own security, President Hamid Karzai is expected to announce the transfer of six areas to Afghan control: Bamian and Panjshir Provinces, the cities of Herat, Mazar-i-Sharif and Lashkar Gah, and much of the province around the Afghan capital of Kabul. Few United States forces are in those areas, which are all relatively stable.        

The details of the current military planning were described by administration, Pentagon and military officials on the condition of anonymity, since the decisions are not yet final and have not been announced.        

The discussion about the way ahead in Afghanistan was certain to accelerate this week as Gen. David H. Petraeus, the senior commander, was to testify before Congress on Tuesday and Wednesday.        

General Petraeus has cited advances in the southern provinces, and he has said that American and NATO forces have been able to halt or reverse Taliban gains around Kabul and in the north and west of the country. Still, there are some in the administration who continue to advocate narrowing the mission to a campaign focused on counterterrorism missions, rather than the more expansive counterinsurgency effort, and beginning to withdraw troops more rapidly.        

NATO defense ministers endorsed initial plans for the transfer of security forces at a meeting last week in Brussels, where Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates bluntly warned the assembled allies that they should not use the modest withdrawal of American forces this summer as a reason to withdraw their own troops and head for the exits.        

&ldquo;Frankly, there is too much talk about leaving and not enough talk about getting the job done right,&rdquo; Mr. Gates told the group. &ldquo;Too much discussion of exit and not enough discussion about continuing the fight. Too much concern about when and how many troops might redeploy and not enough about what needs to be done before they leave.&rdquo;        

American commanders say that the effective change in a withdrawal date &mdash; from July 2011 to the end of 2014, when Afghan forces are supposed to handle all security on their own &mdash; has given them three years of crucial breathing space.        

Military officers said that unlike Iraq, where a 2007 surge in American forces brought a sharp drop in violence within a year, in Afghanistan they expect the surge last year of 30,000 American forces to produce slower results.        

At the same time, the officers say they believe that Mullah Muhammad Omar, the Taliban commander believed to operate from Pakistan, has lost some control over his troops. He is concerned, they say, that less-experienced fighters are causing civilian casualties &mdash; for example, panicking and detonating suicide vests in crowded areas, killing women and children before they get close to Afghan government officials, who are the targets.        

Nonetheless, American military officials say that they expect the Taliban to mount an aggressive and lethal campaign of assassination attempts during the traditional spring fighting season, and that the Taliban will increasingly use homemade bombs against American troops rather than directly engage them in firefights they know they are likely to lose.        

Commanders say that night raids by American forces to round up or kill suspected insurgents continue to have an effect. At the same time, the commanders are continuing classic counterinsurgency strategy: protecting the population, building roads, bridges and schools, and hiring local Afghans to do much of the work. Neither the night raids nor the counterinsurgency operations would work without the other, they say.        
