
NATORI, Japan &mdash; What the sea so violently ripped away, it has now begun to return. Hundreds of bodies are washing up along some shores in northeastern Japan, making clearer the extraordinary toll of the earthquake and tsunami that struck last week and adding to the burdens of relief workers as they ferry aid and search for survivors.        

On Monday, various reports from police officials and news agencies said that as many as 2,000 bodies had now washed ashore along the coastline, overwhelming the capacity of local officials. That, combined with the country&rsquo;s unfolding nuclear disaster and a regionwide stock market plunge, has become what Prime Minister Naoto Kan described as Japan&rsquo;s worst crisis since World War II.        

About 350,000 people have reportedly been left homeless and are staying in shelters, awaiting news of friends and relatives among the many thousands who remain unaccounted for. The national police said early Tuesday that more than 15,000 were missing, though just 2,475 deaths had been confirmed since the quake, which the U.S. Geological Survey revised to a magnitude of 9.0, from 8.9, on Monday.        

With police officials estimating that 10,000 people may have been swept away in one town alone, Minamisanriku, north of here, there was every expectation that the toll would rise.        

The disruptions to Japan&rsquo;s $5 trillion economy, the third-largest in the world, and collective anxiety over the stricken reactors caused a rout in the Japanese stock market that reverberated across the region on Tuesday.        

A steep decline in the Japanese stock market, which lost 13 percent by midday Tuesday, sent other Asian markets tumbling. The Bank of Japan, which injected a record $183.8 billion into the economy on Monday to maintain liquidity, poured in tens of billions of dollars more on Tuesday, which failed to halt the slide.        

Here in Natori, where some of the first pictures of the tsunami showed a towering initial wave lashing a line of trees, all that remains along the coast is a field of black mud. Brightly clad searchers bent to their work Monday &mdash; the police in navy blue, the handlers of sniffer dogs in orange, the military squads in camouflage.        

They made their way around marooned boats and collapsed houses, finding toys, torn bedding, tangled fishing nets and pieces of cars, toilets or pottery, all the mundane pieces of daily life, now broken. Occasionally, too, they found a body, sometimes already covered by a tarp.        

The region continues to face widespread power and water shortages. When relief supplies do come, residents clamor for help. At Natori City Hall, survivors quickly lined up at a truck handing out large containers of water. Lines of nearly a mile formed in front of stations providing gasoline.        

At City Hall, officials in this town of 70,000 residents have posted a list of the 8,340 people who arrived safely at 41 makeshift shelters. Dozens of people crammed into the building&rsquo;s small lobby to pore over the lists.        

Those who could not find the name they sought wrote out messages on pieces of paper, and taped them to the entrance. Hundreds of pieces hung there.        

Mikako Watanabe, 26, and Yumiko Watanabe, 24, were looking for their mother. They were at work when the tsunami struck, but their mother was napping at home in the Yuriage neighborhood, as she always did after her night shift as a nurse.        

&ldquo;I hope she woke up with the earthquake and got to safety in time,&rdquo; the older sister said. &ldquo;We have no way to contact her.&rdquo;        

On Monday, three days after the tsunami, they still had no word of her. Their message said, &ldquo;Yurika Watanabe, we&rsquo;re looking for you. Contact us if you see this.&rdquo;        

But communications are badly broken. With cellphone service largely knocked out, many residents are relying on the small number of surviving pay phones.        

Some meetings are by chance. In the crowds, there were squeals of joy at reunions &mdash; and crying for relatives not found. One woman wailed over and over, &ldquo;Her name is not on the list! Her name is not on the list!&rdquo; She said she was looking for her sister-in-law, who lived in Yuriage. She said that if she is not at an evacuation center, she must be dead.        

Rescue teams from 13 countries pressed on with the searches. One used a German shepherd and a small spaniel in Yuriage. The shepherd would climb around the wreckage of homes and twisted hulks of cars, sniffing. If he started barking, the team sent in the spaniel, small enough to prowl around the crevices of the wreckage.        

Martin Fackler reported from Natori, Japan, and Mark McDonald from Tokyo. Reporting was contributed by Mac Bishop from Fukushima, Japan, Moshe Komata and Hiroko Tibuchi from Tokyo, and Bettina Wassener from Hong Kong.
