
LAHORE, Pakistan &mdash; The Pakistani government on Monday further postponed the resolution of the question of whether a C.I.A. operative being investigated for a double murder is entitled to diplomatic immunity.        

At a hearing at Punjab High Court here, the government said the Foreign Ministry had not clearly stated that the operative, Raymond A. Davis, was entitled to immunity.        

The court ruled that the issue could be decided by the trial court in the murder case, which may begin on Wednesday.        

Mr. Davis, a former Green Beret employed by the C.I.A., fatally shot two motorcyclists in Lahore in January. He has said he did so in self-defense, and the United States has said he is a diplomat and entitled to immunity.        

The Pakistani government has sought to delay decisions on the case to allow public anger over the shootings to subside. Under pressure from opposition parties, and facing widespread discontent over the economy, the government has avoided making any decision that could be seen as pro-American and unpopular, and has left it in the hands of the Foreign Ministry and the High Court.        

Ceding the decision of whether Mr. Davis has diplomatic immunity to the trial court will draw out the process and will not please the American government, which has demanded his immediate release. Mr. Davis has refused to sign a charge sheet, but the murder trial may now proceed at a hearing on Wednesday.        

The High Court decision may prove unfavorable for Mr. Davis, since Pakistan&rsquo;s courts are susceptible to the pressure from the street &mdash; religious parties and extremists have campaigned to have Mr. Davis hanged &mdash; and from the military establishment. American officials have said Mr. Davis&rsquo;s team was involved in gathering intelligence on Lashkar-e-Taiba, a militant group under the wing of Pakistan&rsquo;s spy agency, the Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence.        

The Foreign Ministry has confirmed that Mr. Davis holds a diplomatic passport and was issued an official business visa by the ministry, Deputy Attorney General Naveed Inayat Malik told the court on Monday. He said the ministry did not have any records on Mr. Davis&rsquo;s diplomatic immunity status.        

Justice Ejaz Ahmad Chaudhry complained that the government had not submitted a clear opinion on whether Mr. Davis was entitled to immunity and ruled that the issue could be decided by the court considering the murder charges.        

The Davis case has strained relations between the United States and Pakistan and their intelligence agencies. The United States has made strenuous efforts to have Mr. Davis released.        

The American Embassy, which had hoped for a clear confirmation of Mr. Davis&rsquo;s diplomatic status by the court on Monday, could not be reached for comment.        
Waqar Gillani reported from Lahore, Pakistan, and Carlotta Gall from Islamabad.
