
AJDABIYA, Libya &mdash; Military forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi cranked up military and psychological pressure on the rebels on Monday, offering amnesty to those who surrendered their weapons but bombing a strategic linchpin in the east and invading a rebel-held town in the west.        

Government warplanes launched fresh strikes against this anxious town on the doorstep of the opposition capital, Benghazi, and almost abreast of a highway crucial to recapturing the eastern border and encircling the rebels with heavy armor and artillery.        

Residents of Zuwarah, an isolated city near the Tunisian border in the west, told Reuters that the pro-Qaddafi forces that surrounded them three days before had taken control. &ldquo;Zuwarah is in their hands now,&rdquo; said one resident, Tarek Abdallah. &ldquo;They control it and there is no sign of the rebels. They are now in the center &mdash; the army and the tanks.&rdquo;        

The developments came against a background of quickening diplomatic debate over possible outside help for the Libyan rebels, who have made increasingly anxious pleas for intervention that have, so far, produced none. The United Nations Security Council took up the contentious question of a no-flight zone on Monday, but no decision was reached.        

In recent days, the rebels have asserted that the retreat of their forces is a tactical choice rather than a desperate measure, and that they are reorganizing to inject more experienced fighters into the ranks. At the same time, their unrelenting calls for the no-flight zone &mdash; at news conferences, on banners and even in the face paint of protesters &mdash; have made clear that the rebel leadership holds out little hope of its ragtag army defeating the colonel&rsquo;s loyalists on its own.        

In a welcome turn for the rebels, who have asked for military assistance, including airstrikes, from Western powers, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton met with unnamed opposition leaders in a Paris hotel room after a meeting of the foreign ministers of the countries in the Group of 8 &mdash; the first such high-level meeting.        

In Benghazi, the vice chairman of the interim opposition ruling council, Abdul Hafidh Ghoga, said a rebel representative would use the meeting with Mrs. Clinton to demand quicker intervention. Inaction, Mr. Ghoga warned, &ldquo;would have negative results on our future relations with the West.&rdquo;        

Apparently seeking to undermine the rebels&rsquo; determination to continue their fight, government authorities on Monday repeated an offer of amnesty for combatants who give up their weapons, Reuters said, quoting state television. The response was not immediately clear.        

West of Tripoli, loyalists appeared to be tightening their siege of other rebel-held areas, following a brutal week of battle in which they recaptured &mdash; and nearly demolished &mdash; the strategically important town of Zawiyah. The legacy of that battle haunted the residents of Zuwarah, a Berber town of about 40,000 people.        

&ldquo;We know what happened in Zawiyah, and we think that the same thing is going to happen here soon,&rdquo; one resident said, speaking anonymously to protect himself and his family from retribution.        

&ldquo;They say that if you take down the flag, we will let you live,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;Maybe we will fight, but we will have a lot of casualties.&rdquo;        

On the eastern front, amid conflicting claims by the rebels and loyalist forces, the battle lines were hard to locate. The government said on state television that its troops controlled Brega, The Associated Press reported. At the same time, Mr. Ghoga said that rebel soldiers were still fighting in the city, particularly at night, and that on Sunday they had captured more than two dozen loyalist fighters there. But he did not provide any proof of that claim.        

As the fighting nears Benghazi, Libya&rsquo;s second-largest city, rebel leaders, reacting to criticism of their battlefield performance, have contended that they may still have a chance: Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces, they contend, are overextending their lines as they push rebels back and might be running short of fuel. Mr. Ghoga said the rebels were not facing a similar fuel shortage.        

And in an interview on Sunday evening, Gen. Abdul Fattah Younes, the country&rsquo;s former interior minister and now the head of the rebel army, said the rebels still retained a sizable fighting force, though he said a no-flight zone was still a necessity. General Younes, the former commander of the special forces, said thousands of officers from that unit were now being recalled and mobilized. He said the rebels also had about 100 working tanks that had not yet been deployed. &ldquo;The time will come,&rdquo; he said.        

There was an eerie calm in Ajdabiya, a strategic town about 100 miles south of Benghazi that has braced for an attack by forces loyal to Colonel Qaddafi. Some lines formed at bakeries, and a few cars were seen transporting residents out of the city.        

Soviet-made warplanes struck a military barracks at the edge of Ajdabiya that has housed the rebels, who seem, at least anecdotally, to be making an effort to bring discipline to their unruly ranks. One blast struck a guard post at the barracks, spraying shards of green glass around the entrance. The other detonated just feet away from a pile of ammunition and rocket-propelled grenades, which did not go off.        

Hospital officials said five people were wounded, one of them seriously.        

At the entrance to Ajdabiya, marked by two metal arches, rebels have built dirt fortifications and filled hundreds of sandbags. Ammunition boxes scattered around a courtyard were moved inside or toward fighting near Brega. Rebel leaders repeatedly urged the civilians to leave the entrance, where reporters&rsquo; access was limited.        

&ldquo;If he takes Ajdabiya, he will win,&rdquo; said Yunes Mohammed, an oil safety official milling about with a crowd at the town&rsquo;s edge, where strong winds swept up sand.        

&ldquo;His people can go from here to Benghazi. But the people of Ajdabiya will fight because we know that if he takes the area, he will kill us all, and we know he has done this before.&rdquo;        

Anthony Shadid reported from Ajdabiya, and Kareem Fahim from Benghazi, Libya. David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from Tripoli, Libya, and Steven Lee Myers from Paris.
