
MOSCOW &mdash; Russia&rsquo;s ruling party, United Russia, won less than half of the popular vote in the weekend&rsquo;s regional elections, the last electoral test before momentous coming races for Parliament and president, according to results released Monday.        

The party still won easily in all 12 regional contests, which its chairman, Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin, called &ldquo;more than satisfactory.&rdquo; He said 46.2 percent of voters cast ballots for United Russia, slightly more than the 46 percent the party won in 2007 regional elections.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not a big increase,&rdquo; Mr. Putin said. &ldquo;However, it&rsquo;s an indicator of people&rsquo;s confidence in the authorities in general in a crisis.&rdquo;        

It was notable that support for United Russia was below 50 percent in seven of the regions and below 40 percent in two, and some analysts said it was a sign that rising prices and unemployment were strengthening the hand of the opposition. The three minority parties in Russia&rsquo;s Parliament &mdash; the Communists, the Liberal Democrats and A Just Russia &mdash; garnered a combined 48 percent of the vote, early results showed.        

&ldquo;The question is, what happens now,&rdquo; said Stanislav A. Belkovsky, a prominent political analyst. &ldquo;Can the systemic opposition join forces so that they can form a parliamentary majority? If they can, then we could talk about real political change. If they can&rsquo;t, then everything will stay the way it is, regardless of the results of the elections.&rdquo;        

The next year will be a pivotal one in Russian politics. President Dmitri A. Medvedev has called for legal reforms and more political pluralism, but it is not clear whether he will serve a second term or step aside for Mr. Putin, still Russia&rsquo;s most popular politician. The government will face budget constraints beginning in 2012, and Moscow remains jittery about the possibility of social unrest.        

Amid hikes in utility charges and food prices, United Russia&rsquo;s approval ratings slipped below 50 percent during the first months of the year, their lowest point since 2007, according the Russian Public Opinion Research Center.        

Olga V. Kryshtanovskaya, a sociologist who is a member of United Russia, said Sunday&rsquo;s results showed the party &ldquo;has held on to its position&rdquo; despite growing discontent. &ldquo;There is a protest mood, but there are no channels to carry it,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;There is no party that can unite all these protest feelings.&rdquo;        

Campaigning this spring was aggressive, with widespread allegations of fraud. Golos, an independent monitoring group, said it recorded 720 reports of violations, breaking the previous record of 630, from last October. In one region, where United Russia received more than 65 percent of the vote, official data shows that 20 percent of votes were cast from home, said Aleksandr Kynev, an analyst. &ldquo;In Tambov region, every fifth voter is an invalid,&rdquo; Mr. Kynev said. &ldquo;This raises very strange questions.&rdquo;        

Officials from A Just Russia, a pro-Kremlin party that has jockeyed for power with United Russia, said automatic vote counting mysteriously ceased between 2 and 3 a.m. Monday in the Tver, Kirov and Nizhegorod regions &mdash; three regions where United Russia is not popular &mdash; and resumed only when opposition candidates insisted on it.        

Sergei M. Mironov, the party&rsquo;s leader, said political opponents distributed newspapers attributing scandalous statements to A Just Russia&rsquo;s candidates, like one that claimed &ldquo;the residents of Kursk region greeted the Nazis with bread and salt,&rdquo; a traditional Russian welcome. &ldquo;I have never seen such dirty tricks and abominations,&rdquo; Mr. Mironov said.        

Communists said United Russia secured a stratospheric 71 percent in Chukhotka by flying in pop stars to the remote Arctic region for a free concert. United Russia, for its part, claimed that opposition parties used underhanded means to suppress turnout, like making a wave of insistent campaign calls to voters in the middle of the night hours before the polls opened. Mr. Mironov shrugged off allegations that his party was involved in such things.        

&ldquo;They can say whatever they want,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The results are obvious. We are attracting more and more support from voters, and United Russia is catastrophically losing that support.&rdquo;        
