
MANAMA, Bahrain &mdash; Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s military rolled into Bahrain on Monday, threatening to escalate a local political conflict into a regional showdown with Iran.        

Saudi Arabia has been watching uneasily as Bahrain&rsquo;s Shiite majority has staged weeks of protests against a Sunni monarchy, fearing that if the protesters prevailed, Iran, Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s bitter regional rival, could expand its influence and inspire unrest elsewhere.        

The Saudi decision to send in troops could further inflame the conflict and transform this teardrop of a nation in the Persian Gulf into the Middle East&rsquo;s next proxy battlefield between regional and global powers.        

By midday, about 2000 troops &mdash; 1,200 from Saudi Arabia and 800 from the United Arab Emirates &mdash; entered Bahrain as part of a force operating under the aegis of the Gulf Cooperation Council, a six-nation regional coalition of Sunni rulers that has grown increasingly anxious over the sustained challenge to Bahrain&rsquo;s king, Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa. &ldquo;This is the initial phase,&rdquo; a Saudi official said. &ldquo;Bahrain will get whatever assistance it needs. It&rsquo;s open-ended.&rdquo;        

The decision is the first time the council has used collective military action to help suppress a popular revolt &mdash; in this case a Shiite popular revolt. It was rejected by the opposition, and by Iran, as an &ldquo;occupation.&rdquo; According to Iranian news reports, Iran even went so far as to call the troop movement an invasion. Iran has long claimed that Bahrain is historically part of Iran.        

The troops entered Bahrain at an especially combustible moment in the standoff between protesters and the monarchy. In recent days protesters have begun to move from the encampment in Pearl Square, the symbolic center of the nation, to the actual seat of power and influence, the Royal Court and the financial district. As the troops moved in, protesters controlled the main highway and said they were determined not to leave.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know what is going to happen,&rdquo; Jassim Hussein Ali, a member of the opposition Wefaq party and a former member of Parliament, said in a phone interview. &ldquo;Bahrain is heading toward major problems, anarchy. This is an occupation, and this is not welcome.&rdquo;        

Rasool Nafisi, an academic and Iran expert based in Virginia, said: &ldquo;Now that the Saudis have gone in, they may spur a similar reaction from Iran, and Bahrain becomes a battleground between Saudi and Iran. This may prolong the conflict rather than put an end to it, and make it an international event rather than a local uprising.&rdquo;        

An adviser to the United States government, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to talk to the press, agreed. &ldquo;Iran&rsquo;s preference was not to get engaged because the flow of events was in their direction,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;If the Saudi intervention changes the calculus, they will be more aggressive.&rdquo;        

Though Bahrain said it had invited the force, the Saudi presence highlights the degree to which the kingdom has become concerned over Iran&rsquo;s growing regional influence, and demonstrates that the Saudi monarchy has drawn the line at its back door. Oil-rich Saudi Arabia, a close ally of Washington, has traditionally preferred to operate in the shadows through checkbook diplomacy. It has long provided an economic lifeline to Bahrain.        

But it now finds itself largely standing alone to face Iran since its most important ally in that fight, Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, has been ousted in a popular uprising. Iran&rsquo;s ally, Hezbollah, recently toppled the Saudi-backed government of Lebanon &mdash; a symbol of its regional might and Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s diminishing clout.        

But Bahrain is right at Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s eastern border, where the kingdoms are connected by a causeway.        

The Gulf Cooperation Council was clearly alarmed at the prospect of a Shiite political victory in Bahrain, fearing that it would inspire restive Shiite populations in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait to protest as well. The majority of the population in Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s eastern provinces, where the oil is found, is Shiite, and there have already been small protests there.        

&ldquo;If the opposition in Bahrain wins, then Saudi loses,&rdquo; said Mustafa el-Labbad, director of Al Sharq Center for Regional and Strategic Studies in Cairo. &ldquo;In this regional context, the decision to move troops into Bahrain is not to help the monarchy of Bahrain, but to help Saudi Arabia itself .&rdquo;        

The Bahrain government said that it had invited the force in to help restore and preserve public order. The United States &mdash; which has continued to back the monarchy &mdash; said Monday that the move was not an occupation. The United States has long been allied with Bahrain&rsquo;s royal family and has based the Navy&rsquo;s Fifth Fleet in Bahrain for many years.        

Ethan Bronner reported from Manama, Bahrain, and Michael Slackman from Berlin. Nada Bakri contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon, Steven Lee Myers from Paris, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.
