
TOKYO &mdash; Japan, a country lulled by the reassuring rhythms of order and predictability, has been jolted by earthquake, tsunami and nuclear crisis into an unsettling new reality: lack of control.        

In a nation where you can set your watch by a train&rsquo;s arrival and a conductor apologizes for even a one-minute delay, rolling blackouts have forced commuters to leave early so they will not be stranded when the trains stop running. Some stores have been stripped bare of essentials like rice and milk, leading the prime minister to publicly call for calm. All the while, aftershocks small and large rattle windows and fray nerves.        

While workers struggle to avert nuclear meltdowns at stricken power plants 170 miles to the north, residents of Tokyo are wondering whether to trust the government&rsquo;s assurances that they are out of harm&rsquo;s way.        

The string of disasters has revived the notion &mdash; dormant since Tokyo rose from the firebombed devastation of World War II &mdash; that this city is living on borrowed time. Many people are staying inside to avoid radiation that the wind might blow in their direction. Others are weighing whether to leave.        

But most Japanese are trying to uphold the ethic that they are taught from childhood: to do their best, persevere and suppress their own feelings for the sake of the group.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve been checking the news on the Internet, and I really don&rsquo;t know who to believe, because first they say it&rsquo;s O.K., and then things get worse,&rdquo; said Shinya Tokiwa, who lives in Yokohama and works for Fujitsu, the giant electronics maker, in Tokyo&rsquo;s Shiodome district. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t go anywhere because I have to work my hardest for my customers.&rdquo;        

Those customers, more than 200 miles south of the earthquake&rsquo;s epicenter, are still grappling with its effects. The computerized systems that Fujitsu sells to banks have crashed under the strain of so many people trying to send money to relatives and friends in stricken areas.        

That has kept Mr. Tokiwa busy with repairs and unable to make any sales calls. Just meeting a customer or colleague has become a chore, with trains and subways not running on schedule.        

The Japanese are bracing for further losses. The confirmed death toll was 3,676 on Tuesday, with 7,558 people reported missing, but those numbers may well be understated, and bodies continued to wash ashore.        

A brief ray of hope pierced the gloom on Tuesday when two people were rescued from collapsed buildings where they had been trapped for more than 90 hours. One of them was a 92-year-old man who was found alive in Ishinomaki City, the other a 70-year-old woman who was pulled from the wreckage of her home in Iwate Prefecture.        

In northern Japan&rsquo;s disaster zone, an estimated 440,000 people were living in makeshift shelters or evacuation centers, officials said. Bitterly cold and windy weather compounded the misery as survivors endured shortages of food, fuel and water.        

Rescue teams from 13 nations, some assisted by dogs, continued to search for survivors, and more nations were preparing to send teams. Helicopters shuttled back and forth, part of a mobilization of some 100,000 troops, the largest in Japan since World War II, to assist in the rescue and relief work. A no-flight zone was imposed around the stricken nuclear plants.        

Japan&rsquo;s neighbors watched the crisis anxiously, with urgent meetings among Chinese officials about how to respond should radioactive fallout reach their shores. South Korea and Singapore both said they would step up inspections of food imported from Japan.        

The Japanese are no strangers to catastrophe &mdash; earthquakes, typhoons, mudslides and other natural disasters routinely batter this archipelago, which is smaller in land area than California but is home to nearly four times as many people.        

Japan is also the only nation to have suffered an atomic attack. But by now, most Japanese have only read about the destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by atomic bombs in 1945, or have made the pilgrimage to Hiroshima to hang origami cranes and shudder at its museum&rsquo;s graphic displays.        

Many of the most recent natural disasters, including the earthquake in Kobe in 1995, occurred far from the capital. The last major earthquake to hit Tokyo was in 1923.        

So for most Japanese, these hardships are entirely new.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m a little scared,&rdquo; Yuko Ota, 38, an office worker, said as she stood in a long line at Meguro Station in central Tokyo for a ticket to Osaka, her hometown.        

Reporting was contributed by Mark McDonald and David Jolly from Tokyo; Sharon LaFraniere and Li Bibo from Beijing; Su-Hyun Lee from Seoul, South Korea; and Kevin Drew from Hong Kong.
