
WASHINGTON &mdash; The American commander in Afghanistan and the Pentagon&rsquo;s top policy officer on Tuesday described the value of sustaining a long-term relationship with Kabul, and raised the possibility of operating joint military bases with local forces long after foreign troops are scheduled to withdraw in 2014.        

Gen. David H. Petraeus, commander of American and coalition forces, told members of the Senate Armed Services Committee that &ldquo;it&rsquo;s very important to stay engaged in a region in which we have such vital interests.&rdquo;        

He cited his tenure as the senior commander in Iraq as an example of the benefits of the American military &ldquo;providing enablers&rdquo; &mdash; troops that train, advise and support local forces &mdash; in countries where the United States has important national security interests.        

&ldquo;I think the concept of joint basing, the concept of providing enablers for Afghan operations and so forth &mdash; frankly, similar to what we have done in Iraq since the mission changed there &mdash; would also be appropriate in Afghanistan,&rdquo; General Petraeus said.        

He and Michele A. Flournoy, the under secretary of defense for policy, noted that any continuing military relationship with Afghanistan would require negotiations with the government there.        

&ldquo;The president&rsquo;s been also very clear from the beginning that we do not seek any permanent bases in Afghanistan &mdash; that we don&rsquo;t seek to have a presence that any other country in the region would see as a threat,&rdquo; Ms. Flournoy said.        

She said negotiations with the Afghan government for American assistance beyond 2014 likely would include opportunities to help develop the country&rsquo;s economy and system of governance.        

While the focus of the hearing was the war in Afghanistan, a central theme was the threat of ungoverned areas of Pakistan serving as havens for terrorists and insurgents. Senators from both parties pressed to find out what could be done to assist &mdash; and even compel &mdash; Pakistan to do more to rout insurgents from those areas.        

&ldquo;The Pakistanis are the first to note that more needs to be done,&rdquo; General Petraeus said. &ldquo;There is, I think, a growing recognition that you cannot allow poisonous snakes to have a nest in your backyard even if they just bite the neighbor&rsquo;s kids, because sooner or later they&rsquo;re going to turn around and cause problems in your backyard.&rdquo;        

General Petraeus made clear that Al Qaeda continues to maintain a small presence inside Afghanistan, which under Taliban rule provided haven for Osama bin Laden to organize the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.        

He said Al Qaeda has under 100 operatives or fighters inside Afghanistan today. He also said efforts to woo Taliban foot soldiers away from the insurgency were showing progress: About 700 former Taliban fighters had officially reintegrated with Afghan authorities and another 2,000 were now in early stages of the reintegration process.        

General Petraeus said that while Afghan and coalition forces had turned back the Taliban&rsquo;s initiative on the battlefield, he warned that progress remained &ldquo;fragile and reversible.&rdquo;        

Sen. Carl Levin of Michigan, who is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, called for adding up to 70,000 Afghan troops and police, and he said the United States and its allies should press Afghan leaders to improve governance and public services, and fight corruption.        
