
MANAMA, Bahrain &mdash; The battle for control of this strategic island kingdom intensified on Tuesday as Iran lashed out at the arrival of Saudi troops brought in to help retake the streets from antigovernment protesters, and the king declared a three-month state of emergency. Two men were killed by security forces in a growing wave of unrest.        

A senior American diplomat arrived on an unplanned visit and sought ways to calm the chaos while pressing the government to exercise restraint. Long-simmering popular anger at the autocratic government and Sunni Muslim domination over a Shiite majority has been ratcheted up by recent revolts across the Arab world.        

&ldquo;We are not an exact copy of what happened in Egypt, but we have been inspired by it,&rdquo; said Redha Hayat, a petroleum technician manning a protester checkpoint in the village of Sanabis.        

Since Sunday, much of Manama, the capital, and many surrounding villages have taken on the quality of a war zone with overturned trash hauling bins and piles of rubble blocking empty streets lined with shuttered malls. Protesters and the police have set up competing checkpoints, schools are closed, gasoline stations have no fuel, cash machines are empty and there are daily encounters between tear-gas-lobbing police officers and demonstrators.        

Doctors at Salmaniya Hospital in Manama estimated that 200 people had been injured on Tuesday and said two had been killed in the village of Sitra in clashes with the riot police. One man, Ahmed Farhan, 24, had dozens of shotgun pellet wounds in his back and a gaping head injury. The second man, a foreign worker from Bangladesh, had tire marks from having been run over by security forces, the doctors said.        

&ldquo;The signs are that this is a coordinated attack,&rdquo; said Dr. Ali al-Aradi, a hospital administrator. &ldquo;These were not skirmishes. This was an attack on the protesters. These are the kinds of wounds we are seeing &mdash; shotgun and head injuries.&rdquo;        

The government meanwhile accused the protesters of running over and killing a member of the security forces and directing automatic weapons fire at others. It was impossible to verify such claims, but there was little doubt that the mood on the streets had hardened in the month since peaceful protests began in Pearl Square, the capital&rsquo;s center. The demonstrators still chant &ldquo;peaceful, peaceful&rdquo; but some now also carry sticks of wood and steel.        

While the 2,000 troops from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates were shown on television arriving on Monday across the causeway linking this island to Saudi Arabia, they were nowhere in evidence on Tuesday and seemed to have remained garrisoned in military barracks near the royal palace.        

Iran, the center of Shiite Islam which has sometimes called Bahrain one of its own provinces, objected angrily to the troops&rsquo; arrival. The state media called it an invasion and the Foreign Ministry spokesman told a news conference in Tehran that the presence of foreign troops in Bahrain was &ldquo;unacceptable.&rdquo;        

There is little evidence that the Shiite-led protests here have an Iranian sponsor or flavor. In fact, they are at least as much about demands for a democratic government as about sectarianism. But the risk of Iranian interference is clearly on the minds of the Saudis and the Americans.        

Bahrain, a longtime American ally, is home to the United States Navy&rsquo;s Fifth Fleet, which patrols the Persian Gulf and helps support the war in Afghanistan. The kingdom also allows American military aircraft to operate from its main air base.        

But the Obama administration has been urging the royal family to step up long-promised political reforms. Last Saturday, Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates stopped here to tell King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa that &ldquo;baby steps&rdquo; toward change were not enough. Jeffrey D. Feltman, an assistant secretary of state, was in Manama on Tuesday seeking solutions to what an American Embassy statement called &ldquo;rising tensions and increased incidents of violence in Bahrain.&rdquo;        

A White House spokesman called for &ldquo;calm and restraint on all sides.&rdquo; He added: &ldquo;We are particularly concerned by the increasing reports of provocative acts and sectarian violence by all groups. The use of force and violence from any source will only worsen the situation. One thing is clear: there is no military solution to the problems in Bahrain. A political solution is necessary and all sides must now work to produce a dialogue that addresses the needs of all of Bahrain&rsquo;s citizens.&rdquo;        
Nadim Audi contributed reporting from Manama, and Steven Lee Myers from Cairo.
