
KESENNUMA, Japan &mdash; The Shishiori River starts life nestled between 1,500-foot hills north of here, and runs a bare 7 &frac12;-mile course southward until it empties into Kesennuma Bay. The end is a mean one, a short trip down a 50-foot-wide culvert, shackled in by manmade banks and girdled by highway bridges.        

It was on Friday that Japan&rsquo;s monster tsunami inundated that last concrete stretch, swamping the river with overturned cars and fishing boats and demolishing hundreds of homes on both banks. And it was this Wednesday that searchers, entering a battered home there, found the bodies of a man and his wife in their 70s &mdash; the last of 81 victims they recovered in the river basin.        

The total, well over a third of the confirmed deaths in Kesennuma, testifies to the searchers&rsquo; grit. But it also testifies to the enormousness of the task ahead, not just here but across northeastern Japan. To recover those 81 bodies, 300 rescuers spent four days combing a neck of land about 450 yards wide and only 5/8-mile long, in the center of a busy urban neighborhood.        

Much of the tsunami&rsquo;s havoc, here and elsewhere, was wrought in rural and even inaccessible areas &mdash; and much of that has barely been touched.        

&ldquo;About 20 percent of the damaged area here has been searched,&rdquo; Ken-Ichi Sato, who heads Kesennuma&rsquo;s emergency operations, said Wednesday. &ldquo;Parts we can&rsquo;t reach because we can&rsquo;t get into the area, and parts haven&rsquo;t been searched because there&rsquo;s so much debris to clear.&rdquo;        

Japan&rsquo;s National Police Agency&nbsp;said on Thursday afternoon that more than 5,000 people had died and nearly 10,000 were missing. Figures in both categories were expected to rise as search teams explored the most heavily damaged areas.&nbsp;        

Underscoring the urgency of the crises, Emperor Akihito took the unprecedented step of addressing Japan on television on Wednesday, saying in a recorded message that he was &ldquo;deeply worried&rdquo; and asking people to act with compassion &ldquo;to overcome these difficult times.&rdquo;        

An official with the Imperial Household Agency said that Akihito, 77, had never before delivered a nationally televised address of any kind. Akihito expressed his concern for the survivors of the disaster and thanked rescue teams working under difficult conditions in the north.        

In Kesennuma, workers began assembling a list of the missing on Wednesday, Mr. Sato said, after some electricity was restored and they could tap a computer database of the area&rsquo;s residents.        

Yet even with computers to pinpoint the homes of the missing, officials say, finding the victims is an especially vexing task, lacking the usual clues that lead to rescues.        

&ldquo;In an earthquake, if it&rsquo;s within 72 hours and we reach them, they&rsquo;re likely to be found alive; and in an earthquake, you find them in place and evacuate them,&rdquo; said Kazutaka Hiramatsu, 48, a Tokyo firefighters&rsquo; school official who was helping direct the Shishiori search.        

&ldquo;But because the tsunami carries everything so far away, it&rsquo;s very difficult to find people. And because it&rsquo;s a tsunami, when we find them, they are usually already dead.&rdquo;        

Because most victims are neither in their homes nor able to call for help, the search-and-rescue teams that attend most natural disasters are less useful here. In this case, the first victims are being found and zipped into body bags by the workers sent in to clear paths through the debris fields that the tsunami has left.        

&ldquo;The problem,&rdquo; Mr. Sato said, &ldquo;is that there&rsquo;s a lot of water, and a lot of the debris is just too big to move. So our search has become search-and-removal &mdash; we have to do it all together.&rdquo;        

Sometimes other homeowners, coming back to pick through the rubble of their belongings, discover the dead. In Kesen-cho, a village in another tsunami-flattened area eight miles northeast of Kesennuma, journalists encountered two victims on Tuesday by a plowed roadside, laid on planks and carefully covered with a beige duvet and a Mickey Mouse bedspread. Bodies also have been recovered at sea by Japan&rsquo;s Coast Guard and the United States Navy, which have mounted helicopter searches.        

That leaves the most difficult and painstaking work to the squads of searchers from Japan&rsquo;s military and emergency groups like the Tokyo Fire and Disaster Management Agency.        

Here in Kesennuma, about 800 searchers are deployed in all, outfitted in mud boots and slickers and carrying the tools of their trade. &ldquo;We use bars, axes and breaking tools that look like spurs to lift and turn over debris,&rdquo; said Keiichiro Horiguchi, one of the Tokyo agency&rsquo;s searchers. &ldquo;We break walls and windows, and use metal cutting tools to turn over the tiles that cover the roofs to see if there is anybody beneath.&rdquo;        

At the Shishiori River, officials first divided the debris field into sections, then deployed the searchers at the end, working slowly toward the ocean. Using a long rod, sometimes with two points at one end, they gingerly poked through the wreckage, first exploring the buildings that were still standing and inspecting the river&rsquo;s flooded automobiles for bodies, then moving to the surrounding rubble.        

Then, upon reaching the sea, they went back and started over.        

&ldquo;The truth is that there are many bodies around the damaged area,&rdquo; said Toshiyuki Yoshioka, 46, a Tokyo riot police director who serves with the fire and disaster agency. &ldquo;If we look for people in the same area again and again, there&rsquo;s a greater possibility to find them. We&rsquo;ll look two, three, as many times as we can in the time allowed us.&rdquo;        

That painstaking approach is what led searchers on Wednesday to the elderly couple, who had been overlooked during previous searches. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s very hard and dangerous work,&rdquo; Yuri Tsurugasaki, 45, a Tokyo fire officer with the searchers, said Wednesday. And not just physically, he added; recovering the victims of such cruel deaths has led to more than one case of post-traumatic stress disorder, he said.        

&ldquo;But it&rsquo;s even harder for the families who are waiting for their dear ones to return,&rdquo; Mr. Horiguchi said. &ldquo;So it&rsquo;s nothing compared to what they feel.&rdquo;        
Mark McDonald contributed reporting, and Moshe Komata contributed research.
