
BOLZANO, Italy &mdash; This picturesque town in the foothills of the Tyrolean Alps became Italian by a twist of history, when a pact signed after the upheaval of World War I handed the territory from Austria to Italy. With its German-speaking majority and reticent elegance, it still feels closer to Vienna than to Rome.        

So it came as little surprise when the president of the autonomous province of Bolzano said he would not join in the nationwide festivities planned this week celebrating the 150th anniversary of the unification of Italy. &ldquo;We were taken away from Austria against our will,&rdquo; Luis Durnwalder, the president, said in an interview in nearby Trento. &ldquo;I respect those people who want to celebrate, but I see no reason to celebrate.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Durnwalder, who helped Bolzano negotiate its autonomy from Rome and its hefty state subsidies, is not the only skeptic. Umberto Bossi, the leader of the Northern League, the most powerful party in Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi&rsquo;s center-right coalition, called the celebrations &ldquo;useless, and a bit rhetorical,&rdquo; and some of his party members have refused to stand for the national anthem. The leading Italian industrialists&rsquo; organization said it would be foolish to lose a workday to a national holiday amid the economic crisis.        

Beyond the political theater, the polemics reflect a profound reality: as Italy prepares to celebrate its 150th anniversary it is more fractured than ever before &mdash; politically, geographically and economically. The country has always been more a patchwork of regions with strong local identities rather than a strong nation-state. And the celebrations have only highlighted the seams.        

&ldquo;Italy has never been this divided,&rdquo; Gioacchino Lanza Tomasi, a musicologist and the son of Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa, whose 1958 novel, &ldquo;The Leopard,&rdquo; is among the most trenchant depictions of Italian unification, said recently in an interview in Palermo.        

Nearby, in an unkempt city park, stood a statue of Giuseppe Garibaldi on horseback, his hand held aloft toward the Italian mainland. It was Garibaldi&rsquo;s landing in Sicily in 1860, and riots for independence in central Italy, that led to unification &mdash; a merging of the Bourbon Kingdom of the Two Sicilies in the south, the Savoy dynasty in the north and Sardinia, some Papal States, and other feudal powers.        

Even today most Italians consider themselves the product of their hometowns or regions more than their nation. Politically, two decades after the end of the cold war, Italy is more divided regionally than ideologically, not least because Mr. Berlusconi, weakened but not undone by persistent sex scandals, has held his coalition together in large part by granting concessions to the Northern League.        

The party, which controls the Veneto and Lombardy regions, both economic powerhouses, is pushing for &ldquo;fiscal federalism,&rdquo; a plan to give regions more power over taxation. The program, which has been partly approved, would essentially allow richer northern areas to keep more of their tax revenue.        

Many believe that the Northern League &mdash; known at the top for its savvy, pragmatic politicians and at the grass roots level for its fierce anti-immigrant stance &mdash; is a more troubling kind of separatist threat than Mr. Durnwalder and his party, because it manages to criticize the centralized state while being a pillar of the governing coalition.        

John Foot, a professor of Italian history at University College, London, points to a growing rejection, among a minority of Italians, of &ldquo;the present nation-state, the way it&rsquo;s been organized.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I think that rejection could become more and more radical if radical forms of federalism are pushed through,&rdquo; Mr. Foot said. &ldquo;There would be an institutional crisis &mdash; not a civil war, but a Belgium situation where it&rsquo;s impossible to form a government, where regions become so strong and are mini-countries. In some ways, that&rsquo;s already happened.&rdquo;        

But others see these kinds of divisions as so intrinsic to the Italian project &mdash; a big, unruly family, bound by language and largely by religion, forever bickering but never quite dissolving &mdash; that they pose no threat.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;What&rsquo;s happening to Belgium won&rsquo;t ever happen to Italy,&rdquo; said Giuliano Amato, a former prime minister who is the anniversary committee chairman. &ldquo;We need to stay together in order to keep arguing,&rdquo; he added wryly. &ldquo;If not, how can we keep arguing?&rdquo;        

In 1911, Italy celebrated the 50th anniversary of unification by inaugurating the hulking Victor Emmanuel Monument in central Rome. (It also invaded Libya, the start of 40 years of bloody colonial rule.) In 1961, for the 100th anniversary, Italy was riding high in an economic boom.        

This time around, as the country gears up for fireworks, concerts and special exhibitions &mdash; and kicks off a four-day weekend, with public offices and schools closed starting Thursday &mdash; the mood is different. Italy is facing economic difficulties, political scandals, brain drain, and once again problems with Libya, its largest supplier of natural gas.        

In a fictive letter to the editor in the Turin daily La Stampa on Sunday, the humorist Massimo Gramellini assumed the guise of Italy. &ldquo;The person writing to you is an old and unpredictable lady who as her birthday approaches feels overcome by a melancholy anxiety,&rdquo; he wrote.        

This week&rsquo;s festivities have revealed ironies, not least that today the main champions of the Italian nation-state are not the right but the left and the Catholic Church &mdash; which excommunicated the kings of Italy. Yet some see Italy, divided along regional lines, as a microcosm of the difficulties of the larger European project, a place where local identities run up against one another &mdash; and often thrive &mdash;within a messy collective.        

&ldquo;As goes Italy, so goes Europe,&rdquo; said Francesco Palermo, an expert on federalism and a professor in Bolzano.        

Here in Bolzano, many residents did not seem too excited about the anniversary celebrations. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m Italian, I feel very Italian,&rdquo; said Paola Ebner, in German-accented Italian, as she served wurst from a street cart. &ldquo;But it&rsquo;s not right to celebrate. What is there to celebrate?&rdquo;        

But while the Austrians and Italians wrestle over their own vexed identities, a new reality is taking hold here: an Italy shaped by new arrivals.        

As he sold dried fruit from a cart in the market here, Hamad Butt, an immigrant from Pakistan, said he thought it was fitting that Bolzano celebrate unification. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a good idea,&rdquo; Mr. Butt said, &ldquo;because it&rsquo;s part of Italy.&rdquo;        
