
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Hundreds of antigovernment protesters clashed with security forces and government supporters on Wednesday in the impoverished western port city of Hodeidah, according to local reports.        

The reports said that men in plainclothes attacked the protesters, who were staging a sit-in in the center of the city, and that security forces intervened, using tear gas. About 10 protesters were shot with live ammunition, and hundreds were injured from tear gas and rocks.        

The official Saba news agency reported that tens of thousands of supporters of President Ali Abdullah Saleh had marched in Hodeidah on Wednesday. The demonstrators &ldquo;called on the political powers to adopt a peaceful dialogue to end the current crisis and maintain the nation&rsquo;s unity and security,&rdquo; Saba said.        

In the past month, protests against President Saleh&rsquo;s leadership have been widening and growing more violent. On Monday, antigovernment tribesmen in northern Yemen killed four soldiers after troops opened fire on demonstrators, and a provincial governor was stabbed after his bodyguards shot at protesters, local reports said.        

At least 40 protesters have been killed in the demonstrations, most of them in Aden, a southern port city.        

On Wednesday evening, a statement was released by the Joint Meeting Parties, Yemen&rsquo;s coalition of opposition political parties. &ldquo;The corrupt oligarchs that continue to hold on to power in this country insist on committing crimes and brutal aggression against the peaceful youth revolution in various governorates of the republic, the latest in Hodeidah, by means of frantic attempts to thwart the revolution,&rdquo; the statement read. &ldquo;This is pure blood that was spilled.&rdquo;        

Also on Wednesday, a government official said that Brig. Abdullah Qiran, the head of security in Aden, had become head of security in Taiz, a mountainous city in central Yemen that is a bastion of opposition sentiment. The official spoke on condition of anonymity because of the delicate political situation.        

Many Adenis say they believe that General Qiran, a northerner, was behind the suppression of antigovernment demonstrations in the city.        
