
This article is by 

Hiroko Tabuchi, 
Ken Belson and 
Norimitsu Onishi.        

TOKYO &mdash; With all the euphemistic language on display from officials handling Japan&rsquo;s nuclear crisis, one commodity has been in short supply: information.        

When an explosion shook one of many stricken reactors at Japan&rsquo;s Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant on Saturday, power company officials initially offered a typically opaque, and understated, explanation.        

&ldquo;A big sound and white smoke&rdquo; were recorded near Reactor No. 1, the plant&rsquo;s operator, Tokyo Electric Power, announced in a curt memo. The matter &ldquo;was under investigation,&rdquo; it added.        

Foreign nuclear experts, the Japanese press and an increasingly angry and rattled Japanese public are frustrated by government and power company officials&rsquo; failure to communicate clearly and promptly about the nuclear crisis. Pointing to conflicting reports, ambiguous language and a constant refusal to confirm the most basic facts, they suspect officials of withholding or fudging crucial information about the risks posed by the ravaged Daiichi plant.        

The sound and white smoke on Saturday turned out to be the first in a series of explosions that set off a desperate struggle to bring four reactors under control after their cooling systems were knocked out by the earthquake and tsunami.        

Evasive news conferences followed uninformative briefings as the crisis intensified over the past five days. Never has postwar Japan needed strong, assertive leadership more &mdash; and never has its weak, rudderless system of governing been so clearly exposed. With earthquake, tsunami and nuclear crisis striking in rapid, bewildering succession, Japan&rsquo;s leaders need skills they are not trained to have: rallying the public, improvising solutions and cooperating with powerful bureaucracies.        

&ldquo;Japan has never experienced such a serious test,&rdquo; said Takeshi Sasaki, a political scientist at Gakushuin University. &ldquo;At the same time, there is a leadership vacuum.&rdquo;        

Politicians are almost completely reliant on Tokyo Electric Power, which is known as Tepco, for information, and have been left to report what they are told, often in unconvincing fashion.        

In a telling outburst, the prime minister, Naoto Kan, berated power company officials for not informing the government of two explosions at the plant early Tuesday morning.        

&ldquo;What in the world is going on?&rdquo; Mr. Kan said in front of journalists, complaining that he saw television reports of the explosions before he had heard about them from the power company. He was speaking at the inauguration of a central response center of government ministers and Tepco executives that he set up and pointedly said he would command.        

The chief of the International Atomic Energy Agency said late Tuesday in a press conference in Vienna that his agency was struggling to get timely information from Japan about its failing reactors, which has resulted in agency misstatements.        

&ldquo;I am asking the Japanese counterparts to further strengthen, to facilitate, communication,&rdquo; said the agency&rsquo;s chief, Yukiya Amano. A diplomat in Vienna familiar with the agency&rsquo;s operations echoed those sentiments.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s so frustrating to try to get good information&rdquo; from the Japanese, the diplomat said, speaking on the condition of anonymity so as not to antagonize officials there.        

The less-than-straight talk is rooted in a conflict-averse culture that avoids direct references to unpleasantness. Until recently, it was standard practice not to tell cancer patients about their diagnoses, ostensibly to protect them from distress. Even Emperor Hirohito, when he spoke to his subjects for the first time to mark Japan&rsquo;s surrender in World War II, spoke circumspectly, asking Japanese to &ldquo;endure the unendurable.&rdquo;        

There are also political considerations. In the only nation that has endured an atomic bomb attack, acute sensitivity about radiation sickness may be motivating public officials to try to contain panic &mdash; and to perform political damage control. Left-leaning news outlets have long been skeptical of nuclear power and of its backers, and the mutual mistrust led power companies and their regulators to tightly control the flow of information about nuclear operations so as not to inflame a spectrum of opponents that includes pacifists and environmentalists.        

Keith Bradsher contributed reporting from Hong Kong, William J. Broad from New York, and Mark McDonald from Tokyo.
