
MANAMA, Bahrain &mdash; Popular protests here modeled on the hopeful events in Egypt took on the darkness of those in Libya on Wednesday as hundreds of Bahraini troops, backed by helicopters and tanks, forcefully cleared the capital&rsquo;s central square of demonstrators clamoring for reform. Three protesters and two security officers were killed.        

Two days after the king of Bahrain called in 2,000 troops from Saudi Arabia and other neighboring allies, and the day after he declared martial law, his forces roared through downtown Manama, wresting it from the protesters who had in recent days taken charge of neighborhoods and nearby villages. As skirmishes continued into the evening, a curfew was announced for the center of the city.        

&ldquo;They broke everything, they shot at kids, there was no humanity, no respect,&rdquo; said Hassan Ali Ibrahim, 35, a gardener, who had spent the night in the plaza, known as Pearl Square, a protest tent camp over the past month like Tahrir Square in Cairo. &ldquo;When we saw the tanks and the cars, about a hundred of us went towards them, and started chanting, &lsquo;Peacefully! Peacefully!&rsquo; This is when they started shooting, from the ground and from the bridge, from everywhere.&rdquo;        

The crackdown placed the United States in an awkward bind. The United States, which bases its Fifth Fleet here, has struggled to balance its strategic interest in placating Bahrain and its ally, Saudi Arabia, its fears that Iran is exploiting the anger of Bahrain&rsquo;s majority Shiite protesters, and American democratic principles. American officials have held off backing the protesters while urging Bahrain&rsquo;s leaders to exercise restraint. That advice was ignored.        

President Obama on Tuesday telephoned both King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia and King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa of Bahrain to stress &ldquo;the need for maximum restraint,&rdquo; said Jay Carney, the White House press secretary.        

He added that Mr. Obama &ldquo;also stressed the importance of a political process as the only way to peacefully address the legitimate grievances of Bahrainis and to lead to a Bahrain that is stable, just, more unified and responsive to its people.&rdquo;        

Plumes of black smoke choked the city landscape as troops repeatedly fired tear gas canisters, rubber bullets and what sounded like live ammunition in their dawn assault. Telephone and Internet service were cut. Tents, trees and brush burned quickly in the desert wind. Security forces extinguished the fires with water cannons normally used to break up crowds. &ldquo;This was not an attack aimed at just dispersing the people in the square, it was meant to hurt us, and the way they were advancing, with the helicopters above them, and the tanks, and the machine guns &mdash; it really felt like a war, not a police operation,&rdquo; said Hussein Ali Eid, 32, a demonstrator.        

Simultaneously, troops and tanks surrounded and invaded Salmaniya Hospital, an opposition stronghold. The crackdown continued in villages outside Manama, the capital, and opposition leaders reported scores of people sent to local clinics and hospitals.        

&ldquo;The hospital was controlled by terrorists, and we liberated it,&rdquo; an army commander at Salmaniya who declined to provide his name or rank said at the complex&rsquo;s entrance. Like nearly all the troops on duty, he covered his face with a mask to prevent identification. It remained unclear whether the foreign troops had participated directly in the assault on Pearl Square or other actions during the day, though officials had said they were there only to protect strategically important ministries and institutions, like the monarchy itself.        

A government announcement said it had lost two soldiers to demonstrators who had repeatedly run them over. It also asserted that the forces had not moved on the demonstrators at first but responded to their gunfire and that the fires were set by the demonstrators themselves.        

The pro-democracy movement of Bahrain, a tiny island off the Saudi coast, is like many in the Arab world, seeking to wrest total power from the hands of the royal family and set up a government of accountability, especially in light of rising economic difficulty. It has been fed by a bulging youth population and access to social media. But it is more fraught, because 70 percent of the country, especially its poorest citizens, is Shiite Muslim while the king and the elite are Sunni.        

Nadim Audi contributed reporting.
