
OFUNATO, Japan &mdash; For the past five days Takiko Kinno has slept on a crowded gymnasium floor, without electricity or running water and living on food rations that in the beginning amounted to one and a half rice balls per day.        

But the toughest part, she says, has been the uncertainty about how long she will have to stay here after last week&rsquo;s tsunami destroyed much of this small port city in northern Japan.        

&ldquo;We are stuck in limbo,&rdquo; said Ms. Kinno, 69, who shares the gym with 500 other residents, most in their 60s or older. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know where we will live, how we will live, how long it will take to leave here.&rdquo;        

It is a predicament shared by tens of thousands across northern Japan. In stricken communities like this one, tsunami refugees have gathered in hundreds of schools, hospitals and public gyms that have been converted into makeshift shelters. In Ofunato, with a population of 41,000, there are 61 such shelters housing 8,437 people, officials said.        

Shelter residents often live in desperate and primitive conditions with little more than a roof over their heads. They have endured days of living in the dark and cold, an ordeal made even worse on Wednesday as a winter storm brought heavy snow and below-freezing temperatures to many devastated areas.        

The privations underscore the difficulties that Japan has faced in responding to the 700,000 refugees created by Friday&rsquo;s earthquake and tsunami, the nation&rsquo;s largest humanitarian crisis since World War II. While national news media and opposition politicians have been quick to criticize Prime Minister Naoto Kan&rsquo;s handling of it, at least some residents said they had low expectations of the central government to begin with.        

&ldquo;The central government has a big debt, no money, so we can&rsquo;t rely on it,&rdquo; said Noriko Kikuchi, 71, in Ofunato&rsquo;s gym.        

But some help is finally starting to trickle in, usually in the form of food and water brought by Japan&rsquo;s military, after many shelters were cut off from the rest of the world in the first days after the disaster. At the gym in Ofunato, four portable toilets arrived a day ago to supplement the two over-used restrooms. A cheer went up in the early afternoon when electricity was partly restored, giving the refugees their first electric light since the waves hit.        

Those living there say they still face severe shortages. They say they have not bathed or changed their clothes in five days &mdash; and for Japanese, who look forward to a nightly ritual of immersion in a hot bath, that is particularly distressing. For many, their clothing was all they brought with them as they fled, leaving them essentially marooned in the shelters because they had no money to hire a taxi or shop.        

The waves swept away everything else they owned, and in many cases their savings as well, because many older Japanese keep their savings in their dressers, not a bank. Those who have bank accounts could not withdraw money because power problems froze A.T.M. networks.        

&ldquo;I would leave tomorrow if I could,&rdquo; said Emi Sasaki, 64, a homemaker living at the gym with her daughter and granddaughter. &ldquo;Access to phones and money would let me at least try to find a place to live.&rdquo;        

Those in the shelters try to maintain the orderly routines of normal Japanese life, seen in the tidy rows of shoes and muddy boots at the doorway to the shelters, where everyone is in socks. But there are also stressful differences: the lack of privacy, the growing odors of hundreds of unwashed bodies and the cries of fear every night during the countless aftershocks.        

They also feel cut off from their families and the outside world, with no phones or newspapers or Internet access. Meanwhile, the closure of highways and lack of goods have slowed government efforts to deliver more supplies.        

&ldquo;We have no idea what will happen to us next,&rdquo; said Ms. Kikuchi, 71, whose home and cigarette stand were destroyed by the waves. &ldquo;I cannot call relatives or friends to ask for help.&rdquo;        

Even those whose homes were spared have found themselves living in a state of privation that this modern and wealthy nation has not known since World War II. Entire areas of northern Japan remain without electricity, water or cellphone service.        

Chronic shortages of everything from rice to gasoline have led to empty or closed stores, and lines at filling stations that extend a mile or more. Maki Niinuma, a 30-year-old homemaker, said her biggest anxiety was providing for her children, particularly her seven-month-old son. While the waves spared her home, fuel shortages have made it hard for her to shop because she wants to keep enough gas in her car to drive the baby to an inland hospital if he gets sick.        
Makiko Inoue contributed reporting.
