
WASHINGTON &mdash; Gen. David H. Petraeus told Congress on Wednesday that some American combat troops might be included in an initial withdrawal of United States forces from Afghanistan in July, but he said that he was still preparing options for President Obama and that no final decision had been made.        

General Petraeus, the top American commander in Afghanistan, did not say how many combat troops might be withdrawn, or from which parts of the country they would come.        

&ldquo;I am still formulating the options that I will provide to the president and the recommendations that I will make,&rdquo; he told the House Armed Services Committee. &ldquo;But I do believe there will be some combat forces included in those options and in that recommendation.&rdquo;        

A range of administration, Pentagon and military officials have said that the first American troops to come home in July are expected to be engineers and support troops, rather than combat soldiers, particularly because fighting is expected to be intense this summer and American commanders do not want to lose the territory they have gained.        

But General Petraeus is seeking to balance demands from the military with the White House&rsquo;s insistence on something more than cosmetic withdrawals in July. He met with President Obama and Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates on Monday.        

General Petraeus&rsquo;s testimony echoed cautiously positive statements about the war that he made Tuesday to the Senate Armed Services Committee. The sessions were among a series of recent statements he has made citing United States progress in Afghanistan, but in the face of what polls show is faltering support among Americans for the nearly decade-old war.        

To try to regain momentum, Mr. Obama sent another 30,000 United States troops last year, bringing the total number of American forces in Afghanistan to 100,000. At the same time Mr. Obama vowed that United States withdrawals would begin in July 2011, although substantial reductions are now not expected until 2014.        

General Petraeus told the House committee on Wednesday that he was realistic about what could be achieved in Afghanistan, where corruption exists throughout the government and much of the country lives in villages little changed from centuries ago. &ldquo;We are not, of course, trying to turn Afghanistan into Switzerland in a decade or less,&rdquo; General Petraeus said. Instead, he said, &ldquo;we are after what is, in a sense, good enough for Afghanistan.&rdquo;        

The general estimated that at a peak there had been some 25,000 Taliban fighters in Afghanistan. Although he said the United States had killed and captured a large number, he declined to give an estimate of current Taliban troop strength. But he described them as resilient.        

On a personal note, General Petraeus told the committee that his son, Lt. Stephen Petraeus, a 2009 graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, had returned home this fall after serving as an infantry platoon leader in Afghanistan.        

&ldquo;You know, I may not be at this table &mdash; probably won&rsquo;t be at 2015 &mdash; but I&rsquo;ll tell you that my son is in uniform, and Lieutenant Petraeus just completed a tour in Afghanistan, which thankfully we were able to keep very quiet,&rdquo; the general said.        
