
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; The rebels seeking to oust Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi claimed minor victories on Wednesday in some of their last footholds at both ends of the country&rsquo;s coast as they battled to hold off the Qaddafi forces&rsquo; superior firepower and to disprove a claim by one of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons that the last of the insurrection would be wiped out &ldquo;in 48 hours.&rdquo;        

After days of retreat, the rebels appeared to be fighting for time in the hope of obtaining some form of international aid, which Western leaders now seem close to delivering.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, speaking from Cairo in a television interview, declared &ldquo;a sea change in opinion&rdquo; in favor of enforcing a no-flight zone over Libya after the 22-member Arab League voted unanimously to support the idea. &ldquo;There is a sense of urgency, obviously,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton told reporters in Cairo. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re all seeing that in real time.&rdquo;        

With the advances made by loyalists, there is growing consensus in the Obama administration that imposing a no-flight zone would no longer make much of a difference, and that it should consider more aggressive airstrikes, which would make targets of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s tanks and heavy artillery &mdash; an option sometimes referred to as a no-drive zone. The United States or its allies could also send military personnel to advise and train the rebels, an official said.        

The rebels seemed Wednesday to have made some gains in a continuing battle for the strategic eastern city of Ajdabiya, a gateway to the Egyptian border and to the rebel headquarters in Benghazi. The Qaddafi forces, which had appeared to capture the city with ease on Tuesday afternoon, had withdrawn to the perimeter by Tuesday night, residents said, as rebel fighters patrolled the city streets and the battle flared at surrounding checkpoints.        

The Qaddafi forces delivered an airstrike, followed by shelling by tanks and mortars on Wednesday, residents and rebel leaders said. Doctors said at least two were killed Wednesday in addition to 26 deaths the day before.        

By day&rsquo;s end, it was not clear who controlled Ajdabiya, though the rebels appeared to hold more at dusk than they did at dawn. Shortly after midnight on Wednesday, the explosions in Ajdabiya had given way to the sound of sporadic gunfights.        

&ldquo;The quiet is uncomfortable,&rdquo; said Dr. Ahmed al-Jnashi, a doctor at the hospital there. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s abnormal. The streets are empty. People are afraid.&rdquo; He said 38 people had died in two days of fighting, including two children in a car hit by a mortar round.        

Dr. Jnashi said witnesses who came to the hospital on Wednesday night said government troops controlled the city&rsquo;s eastern gate, on the approach to Benghazi, securing it with four tanks. &ldquo;There is no media in the city,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;No photographers.&rdquo;        

Rebel leaders claimed that their forces had regained control of entrances to the west and east of the city and were still fighting with government loyalists about 44 miles south of Ajdabiya. But residents said the city remained under a tight siege, with government loyalists running exit checkpoints and shooting at anyone who approached.        

The rebels also boasted that they had displayed a broader arsenal of weaponry. They asserted, without confirmation, that the few aging warplanes under their command flew bombing missions against Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s stronghold in Surt and, for the first time, a rebel helicopter joined the battle in Ajdabiya.        

But there were signs that the Qaddafi forces were simply massing for a renewed assault. The Associated Press, brought to Ajdabiya by the Qaddafi government to document its progress against the rebels, reported hundreds of pro-Qaddafi troops with tanks and artillery waiting outside Ajdabiya&rsquo;s western gates. Truckloads of ammunition and equipment were reported to be arriving as well.        

In Benghazi, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s warplanes bombed targets on the outskirts of the city &mdash; an opening shot, perhaps, in the battle for the rebel seat of power. Aid organizations, including the International Center for the Red Cross, withdrew from the city. So did many of the last of the international news organizations that had set up bases.        
David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Tripoli, and Kareem Fahim from Tobruk. Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Cairo.
