
BEIJING &mdash; China urged Japan on Thursday to report any developments in its nuclear crisis quickly and accurately as concern spread over whether officials in Tokyo had played down the scope of the radiation risk.        

Those concerns led Chinese across the country to empty supermarkets of iodized salt, even though government health officials warned that ingesting it would not protect people exposed to radiation.        

At a regular news briefing, Jiang Yu, the Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, said, &ldquo;We hope that Japan reports details to the world in a timely and accurate manner.&rdquo; Her remarks followed comments on Wednesday by a top United States nuclear official that damage to at least one reactor at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station was far more serious than Japan had acknowledged.        

The China Meteorological Administration reported Thursday morning that the wind was sweeping radioactive pollutants from Japan&rsquo;s crippled nuclear plant toward the southeast. China should not be affected for the next three days, the agency said.        

China Central Television, the government&rsquo;s flagship network, reported Thursday that radiation in China was at normal levels. Zhang Wei, quality management director at the Ministry of Health&rsquo;s National Institute for Radiological Protection, said Thursday evening that Chinese officials were intently following developments at the Fukushima reactors but were unable, as yet, to determine what the impact might be on China. He said the government was trying to keep Chinese citizens informed and to ward off &ldquo;irrational fears.&rdquo;        

Nonetheless, worried Chinese combed pharmacies on Thursday in a mostly vain search for potassium iodide tablets, which are believed to decrease the risk of developing thyroid cancer from nuclear radiation.        

In South Korea, a run on the pills prompted the Korean Pharmaceutical Association to caution against panic buying, Agence France-Presse reported.        

&ldquo;As there is little possibility of radioactive dust reaching the country, heavy doses of iodide needed to fend off radiation impact would only bring about health hazards,&rdquo; the association&rsquo;s statement said.        

Few Chinese pharmacies appear to carry the tablets, although Mr. Zhang said this week that the government had a stockpile for emergency distribution. A clerk at one downtown Beijing pharmacy said that more than 20 people had asked for the tablets in the last two days. She said she hoped to get some by Friday and requested deposits from customers.        

Other anxious Chinese flooded supermarkets looking for iodized salt after numerous postings on popular Internet chat sites claimed that it could also protect people from diseases caused by exposure to nuclear radiation.        

Mr. Zhang said the level of iodine in salt was far too low to provide any protection. &ldquo;Eating iodized salt will do nothing to protect a person from nuclear radiation,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Even eating two kilos of salt won&rsquo;t help. More likely, it could kill a person.&rdquo;        

But demand was so great that the state-owned National Salt Industry Corporation, China&rsquo;s biggest salt producer, asked its subsidiaries to step up distribution, a spokesman said. He said the company&rsquo;s Web site had so many hits on Thursday that it was disabled.        

In downtown Beijing, Huapu Hypermarket was sold out of salt on Thursday morning. Clerks stocked five shelves with bags of rice instead.        

Within a 10-minute period that afternoon, seven customers came in hunting for salt, including the 45-year-old mother of a toddler who said she had learned of the protective benefits of iodized salt on QQ, one of China&rsquo;s most popular Internet chat sites. At outdoor markets, the price of iodized salt was said to have quintupled.        

In Jiangsu Province, north of Shanghai, Zhu Bei, a 25-year-old teacher, went to her local supermarket at 10 a.m. after her mother asked her to pick up three or four boxes of salt, each with as many as 70 individual packets.        

But she said the store clerk told her that customers had lined up outside before the store even opened and not a single box was left. Her mother tried several other markets but also came up empty-handed.        

She said she tried to reassure her mother that the salt would do no good anyway. &ldquo;Save the lecture,&rdquo; her mother snapped. &ldquo;You couldn&rsquo;t even get us some salt.&rdquo;        
Jonathan Kaiman, Li Bibo and Shi Da contributed research.
