
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Yemeni security forces in the central city of Taiz fired tear gas and live ammunition into the air on Thursday to break up clashes between protesters and plainclothes government supporters, witnesses said. More than 100 people were injured, most as a result of tear-gas exposure, according to local reports.        

&ldquo;They shot at us and threw rocks at us,&rdquo; a protest leader who was at the scene, Boshra al-Maqtari, said by phone. She said there were about 200 government supporters there.        

The clash began when the government supporters tried to attack a march through the mountainous city, and protesters taking part in a sit-in calling for the resignation of President Ali Abdullah Saleh came to the marchers&rsquo; defense.        

Demonstrators have held sit-ins in at least three other major cities, including Sana, the capital, to demand that the president step down.        

In the past month, protests against Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s leadership have been widening and growing more violent, and about 40 demonstrators have been killed.        

The demonstrations in Taiz have generally been more peaceful than those in Sana and in the southern port city of Aden, where many of the deaths have occurred.        

On Wednesday, the head of security for Aden, Brig. Gen. Abdullah Qiran, was assigned to lead government security efforts in Taiz. Ms. Maqtari said the demonstrators believed that General Qiran was involved in the attack in Taiz.        

In Sana before sunrise on Thursday, a fresh clash occurred between government supporters and protesters. Two protesters were wounded by gunfire, said Adel al-Suraby, a spokesman for the student group leading the demonstration.        

The protesters, whose camp extends for more than a mile in front of Sana University, were armed with sticks and rocks. Security forces used tear gas and shot into the air to separate the two sides.        

The university&rsquo;s board of directors decided on Thursday to postpone classes until further notice, according to a statement by the official Saba new agency.        

The statement said the sit-in at the university&rsquo;s main gate hindered the &ldquo;access of the students and professors to the colleges.&rdquo;        

In addition, according to a government statement, security forces seized two members of Al Qaeda heading for the sit-in in Taiz on Thursday: Khali Aeed Batarfi, a media official, and Ahmed Omar Abduljalil al-Khadebi.        

&ldquo;Materials and instructions for making explosives, a computer, grenade, an automatic gun, and GSM phone cards were found in possession of Batarfi and al-Khadebi,&rdquo; the statement said.        
