
MOSCOW &mdash; Fears of radioactive contamination from the crippled nuclear plant in Japan are spreading to Russia&rsquo;s Far East. Residents there are ignoring official assurances that there is no danger, and are beginning to stockpile food, medicines and face masks.        

&ldquo;People are in a panic,&rdquo; said Dmitri Mukhotin, a spokesman for Pharma Premium, a chain of pharmacies in the region, where there has been a run on iodine products and other items that are thought to protect the body from fallout or from radiation sickness.        

&ldquo;We are trying to calm people, and in no case are recommending that they use these medicines,&rdquo; Mr. Mukhotin said.        

Vladivostok, the largest city in the Russian Far East, is about 600 miles northwest of the Fukushima plant. Scientists believe that any plumes of radioactive material in the atmosphere are floating in the opposite direction &mdash; at least for now.        

But the events in Japan have rekindled stark memories of the Chernobyl disaster in the Soviet era, and Russians tend to be skeptical of official pronouncements, especially during crises.        

When a reactor at the Chernobyl power plant in Ukraine exploded and burned in April 1986, the Soviet authorities waited days to inform people of the danger, worsening the loss of life.        

This week, Russian officials repeatedly declared that radiation levels in the Far East were normal. The Emergency Situations Ministry said it had put 237 monitoring stations on alert for abnormal increases in radiation. To back up its claims, the ministry set up a live video feed of radiation readings from one of its monitoring devices on its Web site.        

Meteorologists here have predicted that prevailing winds in the region will blow the radioactive material released in northeast Japan out over the Pacific Ocean, away from Russia.        

In an apparent effort to quell concerns in the region, Vladimir V. Putin, Russia&rsquo;s prime minister, will travel this weekend to Sakhalin, a large Russian island in the Sea of Okhotsk north of Japan, his press secretary told Russian news agencies on Thursday. The southern part of Sakhalin is more than 500 miles from the stricken Fukushima nuclear plant.        

&ldquo;Even in the worst-case scenario for the plant in Japan, and for the weather conditions, there is no threat to the Russian Far East,&rdquo; Sergei Kiriyenko, the head of the Russian federal atomic energy agency, said this week.        

Even so, people in Vladivostok have been buying up dosimeters, devices used to measure exposure to radiation. And pharmacy workers have been struggling to keep potassium iodide tablets and other medicines in stock.        

Ingesting potassium iodide can help prevent thyroid cancer, particularly in children, by reducing the chance that radioactive iodine from fallout will be absorbed by the thyroid gland.        

Amid fears that residents could take too many of the tablets and ingest potentially hazardous amounts of iodine, the newspaper Kommersant reported that one official in the Kamchatka region was urging people to take different precautions instead, like eating seaweed and other foods rich in iodine, or coating their bodies in iodine cream.        

Such entreaties, however, do not appear to have stemmed the demand.        

&ldquo;Everything is sold out,&rdquo; said a cashier named Oksana at Moya Apteka, a Vladivostok pharmacy. &ldquo;Everyone wants to protect themselves.&rdquo;        
