
BEIJING &mdash; The authorities suspended a local environmental protection official in eastern China after lead fumes from an illegal battery factory sickened 228 children, the state-run news agency Xinhua reported Sunday. Twenty-three of the children were reported hospitalized.        

The episode joins a long series of pollution problems, including many instances of lead poisoning, that have struck rural China in recent years as the nation&rsquo;s industrial boom has spread from the Pacific coast to inland provinces.        

The children, in Anhui Province&rsquo;s Huaining County, lived across a road from the Borui Battery Company Ltd., which had been ordered closed in August for violating a rule that requires battery factories to be at least 500 meters from residential areas.        

The factory continued to operate, and local authorities closed two battery factories in the area on Thursday after elevated lead levels were reported in 228 of 307 children who were tested, according to a government press release.        

On Sunday, Xinhua reported that the government had suspended Zhao Yiping, the head of Huaining County&rsquo;s environmental protection bureau.        

It was the second instance of factory poisoning to hit Anhui, one of China&rsquo;s poorest provinces, in recent days. Also on Thursday, a leak of phosgene gas at an Anhui chemical factory poisoned 62 workers. Phosgene is used to make pesticides and fertilizer, among other products.        

In China, where both environmental regulation and enforcement can be lax, similar instances of poisoning are not uncommon, especially in rural areas where local officials, under pressure to show economic growth, encourage the development of factories.        

In August 2009, lead pollution from an unlicensed manganese smelter sickened more than 1,300 children in Hunan Province, and doctors found elevated lead levels in the blood of 851 children living near a huge smelter in Shaanxi Province.        

In Shaanxi, residents from villages stormed the smelter grounds, attacking trucks and pulling down fences before police officers subdued them.        
