
NEW DELHI &mdash; India&rsquo;s Parliament erupted in outrage on Thursday over a report of an American diplomatic cable that described insiders in the governing Congress Party showing off chests of money and boasting of paying bribes to wavering lawmakers to secure passage of a critical 2008 vote on a landmark civilian nuclear deal between India and the United States.        

The revelations, contained in a July 18, 2008, cable obtained by WikiLeaks, portray a large, all-out effort by the Congress Party to win a confidence vote in Parliament that could have toppled the wobbly coalition government and doomed the nuclear deal. According to the cable, written five days before the critical vote, a political assistant to an influential Congress Party lawmaker told a United States Embassy diplomat that one small regional political party had already been paid millions of dollars in bribes for support.        

The aide also &ldquo;showed the Embassy employee two chests containing cash and said that around Rupees 50-60 crore (about $25 million) was lying around the house for use as pay-offs,&rdquo; according to the cable. Another Congress Party member told an American diplomat that Kamal Nath, a government minister, &ldquo;is also helping to spread the largesse&rdquo; and was offering jet airplanes as enticements.        

&ldquo;Formerly, he could only offer small planes as bribes,&rdquo; the unnamed Congress Party member told the American diplomat, according to the cable, which was reported in Thursday&rsquo;s edition of The Hindu, an English-language Indian newspaper.        

The uproar comes as the Congress Party has been besieged for months over allegations of corruption. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, known for his integrity, has been hammered by opposition leaders for failing to prevent a telecom scandal that may have cost India&rsquo;s treasury as much as $40 billion. A parliamentary committee is now investigating the telecom scandal, and Mr. Singh has defended himself in remarks made to Parliament.        

Now the nuclear vote controversy has again inflamed criticism of the government. &ldquo;It is clear now that this government survived on the strength of a political sin,&rdquo; Arun Jaitley, a senior leader of the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party, or B.J.P., said Thursday on the floor of the upper house of Parliament.        

The 2008 nuclear deal is regarded as a crowning achievement of Mr. Singh&rsquo;s tenure and is credited with improving the growing partnership between the United States and India, even as technical hurdles remain. Mr. Singh has described nuclear power as a critical component of expanding India&rsquo;s power supply, though he has called for safety inspections in the wake of the catastrophe in Japan.        

But at the time of confidence vote, the nuclear deal was an angrily contested political issue that almost fractured the government. Both the Congress Party and the rival B.J.P. maneuvered frantically over the vote, wooing tiny political parties, most of them regional organizations with no national agenda.        

According to the leaked American cable, the leader of the small party at the center of the bribery allegations, the Rashtriya Lok Dal, demanded that Congress rename an airport in Lucknow, the capital of India&rsquo;s most populous state, after his father in exchange for his support. The government apparently agreed, sending a notification that the airport would be renamed. Despite this and the alleged cash payments described in the cable, the party ultimately voted against the Congress Party in the confidence vote.        

From the outset, corruption allegations have swirled around the issue. During an angry floor debate before the 2008 vote, B.J.P. lawmakers waved wads of cash they said were bribes offered by the Congress Party. A parliamentary committee led by a senior Congress leader later investigated the bribery allegations but concluded that there was not enough evidence to support the charges.        

Mahesh Rangarajan, a political analyst in New Delhi, said Thursday&rsquo;s revelations would contribute to an erosion of confidence in the Congress Party, though he predicted the political damage would be limited, given the longstanding suspicions about the issue.        

&ldquo;WikiLeaks confirms what everyone expected,&rdquo; Mr. Rangarajan said. &ldquo;There is nothing earth-shattering in the revelation. But, of course, it is damaging to the Congress. This season of scams seems to continue. Every week, every month, something new happens.&rdquo;        

Elizabeth Fitzsimmons, spokeswoman for the United States Embassy in New Delhi, declined to comment on the cable, noting that the State Department &ldquo;does not comment on material, including classified documents, that may have been leaked.&rdquo; Ms. Fitzsimmons reiterated that the United States considered India one of its most important allies.        

A spokesman for Mr. Singh declined to comment on the issue. But on the floor of Parliament, India&rsquo;s finance minister, Pranab Mukherjee, testily rebuked opposition lawmakers as they tried to shout him down and said it was impossible to confirm or deny the claims made in the cable because the author was protected by diplomatic immunity.        

&ldquo;This piece of information is not admissible in any court of law,&rdquo; Mr. Mukherjee said.        

The Congress Party political assistant described in the cable as showing off the boxes of cash denied ever meeting an American diplomat.        

&ldquo;No, I did not meet him,&rdquo; the political assistant, Nachiketa Kapur, told NDTV, an all-news channel. &ldquo;There was no cash. I never discussed anything related to the vote of confidence.&rdquo;        

Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
