
BRAS&Iacute;LIA &mdash; Two years ago, President Obama energetically reached out in London to shake the hand of Luiz In&aacute;cio Lula da Silva, who was then the president of Brazil. &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s my man, right here,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said. &ldquo;I love this guy. He&rsquo;s the most popular politician on earth.&rdquo;        

This weekend, in his first trip to South America since taking office, Mr. Obama will encounter a noticeably different style of leader in Dilma Rousseff, Brazil&rsquo;s first female president. But while Mr. Obama openly admired Mr. da Silva&rsquo;s ample political skills, he may find the United States has more to gain from a Brazil led by the no-nonsense Ms. Rousseff, analysts said.        

Less than three months into the job, Ms. Rousseff, once thought to be a potential puppet of Mr. da Silva, has swiftly moved out of the shadow of her mentor. In doing so, Ms. Rousseff, his former chief of staff, has shown she is more likely to pursue foreign policy driven by economic goals than by a desire for the kind of global grandeur that Mr. da Silva often sought, potentially mending some fences with the United States.        

Mr. Obama&rsquo;s trip comes at a time when Brazil&rsquo;s rising economic clout is forcing the United States to stand up and take notice, not least because China has. Brazil, now the world&rsquo;s seventh largest economy, has become an increasingly important trading partner for the United States, whose exports to the South American country are growing twice as fast as overall exports of American goods and services, the White House said.        

After a year of strain between Brazil and the United States &mdash; mostly because of Mr. da Silva&rsquo;s efforts to wade into the contentious standoff between the West and Iran over its nuclear program by seeking to avoid further sanctions when the United States was pushing for them &mdash; Ms. Rousseff seems determined to patch up the relationship.        

&ldquo;Lula seemed intent on proving a point &mdash; don&rsquo;t underestimate Brazil &mdash; at times at the risk of alienating Obama,&rdquo; said Julia E. Sweig, director for Latin American studies at the Council on Foreign Relations. Ms. Rousseff, she added, &ldquo;can now reap the benefits by forging a more productive relationship with respect, but without the drama.&rdquo;        

She said, &ldquo;For no-drama Obama, that style could produce tangible benefits for both countries.&rdquo;        

Mr. Obama is scheduled to land in Bras&iacute;lia on Saturday, the first stop of a three-country, four-day tour of Latin America. After meeting with Ms. Rousseff here, he plans to tour a recently &ldquo;pacified&rdquo; slum in Rio de Janeiro and give a speech there, before traveling to Chile and El Salvador.        

The White House has stressed that the trip coincides with Mr. Obama&rsquo;s domestic agenda of promoting integration in the region as a way to stimulate jobs at home. Ms. Sweig said the president was likely to use it to &ldquo;showcase the democratic stability and growing prosperity of the Americas as a whole at a time when the Middle East is in flux.&rdquo;        

Ms. Rousseff&rsquo;s personal story of torture and imprisonment during Brazil&rsquo;s dictatorship has informed a determination to adopt a stronger stance on human rights in Iran and elsewhere than her predecessor did. American officials have welcomed the shift.        

She promised during a speech in January commemorating the Holocaust that her government would be a &ldquo;tireless defender of the values of equality, human dignity and respect for human rights.&rdquo; In Argentina, she met with Mothers and Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo, the women who symbolize the long search for truth about loved ones &ldquo;disappeared&rdquo; during Argentina&rsquo;s dictatorship.        

Ms. Rousseff has also indicated she wants to improve trade relations with the United States, saying she would reopen bidding on a multibillion-dollar contract to supply fighter jets, giving the American company Boeing a chance to land a deal that, under Mr. da Silva, seemed destined for a French company.        

And while she was elected last October with the unbridled support of Mr. da Silva, a former union leader who became one of Brazil&rsquo;s most popular and charismatic presidents, she has refused to negotiate with unions demanding a higher minimum salary increase than she proposed. She has also put forward about $30 billion in budget cuts.        

&ldquo;No one sees her as Lula&rsquo;s prot&eacute;g&eacute;e any longer,&rdquo; said Amaury de Souza, a political analyst in Rio de Janeiro. &ldquo;Lula has sort of faded into the background.&rdquo;        

Ms. Rousseff, 63, has eschewed press briefings that became almost a daily event under Mr. da Silva. She does not stand for lateness, or distractions like cellphones in meetings. While Mr. da Silva regularly had lunch at home with his wife while in Bras&iacute;lia, Ms. Rousseff usually has a quick lunch in her office, sometimes inviting a minister to share a sandwich with her, according to advisers.        
Jackie Calmes contributed reporting from Washington.
