
MANAMA, Bahrain &mdash; Bahrain arrested six opposition leaders on Thursday, kept the main hospital surrounded by troops and tanks and imposed a nighttime curfew on the center of its capital as it moved to the next stage of its crackdown on reform-seeking protesters, sending the political opposition into crisis.        

A day after troops drove demonstrators from the main square and destroyed a month-old tent city there, popular unrest had been reduced to a few minor skirmishes in villages known as opposition strongholds.        

There was much defiant talk of keeping the struggle going, but also deep distress.        

&ldquo;We feel cornered and are trying to find our way out,&rdquo; said Jalal Fairooz, a leader of the Wefaq opposition party in an interview at party headquarters.        

A group of Bahraini human rights groups appealed to the United Nations for help.        

The two most important opposition leaders arrested were Hassan Mushaima, who had returned from exile in London last month and promised to lead a Shiite Islamist party, and Ebrahim Sharif, a Sunni and leader of a secular party seeking a liberal democracy. Four other leaders were also detained.        

The government issued a statement saying those arrested had &ldquo;called for the downfall of the regime and had intelligence contacts with foreign countries.&rdquo;        

It said that during the recent unrest, those detained had &ldquo;incited for the killing of citizens and the destruction of public and private property.&rdquo;        

King Hamad bin Issa al-Khalifa, who invited Saudi troops in to help and declared three months of martial law, made a surprise visit to the financial district of downtown Manama, the capital, to praise troops and press to restore a sense of normality.        

The stock market reopened but the vast majority of stores were shuttered, rubble still littered the streets and traffic was light. Most people stayed home.        

The Obama administration continued to express distress at the Bahraini crackdown, but the widespread feeling here was that Washington&rsquo;s objections were too soft, and that if the United States had wanted to prevent the events of recent days it could have.        

&ldquo;The American language should have been much tougher,&rdquo; Said Yousif Almuhafda, a spokesman for the Bahrain Center for Human Rights, said.        

Bahrain is an American ally. The Navy&rsquo;s Fifth Fleet is based here and the Khalifa royal family has warm relations with Washington.        

Rather than backing the protesters outright, as it did ultimately in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya, the Obama administration has urged the government here to negotiate with the opposition and pursue change.        

Under Secretary of State William J. Burns told a Senate committee on Thursday that force was not the answer to Bahrain&rsquo;s difficulties, adding, &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve urged both the government and the opposition parties to engage in dialogue.&rdquo;        

But the administration remains committed to the royal family here.        

Bahrain is 70 percent Shiite Muslim and is ruled by a Sunni Muslim elite, meaning that both Iran, the center of Shiism, and Saudi Arabia, the center of Sunni Islam, take a strong interest in its internal struggle.        

While supporting democratic reform, the United States is also worried that change could lead to increased Iranian activity here at a time of rising Iranian influence across the region.        

Matar Ebrahim Ali Matar, a former Bahraini member of Parliament and a leader of Wefaq, the Shiite opposition party, said he feared that his country could become a place of regional conflict.        

He said that the arrival of Saudi troops here this past Monday was inflaming sectarianism, &ldquo;and we don&rsquo;t know how the Iranians will react. We don&rsquo;t want a Saudi or an Iranian regime. Only the United States can stop this.&rdquo;        

A number of Shiites in government resigned in the wake of Wednesday&rsquo;s violent removal of protesters from Pearl Square, including the health minister, six members of the Shura advisory council and about a dozen judges.        

The housing minister said he would boycott government meetings but stopped short of resignation.        

Bahrainis seemed depressed by the turn of events, although many said they would not give up their struggle for greater democracy.        

&ldquo;After what happened, with the government opening fire on its own people, how can you expect things to go back to normal?&rdquo; asked Ali Hussein Jaafer, 23, a business student. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s impossible. The more they go after us, the harder we will resist."        
Nadim Audi contributed reporting.
