
YAMAGATA, Japan &mdash; Neither last week&rsquo;s earthquake, nor the tsunami that followed, nor days without electricity, water or heat could drive 70-year-old Sadako Shiga from her home. What finally caused her to flee was something invisible, but to her mind far more sinister: radiation.        

More Photos &#x00bb;


As explosions and fires crippled a nuclear plant 18 miles from her home in northeast Fukushima Prefecture, Ms. Shiga and her family loaded their car with blankets, water and food and headed to the mountains. &ldquo;We were running for our lives,&rdquo; she said Thursday.        

They are part of a swelling exodus &mdash; almost 10,000 residents, according to the national broadcaster NHK &mdash; who have been spurred by a spreading panic caused in part by distrust that the government is telling the full truth about the nuclear accidents and how widespread the danger is. The human tide is compounding a natural and now man-made calamity that has steadily built since the magnitude 9.0 earthquake and tsunami hit last Friday.        

Their numbers seem certain to grow. According to Fukushima Prefecture officials, some 80,000 people are covered by the Japanese government&rsquo;s evacuation &ldquo;advisory&rdquo; &mdash; a step below an evacuation order &mdash; for areas within 12 miles of the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant, and 6 miles of the Fukushima Daini plant.        

But many, like Ms. Shiga, who live even beyond that zone, have decided for themselves that it is time to leave. And as they go, others follow.        

These &ldquo;nuclear refugees,&rdquo; as they are roughly known, tell tales of arduous journeys, of scrounging to find gasoline amid post-disaster shortages, and arriving with just the clothes on their backs. Many are already traumatized by the tsunami that swept away entire towns in northern Japan, leaving more than 15,000 dead or missing.        

Like Ms. Shiga, they are driven not just by suspicion of the government but also by a deep fear of radiation, in a nation where the word conjures images of the atomic devastation at Hiroshima and Nagasaki. As they flee, they enter a life in limbo, camped out on gym floors with hundreds of others, uncertain when or if they will ever be able to return to their homes.        

None said they had been forced to leave their homes, but the police are expected to enforce the evacuation advisory strictly. Some said authorities had already set up roadblocks, barring anyone from getting back into the evacuation areas.        

Shelters are being established to accommodate the displaced around Fukushima Prefecture, where the plants are. But unlike those in tsunami-hit areas farther north, these are staffed with health officials in plastic body suits and masks who scan new arrivals with Geiger counters to check for radiation.        

Ichiro Yamaguchi, who heads a testing station here in Yamagata, said that many of those checked had low levels of radiation, though no one had yet been found with dangerous levels of contamination.        

&ldquo;If Fukushima becomes another Three-Mile Island or Chernobyl, then we may never be going back,&rdquo; said Akio Sanpei, a 61-year-old acupuncturist who arrived in Yamagata on Thursday from the town of Futaba, within the evacuation zone.        

In Yamagata, a city about 66 miles northwest of the closer of the two plants, a large sports coliseum was converted into a makeshift shelter on Wednesday. Since opening, it has seen a steady stream of new arrivals &mdash; 539 people have entered the shelter, city officials said.        

&ldquo;Space is filling up rapidly, and if more come we&rsquo;ll soon be putting people into hallways and all available space,&rdquo; said Masashi Iwata, a city official in charge of the shelter.        

One who arrived on Thursday was Junya Kikuchi, a 28-year-old construction worker who came with his wife from the city of Soma, about 25 miles north of one plant, Fukushima Daiichi.        

That is far enough to be outside the evacuation zones, and also a broader area in which authorities have told residents to stay indoors to avoid contamination. Still, Mr. Kikuchi said that communities like his were emptying. He said a third of the city&rsquo;s residents had left already. He also decided to leave because of his wife, who is six months pregnant.        

Makiko Inoue contributed reporting.
