
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The American government has terminated its contract with an international accounting firm that was providing technical advice to the Afghan banking system here because of the firm&rsquo;s failure to report signs of trouble at Kabul Bank, the nation&rsquo;s largest financial institution.        

The United States Agency for International Development ended the banking portion of a contract with the firm, Deloitte, which had staff members working as advisers to Afghanistan&rsquo;s Central Bank, according to a report released Wednesday by the inspector general for the aid agency.        

A section of the report outlines the termination of the banking portion of the Deloitte contract as well as other steps that the aid agency plans to take to remedy the situation.        

The 23-page report paints a portrait of an often overwhelmed Central Bank trying to determine what was really going on at Kabul Bank and receiving little support from Deloitte and its predecessor, Bearing Point. Although a huge fraud was under way that diverted $850 million to insiders, numerous red flags were overlooked by the Deloitte team.        

American and other Western advisers are embedded in a number of Afghan ministries and governmental institutions to help officials to gain technical skills and institute professional standards. U.S.A.I.D.&rsquo;s effort to help the banking system started in 2003.        

The report faults Deloitte for failing for two years to report evidence of fraud at Kabul Bank. The report found that, long before the run on the bank in September 2010, there were repeated opportunities &ldquo;to learn about fraudulent activities at the bank&rdquo; but that Deloitte advisers either did not inform the aid agency or did not recognize the warning signs.        

The report also says that Deloitte&rsquo;s lead adviser at the Afghan Central Bank disclosed that he had withheld information about evidence of fraud at Kabul Bank from the aid agency because he wanted to maintain his confidential relationship with officials at the Afghan Central Bank.        

The inspector general&rsquo;s report suggests that evidence of serious problems at Kabul Bank should have been obvious to the aid agency even before Deloitte became involved, as early as November 2008, when one Bearing Point adviser to the Central Bank received two death threats in connection with an on-site examination of Kabul Bank.        

U.S.A.I.D. knew about the death threats and agreed to have Bearing Point stop further involvement in on-site bank examinations, but agency officials failed to see it as a sign of fraud at Kabul Bank.        

In 2009, Bearing Point advisers also saw growing evidence of how Kabul Bank&rsquo;s political clout was allowing it to avoid scrutiny, according to an incident recounted in the inspector general&rsquo;s report.        

While conducting a training exercise for bank examiners from the Afghan Central Bank, the report says, a Bearing Point adviser told the trainees that the Central Bank had the power to remove the management of Kabul Bank. The Afghan trainees were incredulous and told the Bearing Point adviser that the reverse was true. Kabul Bank management &ldquo;can remove us,&rdquo; they said, according to the report.        

The audit by the inspector general also questioned Deloitte&rsquo;s overall effectiveness because for the past seven years the Deloitte staff members, and Bearing Point before Deloitte, had been embedded in the Central Bank to give technical advice, yet they failed to help the bank&rsquo;s supervisors prevent the near collapse of Kabul bank.        

U.S.A.I.D. officials admitted many of the problems both in Deloitte&rsquo;s performance and in the agency&rsquo;s supervision of the contract but underscored that nothing the company could have done would have stopped the fraud.        

&ldquo;It should be made clear that Deloitte could not have stopped the massive fraud that occurred at Kabul Bank,&rdquo; said David McCloud, the acting assistant to the administrator of the Office of Afghanistan and Pakistan Affairs for U.S.A.I.D. in written comments on the inspector general&rsquo;s report.        

Mr. McCloud also said that the aid agency commissioned an assessment that found that the &ldquo;massive fraud&rdquo; at Kabul Bank was &ldquo;a criminal act by the chairman of the board and the C.E.O., aided and abetted by other senior managers and board members.&rdquo;        

Bank officials arranged for loan documentation to be fabricated for fictitious companies, and the money from those loans was then diverted to the bank officials for their personal use.        

The inspector general&rsquo;s report cited data from the aid agency that said that $850 million from fraudulent loans was diverted to Kabul Bank insiders, representing 94 percent of the bank&rsquo;s outstanding loans. In January, The New York Times reported that potential losses at Kabul Bank could be as much as $900 million.        

In response to the inspector general&rsquo;s report, Deloitte issued a statement saying that the aid agency&rsquo;s inspector general did not find any evidence of fraud by Deloitte personnel, and that auditing Kabul Bank&rsquo;s books was never part of its contract with the agency.        

&ldquo;Deloitte has acted appropriately and performed consistent with its contractual obligations and we believe the management comments of U.S.A.I.D. demonstrate this,&rdquo; the company&rsquo;s statement said.        
Alissa J. Rubin reported from Kabul, and James Risen from Washington.
