
PORT SAID, Egypt &mdash; When a few youthful organizers of the Tahrir Square revolution brought their democracy road show to this graceful Suez Canal port one recent evening, an animated throng rushed the tented stage as the speeches ended.        

Some merely wanted to touch the Tahrir icons or take snapshots with them. But many shouted questions in a cacophony that drowned out the chill wind rattling the palm fronds on Port Said&rsquo;s main square:        

&para;&ldquo;Are you worried about Egypt&rsquo;s future?&rdquo;        

&para;&ldquo;Why are the ruling generals so slow in implementing the people&rsquo;s demands?&rdquo;        

&para;&ldquo;Are you running for president?&rdquo;        

&para;&ldquo;What about reforming the education system?        

&para;&ldquo;What about a political party?&rdquo;        

The organizers could not possibly answer them all, but one of them, Amr Hamzawy, a 43-year-old political science professor, responded to the question about a political party. &ldquo;We are still searching for a good name for a party and an idea that attracts people&rsquo;s attention,&rdquo; he said.        

A nucleus of about 15 men and women who helped guide the popular movement that toppled President Hosni Mubarak on Feb. 11 now must complete the unfinished work of the uprising: to dismantle the entire authoritarian system. To do so, they are trying to build a national political organization in minimal time, not least to prevent more established political groups like the Muslim Brotherhood from filling the political vacuum they helped to create.        

Scenes like the one here unfold almost nightly up and down Egypt. &ldquo;They did well on Facebook, but now they have to take it onto the streets,&rdquo; said Michael Meunier, a political organizer and consultant.        

The Tahrir activists inspired millions to pour into the streets in protest, of course. But they are finding that translating a protest movement into votes and a permanent voice in national affairs is a far more grinding task.        

They have no headquarters &mdash; a few camp out in a backpacker hostel in what was once a glamorous apartment house in downtown Cairo that has seen its best days. They meet endlessly in smoke-filled rooms, and sweat to find an original name (on Friday, a coalition of groups settled on the Egyptian Social Democratic Party, which won out over the Square, a reference to Tahrir). They have little money, although offers are coming in. Perhaps most difficult of all, they have to figure out how to present a largely leftist, secular ideology in language that will appeal to a conservative, religious society.        

&ldquo;If you want to change the political life, you have to transform it from one about individuals to one about institutions,&rdquo; Nasser Abdel Hamid, 28, told a rapt audience of about 40 well-to-do men and women in a Cairo hair products salon converted to a political salon for the evening. Instead of the top-down model prevalent in the Arab world, he said, &ldquo;this is the only chance to have a party that grows from the bottom up.&rdquo;        

The young activists demur when asked if they represent the Egyptian people or even the young; rather, they want to carry the revolution forward. They face their first electoral test on Saturday, when the ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces has scheduled a national referendum on eight constitutional amendments to lay the groundwork for legislative elections in June and a presidential vote in August. At nightly rallies the activists try to muster the &ldquo;no&rdquo; vote, to create public pressure to delay the process by at least six months to give the democratic forces more time to organize.        

Barring that, they are preparing a national list of candidates for the parliamentary vote, though they do not expect to be able to pull their disparate supporters into an organized party by then.        

The young liberals have split into two groups, divided mostly by economic issues. The more left-wing have come up with a few planks focused on social justice issues, like pushing for a minimum wage of $200 a month, said Sally Moore, 32, a half-Irish, half-Egyptian Copt psychiatrist. (It is currently about $35 and widely ignored.) They struggle to define a party that can appeal broadly to all Egyptians, including minority groups like the Copts, the Nubians and the Sinai Bedouins.        

Take the idea of being a secular party. In recent years, the jihadists have successfully distorted the word &ldquo;ilmani,&rdquo; a direct translation of &ldquo;secular,&rdquo; into a synonym for &ldquo;kufr&rdquo; or infidel. &ldquo;The word secular does not go over so well,&rdquo; Ms. Moore sighed. Instead, they tell audiences that their goal is a modern, civil, democratic country.        

This tension dates back over 100 years, to the birth of Egypt&rsquo;s independence movement.        

Amr Emam contributed reporting from Port Said, and Mona El-Naggar from Cairo.
