
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti &mdash; Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the former priest who rose to become Haiti&rsquo;s first democratically elected president before being forced into exile twice, returned home on Friday to a raucous welcome from supporters and jitters that he would rattle a presidential runoff intended to settle months of political discord here.        

Thousands of people cheered, danced and blocked streets around the airport upon his arrival. Then they swarmed the grounds of his spacious home, climbing over walls to get on the property, scaling trees to get a look at him and massing on his porch to peer into windows &mdash; once the thick crowd parted enough for him to get out of his car and make it inside. Several people swiped coconuts from his trees and cracked them open during an impromptu celebration under the fierce sun.        

Mr. Aristide, who remained secluded inside, arrived like a conquering hero on a chartered flight from his adopted home in South Africa at 9:05 a.m. local time, stepping onto Haitian soil for the first time since he left the country in 2004 under strong American pressure as rebels closed in on the capital.        

A polarizing but closely followed figure, beloved by the poor but reviled by others as corrupt and autocratic, Mr. Aristide defied American efforts to keep him out, at least until after the runoff on Sunday. The election is the product of months of political wrangling after the fraud and violent protests from the first round of voting in November, and American officials fear that Mr. Aristide&rsquo;s presence alone could disrupt it.        

Juggling five languages as he spoke in the shade of a veranda at the airport, Mr. Aristide did not directly mention the runoff, but he denounced the exclusion of political parties, including his own, Fanmi Lavalas, which officials barred from the voting last year for what was described as paperwork problems.        

&ldquo;The exclusion of Fanmi Lavalas is the exclusion of the Haitian people,&rdquo; he said in Haitian Creole.        

In English, he added: &ldquo;In 1804, the Haitian revolution marked the end of slavery. Today, may the Haitian people end exiles and coup d&rsquo;&eacute;tats, while peacefully moving from social exclusion to inclusion.&rdquo;        

As he left in a dark sport-utility vehicle along with a caravan of cars, marchers followed him into the streets, some chanting, &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t have a candidate, so we are not going to the election.&rdquo;        

A carnival float drove along the road to his house and pounded out a thumping beat, with &ldquo;Welcome Home President Aristide&rdquo; painted on its side and supporters dancing as they marched to his house, where it was evident the security Mr. Aristide&rsquo;s supporters had arranged was quickly overwhelmed.        

He remained in his car for several minutes at his house while a mob of enthusiasts surrounded it. When he was finally able to emerge, a hearty roar went up and the celebrants remained for hours, chanting and sharing their disbelief that he had actually come back until the police began to disperse them.        

Mr. Aristide has said he came back to work on his educational foundation, but Western diplomats working to keep him out of the country were skeptical, given the timing. He arrived on the last official day of campaigning for the two candidates in the runoff.        

President Obama had even called President Jacob Zuma of South Africa, where Mr. Aristide made his home while in exile, in hopes of preventing the former Haitian president&rsquo;s return because of the &ldquo;destabilizing&rdquo; effect it might have &ldquo;in the closing days of the election,&rdquo; said Tommy Vietor, a spokesman for the National Security Council.        

But South African officials, who oversaw Mr. Aristide&rsquo;s residence and security, said they had no cause to hold him. And the Haitian government issued Mr. Aristide a diplomatic passport weeks ago, saying there was no reason he could not come back.        

Some Aristide supporters in the streets and at his house said they would sit out the election, a development that could suppress voter turnout and throw the legitimacy of the victor into question.        

&ldquo;Since he left, things are difficult for us; I hope his return can change the poor situation here,&rdquo; said James Fenelon, 25, who is unemployed and waited outside the airport for Mr. Aristide. &ldquo;I am not going to vote. I have one leader. It&rsquo;s Aristide.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
But others vowed to vote, even though Mr. Aristide would not be on the ballot. Donald Delva, 24, who said that as a child he had lived in a shelter Mr. Aristide founded and who on Friday joined the crowd on his lawn, said he planned to vote Sunday, though he would like guidance from Mr. Aristide.        

&ldquo;Of course they tried to keep us out of the election, but I am still going to vote,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I can wait for Aristide&rsquo;s decision.&rdquo;        

Both candidates in the runoff, Mirlande Manigat, a former first lady, and Michel Martelly, one of the country&rsquo;s most popular singers, held large rallies to finish their campaigns without commenting on Mr. Aristide&rsquo;s return.        

Although both had opposed him in the past &mdash; Mr. Martelly has dismissed him with obscenities &mdash; they both have sought to tap into his well of supporters by declaring in recent days that he had the right to return. Supporters of both mixed in with the crowds flocking to Mr. Aristide&rsquo;s home.        

Elsewhere here, life carried on and people greeted the news with a shrug. There were no reported demonstrations against his return and radio commentators noted that even former opponents had decided to keep silent.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think he is going to have an impact,&rdquo; said Yvon Noel, 60, who had voted for Mr. Aristide but was now busy preparing to serve as a poll worker in Sunday&rsquo;s election. Mr. Martelly, he said, represented the future.        

Mr. Aristide is the second major figure in Haitian history to return in recent months: Jean-Claude Duvalier, the former dictator known as Baby Doc, suddenly returned from exile in January and was quickly confronted with human rights and corruption charges related to his government.        

Mr. Aristide had helped topple his regime before winning office in Haiti&rsquo;s first democratic elections in 1990. But, in a sign of the volatile, fragile politics here, he was ousted in a coup in 1991, then returned to power in 1994 with the help of 20,000 American troops.        

Mr. Aristide was overwhelmingly re-elected in 2000, though opposition parties boycotted it and the business elite disapproved. But by 2004, an armed uprising swelled as he violently suppressed opponents. He resigned, he said, to avoid bloodshed and was whisked from the country on an American jet, later accusing diplomats of kidnapping him.        
