
NEW DELHI &mdash; India&rsquo;s prime minister hit back at allegations that members of his party paid hefty bribes in exchange for support in a crucial vote to salvage the landmark civilian nuclear deal between India and the United States in July 2008, declaring in Parliament on Friday that no member of the Congress Party or his government had broken the law.        

&ldquo;No one from the Congress Party or the government indulged in any unlawful act,&rdquo; Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said, adding that the claims that bribes had been paid were based on a leaked American diplomatic cable obtained by WikiLeaks that is &ldquo;unverified and unverifiable.&rdquo;        

On Thursday, a prominent English-language daily, The Hindu, published the confidential cable, written by an American diplomat several days before a confidence vote that was essential to passing the nuclear deal, a centerpiece of Mr. Singh&rsquo;s agenda.        

The cable said an aide to a senior Congress Party official told an American diplomat that a small regional party whose votes were crucial had already been paid millions of dollars for its support, and showed off chests containing $25 million in cash he said was available for buying more votes.        

Mr. Singh said that a parliamentary committee had already rejected the allegations. &ldquo;The committee concluded there was insufficient evidence to draw any conclusion of bribery,&rdquo; Mr. Singh said. Furthermore, the opposition had tried to persuade voters that the bribery scandal remained an important issue in the May 2009 general election, which Congress won handily.        

&ldquo;It is unfortunate that the opposition continues to raise those charges that have been debated, discussed and rejected by the people of India,&rdquo; he said.        

In the past few months Mr. Singh has battled a relentless onslaught of corruption allegations, sapping what had seemed like one of the most stable and promising Indian governments in at least a generation of much of its power. Crucial issues, like deeper economic reforms and the remaking of creaky social safety net programs, have been largely sidelined as the government has been besieged by allegations of graft and bungling.        
