
TOKYO &mdash; For a country that is known for its industrial robots, advanced cellphones and hybrid vehicles, Japan&rsquo;s efforts to cool the hobbled nuclear reactors in Fukushima Prefecture have seemed, at least to a world watching on television, to be decidedly low-tech.        

In the days after the earthquake and tsunami damaged the power plants, employees from Tokyo Electric Power Company, which owns them, struggled largely out of the cameras&rsquo; view. But after high levels of radiation made it too dangerous for workers to get near some of the reactors, the power company, which is known as Tepco, and the government resorted to a series of increasingly desperate and dramatic steps.        

The company tried flooding the stricken reactors with seawater. The police sprayed them with hoses. Then military helicopters used big buckets to drop water on them. On Friday, fire trucks with high-powered water cannon arrived. There are efforts to run a giant extension cord to the plant to power a cooling system.        

With all of Japan&rsquo;s technological prowess, was this the best it could do? Were these Rube Goldberg remedies, cobbled together because everything else failed? Or were they canny solutions to an increasingly dire problem? Just as important, can the measures cool not only the reactors but also the anxiety of Japanese who suspect that they are in harm&rsquo;s way?        

The answers depend on where you sit.        

A number of nuclear power and crisis management experts say that Tepco and the government were woefully unprepared to deal with the explosions at the plants. They were caught off guard by the impact of the earthquake and tsunami, the experts say, and the ad hoc nature of the response is a result.        

&ldquo;They are attacking the problem in a piecemeal fashion,&rdquo; said Atsuyuki Sassa, the former director general of the Cabinet Security Affairs Office in Japan. &ldquo;This isn&rsquo;t crisis management, but a management crisis.&rdquo;        

More sympathetic observers, including some Japanese, take the government at its word: no one could have adequately planned for the twin blows of one of the biggest earthquakes on record and the tsunami it created. The response may seem scattershot, they say, but that is a function of the unpredictable nature of nuclear reactors when disaster strikes.        

Appearances count, too, they say. The Japanese government has tried to reassure its jittery citizens that though the problems are severe, every resource possible is being thrown at them. In that light, the helicopters and water cannon do not appear to be ham-handed actions in the face of a runaway disaster, but signs that no effort is being spared.        

Politicians have tried to underscore their determination to tackle the crisis by discarding their blue suits and neckties and donning the jackets favored by police officers and engineers. Even the governor of the Bank of Japan, Masaaki Shirakawa, whose role in the crisis has largely been limited to pumping money into the economy, has worn one at a news conference.        

&ldquo;The government would like to show it is doing whatever it can do,&rdquo; said Masahiro Horie, the dean of international affairs at Japan&rsquo;s National Graduate Institute for Policy Studies, who worked for 35 years in the government. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s natural that they try to keep people calm, do everything possible and not give any information that might cause a panic.&rdquo;        

The Japanese are not alone, of course, in having to improvise on the run. Last summer, Americans could only watch as BP and a host of oil industry experts tried &mdash; and repeatedly failed &mdash; to get control of a gushing well on the floor of the Gulf of Mexico. BP officials initially thought they could seal the well in a way that would let them save it. When that proved impossible, they resorted to more drastic steps, including pumping in cement to seal the well &mdash; nearly five months after the rig explosion that created the spill.        

A solution to the Fukushima catastrophe remains elusive. After failing on their own, Tepco officials have been forced to seek help outside the company. Having the police, firefighters and the Self-Defense Force join the effort has reassured some people, but others consider those moves as signs that the emergency is spiraling out of control.        

On Friday, the Japanese nuclear safety agency raised its assessment of the problem&rsquo;s severity &mdash; ranked on a 7-level international scale &mdash; to 5 from 4. Level 4 denotes incidents with local consequences; Level 5 indicates broader consequences. For comparison, the partial meltdown of the reactor at Three Mile Island near Harrisburg, Pa., in 1979 was rated a 5.        

&ldquo;Some people might think the arrival of the Self-Defense Forces and helicopters mean that strong measures are being applied, but I think it&rsquo;s the opposite,&rdquo; said Tadae Takubo, who taught international politics and national security at Kyorin University in Tokyo. &ldquo;They seem like desperate measures to me. It&rsquo;s all too late.&rdquo;        

Some of the Tepco workers, police officers and others who have fought to cool the reactors may have been exposed to high levels of radiation. In a nation that values selflessness and determination, it is not surprising that they have been praised in Japanese news reports as heroes for their willingness to sacrifice their health for the sake of the nation.        

Though their efforts have yet to succeed, the fact that someone is doing something &mdash; anything &mdash; is reassuring to some.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know &mdash; I&rsquo;m a little skeptical about dropping water out of a helicopter,&rdquo; said Akiko Sato, 28, an office worker who was shopping in Tokyo&rsquo;s Ginza district. &ldquo;But I like to think what they&rsquo;re doing with the water cannons might be useful. I think they&rsquo;re really trying.&rdquo;        
David Jolly contributed reporting.
