
Jiri Dienstbier, one of Eastern Europe&rsquo;s leading dissidents, who with Vaclav Havel helped topple Communism in Czechoslovakia, died Saturday in Prague. He was 73.        

His death was announced by Czech state television. The cause was not specified.        

Mr. Dienstbier&rsquo;s death marked the passing of a journalist, raconteur, strategist and politician whose life encapsulated an era in which hopes once invested in Communism gave way to disillusionment, outright dissent, punishment and, finally, the crumbling of Communist rule.        

In the case of Mr. Dienstbier, who became foreign minister after the so-called Velvet Revolution in 1989, that first meant enjoying the coveted privilege of working abroad as a journalist for official radio before being expelled from the Communist Party for supporting the crushed reforms of the 1968 Prague Spring.        

Demoted to menial work, he was among the first to sign the human rights document Charter 77, and from 1979 to 1982 he was jailed with Mr. Havel for being a group spokesman.        

&ldquo;We experienced so much together,&rdquo; Mr. Havel said in a personal written statement on his Web site (vaclavhavel.cz). &ldquo;Jiri Dienstbier played an important role in the history of Czech modern journalism, politics and opposition movements. Even in the toughest moments, his good humor was a great encouragement for us all the time.&rdquo;        

Born on April 20, 1937, the son of a doctor in Kladno, west of Prague, Mr. Dienstbier joined the Communist Party in 1958. Within it, he had a good career into the late 1960s, with postings in the United States, Western Europe and Asia.        

Travel was highly restricted for most people living behind the Iron Curtain, and Mr. Dienstbier&rsquo;s postings and work gave him an eye, experience and fluency in English that later eased his contacts with foreigners interested in Charter 77.        

A perennially cheerful, slightly rumpled presence, Mr. Dienstbier found his life changed by the 1968 Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia. Like tens of thousands of others, he was expelled from the Communist Party for criticizing the brutal end to the reforms of Alexander Dubcek.        

The crushing of the Prague Spring, which dominated television screens in Western Europe and the United States, caught the attention of a postwar generation that sought more openness in every sphere of life.        

Western governments eventually ceded to this mood. In Eastern Europe, Poland and Czechoslovakia were the two countries where young people most tried to follow suit. In Poland, the government incited an anti-Semitic campaign to tarnish the opposition, leading to an exodus of thousands of Jews.        

In Czechoslovakia, a generation experienced the deadening of the Prague Spring. Some artists, like the film director Milos Forman, left. Others stayed, like the writer Bohumil Hrabal, who immortalized the menial labor that thousands had to accept in his short novel &ldquo;Too Loud a Solitude,&rdquo; in which Hanta, an old man operating a giant compactor for 35 years, rescues rare books, which he reads and hoards at home.        

For his part, Mr. Dienstbier shrugged off intimidation and even imprisonment after signing Charter 77. In the same spirit, after becoming foreign minister, he tried to shrug off formality, eschewing neckties wherever possible.        

After leaving the ministry, he served as special rapporteur for the United Nations Human Rights Commission in the former Yugoslavia and lectured at several universities worldwide. In 2008, he was elected to the Czech Senate.        

He is survived by his wife, Jirina, a son and two daughters.        
