
BRAS&Iacute;LIA &mdash; With fears of radiation spreading in Japan after the devastating earthquake there, Chile and the United States signed an accord on Friday intended to help Chile develop a nuclear energy program.        

Chile, a country that imports much of its energy, is considering building nuclear reactors to try to fill an expected energy gap in the next few decades. But the developing nuclear crisis in Japan has complicated the debate in Chile, which suffered an 8.8-magnitude earthquake last year that caused widespread destruction.        

The three-page accord focuses on training nuclear engineers, not on building reactors. It calls for cooperation in the areas of &ldquo;operation and utilization of nuclear research reactors,&rdquo; safety, radioactive waste management and scientific exchange.        

Chile&rsquo;s foreign minister and United States Ambassador Alejandro Wolff signed the accord, as had been previously scheduled, on Friday, and American and Chilean officials denied that its importance had been downgraded because of the concerns stemming from the Japanese disaster. It had been expected to be a highlight of President Obama&rsquo;s one-day visit to Chile on Monday.        

Chile&rsquo;s mining and energy minister, Laurence Golborne, signed a similar accord with France last month. But Mr. Golborne said Tuesday that the government needed to carefully study the situation in Japan before committing to a nuclear program.        

&ldquo;We may decide we don&rsquo;t want this type of energy and we will have to analyze other sources of energy,&rdquo; he said.        

Chile&rsquo;s senate president had lobbied to abandon the nuclear accord, and some lawmakers, frustrated at not being shown the wording in advance, have called Mr. Golborne to testify about it in hearings about Chile&rsquo;s energy future. That appearance was delayed until after Mr. Obama&rsquo;s visit next week.        

Chilean officials are concerned that limits on the amount of energy the country may import and its outdated power grid will compromise the rapid growth of its economy. Chile will require a doubling of its energy supplies over the next 12 years if demand for electricity continues to grow at 6 percent a year, said Jorge Zanelli, a physicist who carried out a study of nuclear energy in 2007 for the previous Chilean government. More than 60 percent of that increase would have to be met with energy from fossil fuels if nuclear energy is not part of the equation, Mr. Zanelli said.        

President Sebasti&aacute;n Pi&ntilde;era has also said the government should consider more sustainable renewable sources like solar, wind and geothermal power.        

Critics of nuclear energy said what happened in Japan should be a warning call to Chile.        

&ldquo;Japan&rsquo;s nightmare this past week has been very timely for the Chilean government and society to understand what the real risks and vulnerability involved for seismic countries wishing to develop nuclear power,&rdquo; said Sara Larra&iacute;n, executive director of Chile Sustentable, an environmental group.        
Pascale Bonnefoy contributed reporting from Santiago, Chile.
