
Carel Boshoff, who established Orania, the community in South Africa that remains the country&rsquo;s last bastion of white separatism, died on Wednesday at his home there. He was 83.        

The cause was cancer, The Associated Press reported.        

Mr. Boshoff, who held a doctorate of divinity and for a time lectured in theology at the University of Pretoria, founded Orania, in South Africa&rsquo;s sparsely populated Northern Cape province, in 1991, purchasing with private funds an abandoned village and 1,167 acres of scrubland along the Orange River.        

The village, which had been created for workers building a dam, had 150 clapboard houses, a water recycling plant, a community center and a post office.        

It was a time when apartheid was crumbling and white rule in South Africa was headed toward its final dismantling in the elections of 1994, and Mr. Boshoff, who saw himself as a separatist but not a racist, envisioned Orania as a haven for the preservation of the culture of Afrikaners, the descendants of the Dutch and the French who settled in South Africa in the 17th century.        

Mr. Boshoff was married to the daughter of Hendrik F. Verwoerd, the separatist ideologue who created much of the legislation that established apartheid and who served as the South African prime minister from 1958 until his assassination in 1966.        

Like his father-in-law, Mr. Boshoff espoused a policy of separate development, economically and culturally, for blacks and whites, and argued that apartheid was not immoral. Perhaps unlike Mr. Verwoerd, however, he recognized that its fall was inevitable. With the knowledge that the governing minority was not going to endure forever in South Africa, Mr. Boshoff had for years advocated that &ldquo;white self-determination&rdquo; could be perpetuated only in a well-defined homeland for whites.        

Orania, which has fewer than 1,000 residents and is known for being largely self-sustaining, has maintained a wary peace with the rest of the nation. Other than delivery people or utility company workers, blacks rarely appear in Orania, though black national leaders have occasionally made their way there.        

The current president, Jacob Zuma, visited Orania last fall and met with Mr. Boshoff and his son, also named Carel Boshoff, who is the town&rsquo;s mayor. The president&rsquo;s office issued a statement afterward saying he had been interested in the town&rsquo;s &ldquo;independent development&rdquo; and referred to it as &ldquo;the model of locally generated economy.&rdquo;        

A more well-publicized event took place in 1995, when Nelson Mandela, South Africa&rsquo;s first black president, stopped in and had tea with Mr. Verwoerd&rsquo;s widow. Mr. Boshoff said at the time that most residents of Orania welcomed the visit.        

&ldquo;I know him quite well,&rdquo; Mr. Boshoff said of Mr. Mandela. &ldquo;He is a gentleman.&rdquo;        

According to the South African newspaper The Citizen, Mr. Boshoff was born Nov. 9, 1927, in Nylstroom, north of Pretoria, in what was then the Transvaal region and is now the province of Limpopo. After earning a degree in theology, he worked as a missionary in black townships, including Soweto, for the Dutch Reformed Church before returning to school in Pretoria. He received his doctorate in 1968 and became a professor of missionary science.        

In the 1970s and early 1980s he was chairman of the South African Bureau of Racial Affairs, a conservative organization that served as a government advisory board, and he was a leader of Broederbond, an influential society of Afrikaners whose aim was to further the cause of Afrikaner nationalism in South Africa.        

The Citizen reported that in addition to his wife, Anna, and his son Carel, Mr. Boshoff is survived by five other children.        
