
MEXICO CITY &mdash; After a series of leaked diplomatic cables led to bitter complaints from President Felipe Calder&oacute;n of Mexico, the American ambassador to Mexico has resigned, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said Saturday.        

The ambassador, Carlos Pascual, a Cuban-born expert in failed states, had initially seemed to weather the criticism by Mr. Calder&oacute;n. The friction intensified this month after the WikiLeaks Web site published a December cable that quoted Mr. Pascual questioning the Mexican Army&rsquo;s reluctance to act on American intelligence about a drug cartel leader. (The cartel leader was later captured by the Mexican Navy.)        

Mr. Calder&oacute;n said he was particularly perturbed by comments he interpreted as implying &ldquo;Mexican soldiers aren&rsquo;t brave enough.&rdquo; But as recently as last week, Mr. Pascual could be seen visiting the border city of Ciudad Ju&aacute;rez and praising the bond between American and Mexican authorities.        

Eventually, however, Mrs. Clinton said in a statement, Mr. Pascual concluded that he must leave &ldquo;to ensure the strong relationship between our two countries and to avert issues raised by President Calder&oacute;n that could distract from the important business of advancing our bilateral interests.&rdquo;        

To some degree, the damaged relations between Mr. Pascual and the Mexican president had already become a distraction: Mr. Calder&oacute;n, whose office had no comment on Saturday night, made clear for weeks that he believed Mr. Pascual should be recalled.        

In Mr. Calder&oacute;n&rsquo;s first broadside, published Feb. 22 in the newspaper El Universal, he said the WikiLeaks cables from the American embassy here revealed &ldquo;ignorance&rdquo; about Mexican law enforcement.        

He reiterated his frustration during a trip to Washington to meet with President Obama this month, and countless Mexican newspaper columns have since focused on the issue.        

Some political analysts have said that the leaked cables from Mr. Pascual and other American officials &mdash; describing bureaucratic snags and fears of cartel control of Ju&aacute;rez &mdash; reflected what could already be found in Mexican news accounts.        

Others, such as the historian Lorenzo Meyer, have pointed out that Mexican presidents often attack the American ambassador when they feel pressured by the United States. Since gunmen killed an American agent outside of Mexico City last month, that pressure has increased, according to American and Mexican officials.Mr. Pascual is one of the most senior officials yet to be transferred in the wake of a WikiLeaks release. The American ambassador to Libya, Gene Cretz, was withdrawn in January after cables were published in which he detailed idiosyncrasies of the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

Mrs. Clinton said Mr. Pascual will leave Mexico for a new job in the State Department, after working on the transition to his successor.        
