
JUBA, Sudan  &mdash;  It&rsquo;s not every day that a beleaguered, marginalized and persecuted people get a chance to vote for their own freedom. On Sunday, southern Sudanese did.        

Starting in the cool hours of the night, long before the polls even opened, people across this region began lining up at polling stations to cast their votes in a historic referendum on whether to declare independence. Jubilant crowds made clear which was the overwhelmingly popular choice.        

&ldquo;I feel like I&rsquo;m going to a new land,&rdquo; beamed Susan Duku, a southern Sudanese woman who works for the United Nations.        

As the sun cleared the horizon and the voting began, the streets of Juba, the capital of southern Sudan, broke into a street party. Women were literally skipping around the polls. Young men thumped on drums. Others were wrapped in flags.        

People were hollering, singing, hugging, kissing, smacking high-fives and dancing as if they never wanted the day to end,  despite the sun beating down and voting lines that snaked for blocks.        

Southern Sudan has suffered a lot, and after years of civil war, oppression and displacement, many people here saw the vote as an unprecedented chance at self-determination. The referendum ballot offered two choices, unity with northern Sudan or secession. Unity was  represented on the ballot by a drawing of two clasped hands. Secession was a single open hand. Many people rely on these symbols: more than three-quarters of southern Sudanese adults cannot read.        

The referendum is a result of a  conflict that lasted for decades and an American-backed peace treaty in 2005, which granted the south the right to self-determination.        

For Mrs. Duku, the choice was simple. &ldquo;Separation,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;One hundred percent, plus.&rdquo;        

Many people here spoke in almost biblical terms about lifting themselves out of bondage. Sudan is a deeply divided country, and for decades, the southern third, which is mostly Christian and animist, has been dominated by Arab rulers from the north.        

The Arab government prosecuted a vicious war against southerners, who have been chafing for their own separate state even before Sudan&rsquo;s independence in 1956. The government forces and their proxy militias burned down villages, slaughtered civilians and even kidnapped southern children and sold them to slave  traders for a life of involuntary servitude in the north. More than two million people were killed and many of the tactics used to suppress the insurrection in the south would be repeated in Darfur, in Sudan&rsquo;s west.        

Voters on Sunday spoke of this legacy, and the poverty that has accompanied it. That was in evidence all around. Most polling places were shoddily built schools or government offices with bald concrete floors, no lights, crumbly walls and rusted metal roofs. If southern Sudan becomes independent, it will be one of the poorest countries on earth.        

&ldquo;But better to be free,&rdquo; said Simon Matiek, a student.        

The voting will continue for the next week. Preliminary reports indicated that it was going smoothly.        

&ldquo;I would say it&rsquo;s very orderly and very enthusiastic,&rdquo; said former President Jimmy Carter, in Juba to monitor the election.        

The votes are expected to take at least a week to count. And if 60 percent of the registered voters cast ballots and the majority choose secession, then the hard work begins. Before Sudan can amicably split into two &mdash; the south plans to declare independence in July &mdash; several sticky issues need to be resolved. The top two are sharing Sudan&rsquo;s oil and demarcating the border, including the Abyei area, which both the north and south claim.        

&ldquo;A successful agreement could prevent conflict, whereas if Abyei and other issues remain unresolved, war becomes much more likely,&rdquo; said John Prendergast, of the antigenocide Enough Project.        

Northern and southern forces have skirmished before in Abyei, and United Nations officials said nomads aligned to the north ambushed several southern soldiers on Saturday, though no casualty figures were available.        

In Juba, though, things stayed peaceful &mdash; rowdy, but peaceful. One man, who clearly had been celebrating with fortified beverages the night before, staggered around a polling station blowing an  instrument fashioned from a cow&rsquo;s horn and rubber tubing.        

Most polling places were packed, with lines thousands of people long. Election officials said the turnout was enormous. Many voters had been standing in place since 2 a.m., even though the polls did not open until 8.        

&ldquo;Today will go down in history,&rdquo; said William Lukudu, who arrived before dawn decked out in a natty gray suit, bright green shirt and purple tie. &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t want to be left out.&rdquo;        

Suits, dresses, high heels, plastic pearls  &mdash;  voters were dressed in their Sunday best.        

At the tomb of John Garang, who died in a helicopter crash in 2005 and is considered the father of southern Sudan&rsquo;s modern liberation movement, the atmosphere was carnival-like, with troupes of dancers jumping around in faux leopard-skin loincloths and politicians, soldiers and celebrities celebrating together.        

&ldquo;Who is that man talking?&rdquo; a Sudanese journalist asked, gesturing to a white man with a group  of reporters around him. When told it was George Clooney, a movie star,  the Sudanese journalist looked confused and walked away.        

Some voters, though, seemed contemplative. They spoke of family members who had died. Some spoke of potential future problems within the south.        

Laraka Machar, who had just finished college in Uganda and was looking for work in Juba, explained how he had deep reservations about the leadership in the south and the rise of ethnic politics. The south has been semiautonomous and running most of its own affairs since 2005.        

&ldquo;The people in the government give opportunities to their own friends, their own people,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Machar is a Nuer, considered the second most powerful ethnic group in southern Sudan, behind the Dinka. &ldquo;Corruption is the order of the day,&rdquo; he continued.        

Still, he said, he was voting for secession. &ldquo;This is my own country, my own land,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And I can&rsquo;t sell out my own land because of this.&rdquo;        

Jacob Garang, 27, was a former child soldier who joined the rebellion when he was 12. On Sunday, he voted for secession.        

&ldquo;This is one of the unique days in my life,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I have to thank God that I am alive and that I found this day and I found myself in it.&rdquo;        
Josh Kron contributed reporting.
