
TOKYO &mdash; As bodies are still being pulled from the rubble, as the effects of a nuclear crisis spread, as many companies and schools remain closed if they are standing at all, is it time to play baseball?        

Just 10 days after an earthquake and a tsunami combined to upend Japan, the country is uneasily starting to debate how and when life will get back to normal, and whether it is appropriate to try so soon. And as the United States did in the days after the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, the Japanese are contemplating whether baseball can play a role in comforting a reeling nation.        

In a country where public disputes are muted and agreements are often choreographed behind closed doors, the dialogue has been uncharacteristically emotional and confrontational, with fans accusing teams of selfishness, owners publicly split, normally docile players challenging their bosses and government ministers bashing the overlords of the game.        

The six-team Central League, including the dominant Yomiuri Giants, favored opening the season on time. If nothing else, hundreds of stadium workers would continue to collect paychecks. Ryozo Kato, the commissioner of Nippon Professional Baseball, invoked the palliative effects of the return of baseball to New York after the attacks, an analogy that irked sportswriters and led some fans to call for games to be boycotted.        

But while Lower Manhattan and the Pentagon were directly hit in 2001, the damage and disruption in Japan is far more extensive, and has occurred just before the start of the season, scheduled for Friday.        

Like the New Orleans Saints after Hurricane Katrina in 2005, the Tohoku Rakuten Golden Eagles from Sendai are now essentially homeless and appear destined to play games in Kobe, which suffered its own major earthquake in 1995. The Chiba Lotte Marines, outside Tokyo, may need to make repairs as well. Some foreign players have gone home, spooked by the potential fallout from disabled nuclear reactors in Fukushima. Japanese players from the hard-hit Tohoku region have relocated families or rushed back to help those still there.        

Even here in Tokyo, where damage was minimal, rolling blackouts to save energy have disrupted everyday life, throwing into question whether fans will be able to attend games.        

&ldquo;Honestly, I cannot think about encouraging people by playing baseball now,&rdquo; Yusei Kikuchi, the Seibu Lions pitcher who grew up in Iwate Prefecture, told reporters. &ldquo;The field I used to practice at, the beach I visited with my family, everything is gone now.&rdquo;        

Players from the Seibu Lions, Yokohama Bay Stars and other teams have helped collect donations near train stations. There was talk of a player strike, a remote possibility, but a sign of how divisive the issue has become.        

After much public handwringing, the executives who run the game announced a solution on Saturday that spoke volumes about the art of compromise and sacrifice in Japan.        

The Central League will open its season on March 29, four days late. After being publicly chastised as insensitive wastrels, the teams will play only day games during the first week of the season; lights at stadiums in the affected areas will be dimmed at games played at night or indoors. All games will end after nine innings, which is sure to lead to a surge in unsatisfying tie scores.        

&ldquo;We have not changed our feelings toward helping revitalize the community by showing you players who are working hard,&rdquo; the Central League said in a letter to fans. But &ldquo;baseball will be different this year. We hope that you will understand the changes we need to make to the games in order to conserve energy.&rdquo;        

The less popular Pacific League, meanwhile, will start play on April 12. At Tohoku Rakuten&rsquo;s stadium in Sendai, walls and walkways are cracked, lounges and suites are flooded and the ceilings in the team offices fell. Even if construction crews could be found, repairs would take weeks, if not months.        

&ldquo;In some cases, we can&rsquo;t get experts into the stadium to look at things to get a real estimate of how long it will take,&rdquo; said Marty Kuehnert, an adviser to the Eagles who fled Sendai for Kyoto.        

Despite the obvious hardship ahead for the team, he and other baseball experts believe the Eagles could become the face of the nation&rsquo;s renewal, especially to beleaguered residents in Tohoku. If the team ends up having a Cinderella season, &ldquo;the roof will come off the place,&rdquo; said Bob Whiting, the author of &ldquo;You Gotta Have Wa,&rdquo; a seminal book on Japanese baseball. &ldquo;It would be an appropriate end to the season.&rdquo;        

There is a precedent. In 1995, the Orix Blue Wave, the longtime second division club that plays in Kobe, surprised many by winning the Pacific League, leading grown men to cry in the streets. The team&rsquo;s slogan that year was &ldquo;Gambare Kobe,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Go Kobe,&rdquo; to encourage fans. The team&rsquo;s star player, Ichiro Suzuki, became a media sensation. Mr. Suzuki, now an outfielder for the Seattle Mariners, donated 100 million yen (about $1.2 million) to the Red Cross in Japan last week for relief efforts.        

&ldquo;I was in Kobe when the big earthquake hit in 1995, and for the first time in my life I experienced the fear of death,&rdquo; Mr. Suzuki told ESPN in 2008. &ldquo;So 1995 was a very important year for me and the people of Kobe.&rdquo;        

Despite jitters about resuming play in 2001, the first game in New York after the attacks turned out to be a galvanizing moment. Police officers, firefighters and others involved in the rescue effort at ground zero marched on the field. Bagpipes were played. The Mets wore hats with F.D.N.Y. and N.Y.P.D. logos.        

When Mike Piazza hit what turned out to be the game-winning home run, &ldquo;it helped everyone realize that we could move on,&rdquo; said Bobby Valentine, the Mets&rsquo; manager at the time. &ldquo;It was the beginning of the road to recovery here in the States.&rdquo;        

Still, Mr. Valentine, who went on to manage in Japan for six years, believes that the situation here is different. The level of destruction is greater, and uncertainty about the fate of the hobbled nuclear reactors remains. &ldquo;Baseball, being such a central part of the Japanese character, has to help, but it has to help in a timely fashion.&rdquo;        
Ayasa Aizawa contributed reporting from Tokyo, and David Waldstein from Florida.
