
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti &mdash; Many of the ballots arrived late and some voters were turned away, but the problems appeared minimal in a presidential runoff Sunday to decide whether a bawdy Carnival singer running as a populist or a former first lady rooted in the establishment will lead this country for the next five years.        

It was a far cry from the first round of voting in November, when chaos and confusion reigned and frustrated voters choosing among 19 candidates trashed polling stations, adding to a long history of political strife here.        

This time, by midday, most of the snags in delivering voting materials appeared resolved and, despite reports of sporadic problems and violence in other parts of the country, voting proceeded in an orderly manner across the capital, with officials extending the balloting here by an hour in response to the morning delays.        

The turnout was unclear, however. Some stations had long lines, but others, after an initial crowd, had thinned out to a steady stream or even a trickle. And the counting of the ballots, another opportunity for the kind of fraud and disarray that undermined the first round of voting, was still to come.        

&ldquo;Over all,&rdquo; said Kenneth H. Merten, the American ambassador here, the election &ldquo;was pretty good. If the counting goes as well as the voting appears to have gone, we should be in a good place.&rdquo;        

The country has been on edge over the arrival of Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the nation&rsquo;s first democratically elected president, who returned from seven years in exile in South Africa on Friday to a raucous welcome. That left many wondering whether his supporters would sit out the election, depressing turnout and throwing doubt on the legitimacy of the victor.        

Mr. Aristide, beloved by the poor but accused of corruption and violent suppression of opponents while in office, denounced the exclusion of his political party from the race when he arrived at the airport. He has not made any other public statements.        

In at least one polling station in an Aristide stronghold, many voters showed up, enough for vendors selling beans, frozen juice and plantain chips to set up shop.        

Eder Joseph, 27, described himself as a passionate Aristide man, but he said he voted anyway because he was tired of living in a tent camp since the January 2010 earthquake destroyed his home and displaced him along with more than a million others. &ldquo;We have to change the future of this country,&rdquo; he said.        

Still, other people turned up at polling sites with their voting cards but did not find their names on the required lists, or could not read well enough to determine if they were at the right place. Lenet Demolin, 33, took a 45-minute taxi ride to his designated polling place only to find confusion on the voter rolls. He was denied a ballot and the chance to vote for Michel Martelly, the Carnival entertainer who became the political phenomenon of this election season.        

&ldquo;I wanted to vote for change because nothing is being done with the people in government in this country,&rdquo; Mr. Demolin said. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t have a job, and I have a wife and two kids who I am responsible for.&rdquo;        

Others simply did not vote, skeptical of the process or because they had not been able to replace identification lost in the quake.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think it&rsquo;s going to change anything anyway,&rdquo; said Esnel Luxama, 33, a vegetable vendor who lost her voting card when her house collapsed in the quake and said she had not been able to replace it.        

With Haiti still on its knees after the earthquake and a continuing cholera epidemic, both candidates in the runoff &mdash; Mr. Martelly and Mirlande Manigat, a former first lady &mdash; offer similar promises to expand education, streamline the delivery of billions in international aid and revamp the economy.        

They raised eyebrows with plans to reinstate the armed forces, which were disbanded by Mr. Aristide in 1995 after he was returned to power by American troops following a coup in the first of his two terms.        

But the two candidates in the runoff offer widely disparate styles, with Ms Manigat the mother hen to Mr. Martelly&rsquo;s rebellious son.        

Mr. Martelly, 50, is hoping large crowds of young people at his rallies will help complete his transformation from one of the most popular entertainers here &mdash; known as T&egrave;t Kale (bald head) and Sweet Micky, he frequently disrobed on stage and has admitted to past crack cocaine use &mdash; into a respected, suit-wearing chief executive.        

Ms. Manigat, 70, who was the top vote-getter in the first round in November, has portrayed herself as the adult in the race whose background as a college professor and administrator would make her a sober manager of the billions of dollars of international aid pledged to Haiti. Much of that aid has been stalled by donors&rsquo; doubts over the current president, Ren&eacute; Pr&eacute;val, who is completing a second term and is barred from running again.        

The runoff was delayed for months after widespread fraud in the first round put Mr. Pr&eacute;val&rsquo;s choice as successor, Jude C&eacute;lestin, in the runoff with Ms. Manigat. When announced, those results spurred violent street demonstrations, largely by Mr. Martelly&rsquo;s supporters, and an international investigation that eventually led to Mr. C&eacute;lestin leaving the race in favor of Mr. Martelly.        

This time, the United States and other nations had more than 200 observers watching to see if pledged improvements by Haitian authorities were carried out, including replacing and revising training for poll workers to avoid the chaos and confusion of the first round, when many voters were turned away.        

Still, diplomats said that much of the training was done at the last minute and that they were much more cautious this time in their optimism that a corner had been turned. Election results are not expected until the end of the month.        

&ldquo;There are small problems, but the electoral council has done work to overcome the problems of last time, and so we remain vigilant and hopeful,&rdquo; said Jose Maria Vasquez Ocampo, the Argentine ambassador, as he visited an orderly polling place downtown that was the scene of confusion in November.        

In a twist to an already complicated political climate, a spokeswoman for another popular figure here, the Haitian-American pop star Wyclef Jean, said Mr. Jean had been treated for a gunshot wound to his hand late Saturday.        

The spokeswoman, Cindy Tanenbaum, said she had no other information and the police later cast doubt, with a top official telling Reuters that Mr. Jean had suffered a cut on this hand from glass, not a bullet.        

Mr. Jean, who had previously mounted a campaign of his own and is now a supporter of Mr. Martelly, later voted in the afternoon.        
