
NASHVILLE &mdash; At 8 a.m. on an unusually frigid Sunday here, Apai Mabior was standing in a long line shivering.        

Mr. Mabior, 31, had driven all night, making a 10-hour trip from Jacksonville, Fla., to the closest place he could cast his vote in the referendum on whether southern Sudan should separate from the north and become an independent country. &ldquo;With no car, we would have even made it by foot, you know,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Mabior, like many waiting behind him, left southern Sudan &mdash; he at age 7. He had been tending his family&rsquo;s cattle when northern troops attacked his village, so he walked 15 days to a refugee camp in Ethiopia. He eventually became one of the young male members of the Sudanese diaspora in the United States, known as the Lost Boys.        

Now, here at the Lost Boys Center and Gallery, he was joining 915 others from as far away as Mississippi and Georgia to cast a vote that would be recorded by polling officials in Sudan.        

&ldquo;This opportunity will never come again in my lifetime,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;If I vote, I can keep alive the people who have died for this. They will not see this day, but they will feel it.&rdquo;        

At the other official polling places set up across the United States, Sudanese expatriates also cast votes, after trips in packed vans and family cars.        

In all, 8,789 Sudanese expatriates registered to vote in Omaha; Phoenix; Dallas; Seattle; Chicago; Boston; Alexandria, Va.; and Nashville, according to David Buom Choat, a political affairs officer with the Government of South Sudan&rsquo;s missions abroad office in Washington. He was in Nashville to monitor the voting.        

&ldquo;I will eat the fruit of my struggle,&rdquo; Jacob Ruei, who drove from Harrisburg, Pa., to Alexandria, said by telephone. &ldquo;It is a payback to those who have passed.&rdquo;        

Although the ballot was secret, it was difficult to find one person at the Nashville center who wanted to keep the country unified.        

Like in Sudan, the voting will continue through the end of the week, although a majority of southern Sudanese living in the United States were expected to vote Sunday.        

Friends who had met in refugee camps were reunited, lost cousins were discovered. But for most, it was a deeply moving day of independence after decades of civil war and millions of lives lost.        

Josephine Pita, her finger still wet with blue ink, leaned against a wall and wept after she had voted. Mr. Choat reached out to comfort her. &ldquo;You have done it, you have done it,&rdquo; he said.        

The United States registration and voting process had been organized by the International Organization for Migration and the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission.        

To register, people had to travel in November to one of the eight polling places and prove they were from southern Sudan, using current or expired documents. Poll workers interviewed those without papers to determine whether applicants qualified.        

The resulting registration cards were treated like gold, locked in closets or given to trusted relatives until Election Day.        

Just before the doors opened at 8 a.m. here, with several official observers watching, two plastic ballot boxes were secured with numbered yellow plastic ties, each set of digits read aloud and recorded.        

Voters then spent the day making their way to voting booths and, finally, to an inkwell. To prevent fraud, each voter dipped an index finger when casting a vote. &ldquo;They didn&rsquo;t want anything to go wrong,&rdquo; said Lois Moreno, the president of the board of the city&rsquo;s Lost Boys Foundation. &ldquo;They didn&rsquo;t want anyone to say that the vote in Nashville didn&rsquo;t count.&rdquo;        

The preparation was spiritual, as well. On Saturday, two dozen people gathered in a small red house behind a Baptist church on the outskirts of Nashville. The makeshift church was not much more than a basement room with a folding table for an altar and a beat-up electric organ.        

For hours, Christine Tartisio, 37, sat and prayed for independence. She recalled the day she had left, a little girl forced to run from her school when troops invaded. Her parents were killed, she said, and she spent years in refugee camps in Uganda. In 1998, she left Africa for Nashville.        

Mrs. Tartisio has gone back twice, looking for her parents&rsquo; graves. And, like many who have made it to the United States, she offered some small amount of financial help to one of the poorest regions on earth.        

She said she voted so that her three young children, all born in the United States, might one day be able to visit and help build a new southern Sudan. She also voted, she said, so that her parents&rsquo; deaths would not be in vain.        

&ldquo;We walked through a stream of blood, all of us,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;So we must do this.&rdquo;        
