
BERLIN &mdash; Gaining a respite after recent defeats in regional votes, Chancellor Angela Merkel&rsquo;s Christian Democratic Union looked set to remain in power on Sunday in the eastern state of Saxony-Anhalt, according to preliminary election results.        

The Christian Democrats were projected to win 33.3 percent of the vote, down from 36.2 percent there in 2006. The Social Democrats were on track to win 21.5 percent, with little change. If those results hold up, the parties will be poised to continue a so-called grand coalition in the state.        

The results were hailed as a significant boost for the morale of the Christian Democrats as they head into a major election on Sunday in Baden-W&uuml;rttemberg. Mrs. Merkel has been pushing hard there to keep her party in power and regain the initiative after a week of political turmoil.        

With the crises in Japan &mdash; particularly the fate of nuclear reactors heavily damaged by the March 11 earthquake and tsunami &mdash; and the conflict in Libya playing out as major issues for Germans, all parties have tried to make political inroads in state elections, especially in Baden-W&uuml;rttemberg, a powerhouse of the German economy.        

Mrs. Merkel last week announced a three-month safety review of the country&rsquo;s 17 nuclear power plants, reversing her decision last year to keep the plants operating for an average of 12 years each. Opposition parties accused her of populism and of being more interested in winning elections than in sticking to her policies, however unpopular.        

On Thursday, Germany abstained from voting on a Security Council resolution to impose a no-fly zone over Libya. Mrs. Merkel was praised by the opposition Social Democrats, Greens and Left Party, while the country&rsquo;s NATO allies were disappointed.        

Despite all of these issues, the Christian Democrats appeared set to hold on to power in Saxony-Anhalt &mdash; and comfortably.        

The big worry facing Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s party is the Free Democrats, who suffered a humiliating defeat by failing to win enough votes to enter the regional legislature. The collapse of support for the Free Democrats raised speculation about whether their leader, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle, could remain at the top of a party that has been consistently hammered in opinion polls over the past year.        

The main winners were the Greens. They were on track to double their share of the vote, winning slightly less than 7 percent, as young people, students and those disappointed with Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s energy policies shifted their allegiance.        
