
BAGHDAD &mdash; As long as they can remember, Sadiq Ali and Mohammed Ahmed have been inseparable. They grew up on the same block in western Baghdad. Walked each other to school. Dreamed about being soccer stars. And they were playing video games together at an outdoor arcade when a rocket whipped down from the sky and sprayed the boys with fire and shrapnel.        

Sadiq lost his right leg and Mohammed his left. A third friend was killed.        

Four years later, the two friends&rsquo; lives are a measure of this war&rsquo;s enduring toll on Iraq&rsquo;s children. Untold thousands have been wounded by rockets and car bombs, in street battles or cross-fire, and an additional 800,000 have lost at least one parent, according to United Nations estimates.        

They are one of the most poignant legacies of eight years of fighting. With social services still in tatters, parents, officials and nonprofit groups say the Iraqi government has been unable to provide many of these children with shelter, counseling, medical care.        

But they are also reminders of resilience. As other friendships have eroded and their families&rsquo; attention has gradually drifted back to everyday preoccupations, Mohammed, 14, and Sadiq, 15, have never left each other&rsquo;s side, heading together toward an uncertain adulthood, on donated crutches and a yellow prosthetic leg.        

&ldquo;They share everything,&rdquo; said Mohammed&rsquo;s father, Ahmed Shwadi. &ldquo;They are stronger together.&rdquo;        

Sadiq, with the shaggy hair and easy grin of a preteen pop singer, is the outgoing one who bounced back faster. He urges Mohammed to wear his artificial leg, even though it cracks and buckles.        

Mohammed, wiry with a bashful smile, was the one who shrank into himself, retreating to the rooftop as other children played outside. A good student who wants to become an engineer, he tried to keep Sadiq on track at school when the boys returned after months of recovery.        

In lighter moments, they scuffle while playing soccer and debate which of them is more like the Portuguese forward Cristiano Ronaldo. They joke that they can now share the same pair of shoes. They try to keep each other from letting their anger erupt, or from slipping into the memory of the explosion.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s better to forget,&rdquo; Mohammed said.        

A small nonprofit in the boys&rsquo; neighborhood of Shoula &mdash; a dusty assortment of auto repair shops, emblems to Shiite clerics and scavenging flocks of sheep &mdash; has donated prosthetic limbs and crutches to the friends, though Sadiq and Mohammed say the ill-fitting limbs rub their flesh raw.        

The boys&rsquo; families said they learned quickly the price of being wounded. While trauma surgeries are free, nearly everything else &mdash; from wheelchairs to antibiotics, painkillers and visits to private clinics &mdash; must be bought.        

One mother, Nour Hamed, said she had to buy pints of AB-positive blood from a local blood bank for her 2-year-old son, whose skull had a piece gouged out by a car bomb. Doctors told her the hospital had no free blood to spare.        

&ldquo;Not just blood &mdash; they even have to buy the syringes,&rdquo; said Intisar Ali al-Jabour, head of Parliament&rsquo;s committee on families and children. &ldquo;The government is supposed to be responsible. They&rsquo;re not serious in dealing with these people.&rdquo;        

Ms. Hamed, the mother who bought blood, said the hole in her son&rsquo;s skull had not been repaired. Another boy&rsquo;s bullet-shattered knee was partly reconstructed with a piece of his rib, but doctors told the family they did not have the tools or money to build a new joint.        

Or there is Moussa Kadim, 13, wounded two years ago in the cross-fire of a gunfight between rival militias. His right arm still hangs in a sling, numb and atrophied. His family could not pay to travel abroad for surgery. Moussa has been learning how to eat and write with his left hand.        

After years of violence and insurgency, about 3,000 children with slain parents have ended up in sometimes threadbare orphanages run by the government or aid groups. Others have moved in with extended family. But uncounted thousands thread the streets of Baghdad and other cities, where they sleep in bombed-out buildings, scavenge trash heaps and sell sesame candies and boxes of rose-red tissues to passing cars.        
Yasir Ghazi contributed reporting.
