
TORONTO (AP) &mdash; Canadian politics have hit a turbulent patch that could bring down Prime Minister Stephen Harper this week over corporate tax cuts and accusations of abuses of power.        

But if an election does occur, the country is likely to emerge from it with little changed. Public opinion surveys predict that Mr. Harper&rsquo;s Conservative Party would win, but not outright, meaning that he would continue to govern with a minority in Parliament, dependent on votes from opposition members to stay afloat.        

The problems that may bring him down include the federal budget, which is to be presented to Parliament on Tuesday, and accusations &mdash; supported Monday by a Parliamentary committee &mdash; that Mr. Harper acted in contempt of the house by failing to disclose the full financial details of his tougher crime legislation, corporate tax cuts and plans to purchase stealth fighter jets.        

If the budget is defeated, or if a no-confidence vote on the contempt accusations receives majority support, Mr. Harper will have no choice but to call an election, possibly on May 2.        

Mr. Harper is counting on the perception that an election is pointless, because nothing will change. &ldquo;Canadians don&rsquo;t want an election,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The country doesn&rsquo;t need an election; the thing that all parties should be focusing on is the Canadian economy.&rdquo;        

He is counting on the economy to win him re-election.        

Canada has outperformed other major industrialized democracies through the global financial crisis, recovering all of the jobs that were lost during the recession while its banking sector remained intact. Property values did not plummet, and most economists expect growth in 2010 to have been about 3 percent.        

Mr. Harper, however, is a center-right prime minister in a traditionally center-left country, and his plan to reduce corporate tax rates in the new budget has given the opposition, led by the left-leaning Liberals, an opening to argue that Canada, despite its economic successes, is running a record deficit that will only increase if taxes diminish.        

The opposition has also criticized the prime minister for planning to spend $9 billion on 65 American-made F-35 Joint Strike Fighters, which represents one of the biggest military purchases in Canadian history. It will entail at least an additional $5 billion in maintenance costs.        

The opposition has been able to paint Mr. Harper, 51, as a manipulator who resorts to questionable strategies to thwart the opposition, most notably his suspension of Parliament for three months last year to bring about a shift in house committee chairmanships.        

And now his opponents have been handed the contempt accusations that portray Mr. Harper, who has not had a majority since becoming prime minister in 2006, as a highhanded leader who lacks a popular mandate. No Canadian government has ever been cited for contempt before.        

The Liberals have hinted that they will introduce a motion of no confidence later this week, likely bringing together corporate tax cuts and ethical issues. Defeat in a no-confidence motion obliges a government to call an election.        
