
RIKUZENTAKATA, Japan &mdash; On the afternoon of Friday, March 11, the Takata High School swim team walked a half-mile to practice at the city&rsquo;s nearly new natatorium, overlooking the broad sand beach of Hirota Bay.        

That was the last anyone saw of them. But that is not unusual: in this town of 23,000, more than one in 10 people is either dead or has not been seen since that afternoon, now 10 days ago, when a tsunami flattened three-quarters of the city in minutes.        

Twenty-nine of Takata High&rsquo;s 540 students are still missing. So is Takata&rsquo;s swimming coach, 29-year-old Motoko Mori. So is Monty Dickson, a 26-year-old American from Anchorage who taught English to elementary and junior-high students.        

Life goes on here, as much as life can go on in a place where 4 in 10 people live in camps, their old lives gone forever. But many in Rikuzentakata seem to exist in suspended animation, clinging to fantasies of a family-reuniting miracle, but bracing for the worst.        

Futoshi Toba, the town&rsquo;s 46-year-old mayor, is among them. On that Friday afternoon, he huddled on the third-floor roof of city hall as the wave crashed over the building and erased virtually everything else in sight, including his home.        

&ldquo;I lost my wife,&rdquo; he said in a conversation at the makeshift emergency center in the hills outside town, then quietly added, &ldquo;Maybe.&rdquo;        

The official statistics issued here on Monday afternoon stated that the tsunami had killed 775 people in Rikuzentakata and left 1,700 missing. In truth, a trip through the waist-high rubble, a field of broken concrete, smashed wood and mangled autos a mile long and perhaps a half-mile wide, leaves little doubt that &ldquo;missing&rdquo; is a euphemism.        

This was once a fishing village of uncommon beauty, planted in a steep valley that descended to a seafront shaded by thousands of conifers. On Monday, the surrounding hills were girdled by a bathtub ring of wreckage and felled trees at least 30 feet high.        

The tsunami did produce one true miracle, an 80-year-old woman and her grandson who, trapped inside their nearly demolished house, subsisted on the contents of a refrigerator until the boy wriggled out and alerted rescuers on Sunday.        

The norm, however, played out Monday afternoon at Takata Junior High School, the city&rsquo;s largest evacuation center, where a white hatchback entered the school yard with the remains of Hiroki Sugawara, a 10th grader from the neighboring town of Ofunato. It was not immediately clear why he had been in Rikuzentakata.        

&ldquo;This is the one last time,&rdquo; the boy&rsquo;s father cried as other parents, weeping, pushed terrified teenagers toward the body, laid on a blanket inside the car. &ldquo;Please say goodbye!&rdquo;        

But belief in miracles dies hard.        

Inside the junior high, an alcove wall was filled with scrawled pleas for help finding vanished friends and relatives. Fliers plastered an adjoining wall, many with poignant snapshots of the missing in happier times. &ldquo;The friends from the kindergarten hope you are O.K.,&rdquo; one read. &ldquo;Grandma and Grandpa,&rdquo; said another, &ldquo;we are looking for you.&rdquo;        

Beside them stood a woman holding a handwritten sign taped to a piece of cardboard. The sign read, &ldquo;We are looking for Takata High School students and teachers.&rdquo;        

Here, as elsewhere, high school holds a special place in people&rsquo;s hearts.        

&ldquo;We only have one high school in our city,&rdquo; said Tsutomu Nakai, 61, a retired businessman who oversees the refugee center. &ldquo;Our hopes for the future rested on the acts of Takata High School students.&rdquo;        

Takata High, which turned 80 this year, was the surviving partner in a merger three years ago of the two high schools in a town where the number of young people is steadily dwindling. Students could choose between a curriculum geared toward the fishing industry, the town&rsquo;s lifeblood, or a more traditional set of courses.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;The students have a lot of energy,&rdquo; the vice principal, Toshimitsu Omodera, said at another refugee center, called Sun Village, where many students and teachers are housed. &ldquo;And their clubs were in the top class of the prefecture.&rdquo;        

The clubs &mdash; teams in baseball, girls&rsquo; volleyball, table tennis, soccer and other sports &mdash; were popular in a school where the small student body meant that everyone had a shot at a starting position.        

The swim team was good, if not great. Until this month, it had 20 swimmers; seniors&rsquo; graduation cut its ranks to 10. Ms. Mori, the coach, taught social studies and advised the student council; her first wedding anniversary is March 28.        

&ldquo;Everybody liked her. She was a lot of fun,&rdquo; said Chihiru Nakao, a 16-year-old 10th grader who was in her social studies class. &ldquo;And because she was young, more or less our age, it was easy to communicate with her.&rdquo;        

Two Fridays ago, students scattered for sports practice. The 10 or so swimmers &mdash; one may have skipped practice &mdash; trekked to the B & G swimming center, a city pool with a sign reading, &ldquo;If your heart is with the water, it is the medicine for peace and health and long life.&rdquo;        

Ms. Mori appears to have been at Takata High when the earthquake struck. When a tsunami warning sounded 10 minutes later, Mr. Omodera said, the 257 students still there were ushered up the hill behind the building. Ms. Mori did not go. &ldquo;I heard she was in the school, but went to the B & G to get the swim team,&rdquo; said Yuta Kikuchi, a 15-year-old 10th grader, echoing other students&rsquo; accounts.        

Neither she nor the team returned. Mr. Omodera said it was rumored, but never proven, that she took the swimmers to a nearby city gymnasium where it has been reported that about 70 people tried to ride out the wave.        

The ensuing tsunami gutted the B & G center &mdash; tossing the giant roof girders, pine trees and other debris into the pool &mdash; then rushed to Takata High, collapsing the gymnasium and wrecking all three stories of the school&rsquo;s main building.        

People here say it is still possible that some of the missing could be lost in Rikuzentakata&rsquo;s 60-plus evacuation centers, where more than 9,400 citizens &mdash; some 40 percent of the town &mdash; have taken shelter.        

Ten days after the tsunami hit, that seems difficult to believe. But in a town that has not much else but hope to cling to, people believe it anyway.        
