
This article is by 
Ken Belson, 
Hiroko Tabuchi and 
David Jolly.        

TOKYO &mdash; Efforts to stabilize the crippled nuclear power plant in Fukushima stalled on Monday when engineers found that crucial machinery at one reactor required repair, a process that will take two to three days, government officials said.        

A team of workers trying to repair another reactor, No. 3, was evacuated in the afternoon after gray smoke rose from it, said Tetsuro Fukuyama, the deputy chief cabinet secretary of the Japanese government. But no explosion was heard and the emission ended by 6 p.m., NHK, the national broadcaster, said.        

Separately, NHK cited the Japanese Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency as saying that white smoke was coming from the building housing Reactor No. 2, where repairs to machinery were needed. Mr. Fukuyama said significantly higher radiation had not been detected around the two reactors.        

On Tuesday morning, smoke or steam was reported to be rising from two of the reactors, but the company that owns the power plant, the Tokyo Electric Power Company, reported just after noon that no more smoke was being emitted.        

By late Monday, electrical cables had been connected to all six of the reactor buildings, but much more work needed to be done. At the No. and No. 4 reactors, damage from the earthquake and tsunami, as well as rubble from hydrogen explosions, was impeding the effort to restore operations.        

An official at the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission said Monday that Reactors No. 1 and No. 2 were both too damaged for cooling systems to restart immediately, even when electricity was restored. But the official, William Borchardt, also said that the situation at the plant appeared to be &ldquo;on the verge of stabilizing.&rdquo; The N.R.C. is advising the United States Embassy, giving assistance to the Japanese and gathering information to benefit American reactor safety. The State Department, meanwhile, said it would offer potassium iodide to its staff members and dependents in the Tokyo region and to the north on Honshu, Japan&rsquo;s main island and the site of the troubled power station, as a precaution against a possible radiation release. In a travel warning posted online, the State Department advised against taking the chemical compound &ldquo;at this time&rdquo; and urged consultation with the United States government before consuming it.        

Potassium iodide can help prevent thyroid cancer by reducing the chance that radioactive iodine will be absorbed by the thyroid gland.        

Hundreds of employees of the utility, which owns the disabled Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station, had worked through the weekend to connect a mile-long high-voltage transmission line to the No. 2 unit in hopes of restarting a cooling system that would help bring down the temperature in the reactor and spent fuel pool.        

After connecting the transmission line on Sunday, engineers found on Monday that they still did not have enough power to fully run the systems that control the temperature and pressure in the building that houses the reactor, officials from the Japanese nuclear safety agency said.        

Engineers were also trying to repair the ventilation system in the control room used to monitor conditions in the No. 1 and No. 2 units. When that work is completed, the power company can begin cleansing the air in the control room so workers can eventually re-enter and begin using equipment inside to monitor conditions in the two reactor units.        

Firefighters from Tokyo doused Reactor No. 3 overnight, and fire trucks from the Japan Self-Defense Forces and the American Army spent two hours on Monday morning spraying water on Reactor No. 4. There are six reactors at the plant; Nos. 4, 5 and 6 were offline when the earthquake and tsunami hit, but there are spent fuel rods atop them and the other three.        

The Japanese nuclear safety agency said that some of the water used to douse the damaged reactors had reached the ocean nearby, and that officials were investigating radiation levels in the water. Trace amounts of radioactive material were also reported to have been found on Hokkaido, Japan&rsquo;s northernmost island.        

Separately, residents of Iitate, a village about 30 miles from the Fukushima Daiichi plant, were ordered not to drink tap water after high levels of radioactive elements were detected in the water supply, said Takashi Hashiguchi, a Health Ministry official. Residents were told that they could still use tap water for other tasks, like washing their hands or taking a bath, he said.        

The order came a day after the government barred all shipments of milk from Fukushima Prefecture and shipments of spinach from Ibaraki Prefecture after finding new cases of above-normal levels of radioactive elements in milk and several crops.        

Abnormal levels were also found in spinach from Tochigi and Gunma Prefectures to the west, in canola from Gunma Prefecture and in chrysanthemum greens from Chiba Prefecture, south of Ibaraki.        

A spokesman for the World Health Organization said on Monday that the discovery of radiation in food was a more serious problem than the organization first expected, Reuters reported. Peter Cordingley, a Manila-based spokesman for the organization, said there was no evidence that contaminated food from Fukushima Prefecture had reached the export market.        

But Mr. Cordingley added that &ldquo;it&rsquo;s a lot more serious than anybody thought in the early days,&rdquo; when analysts thought the effect would be limited to 12 to 19 miles from the power plant, Reuters reported.        

In Vienna on Monday the United Nations atomic energy chief said the nuclear crisis in Japan remained &ldquo;very serious.&rdquo;        

In a statement, Yukiya Amano, director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, said he believed &ldquo;this crisis will be effectively overcome.&rdquo; He also said that &ldquo;the agency&rsquo;s role in nuclear safety may need to be re-examined, along with the role of our safety standards.&rdquo;        

The food contamination and delays in repair work at the Fukushima plant are two of the challenges facing Japan since a 9.0-magnitude earthquake and subsequent tsunami struck its northeast coast on March 11. NHK said Monday that the official death toll had been raised to more than 8,600. But the final toll is expected to reach nearly 20,000. On Sunday police officials in Miyagi said they expected the toll there alone to exceed 15,000.        

More than 13,000 people are listed as missing.        

The World Bank, citing private and Japanese government estimates, said that the disaster could cost from $122 billion to $235 billion.        
Norimitsu Onishi contributed reporting from Tokyo, Kevin Drew from Hong Kong, and Matthew L. Wald from Rockville, Md.
