
CAIRO &mdash; The Tunisian government ordered the closing of all schools and universities in the country on Monday until further notice in an attempt to quell escalating riots over poverty and unemployment.        

At least 14 people have died in the riots, according to the official Tunisian news agency, which also reported the school closings. Opponents of the government contend that riot police officers have shot and killed many more since the riots broke out three weeks ago.        

President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, in a televised address, promised to create more jobs, but also to stamp out any violence. He blamed unspecified enemies abroad for the rioting.        

&ldquo;The events were the work of masked gangs that attacked at night government buildings and even civilians inside their homes in a terrorist act that cannot be overlooked,&rdquo; he said, according to Al Jazeera.        

Citing criticism from the State Department for its handling of the riots, the Tunisian government summoned the American ambassador to express its &ldquo;astonishment,&rdquo; Tunisian state television reported.        

A State Department spokesman, Philip J. Crowley, described the meeting as &ldquo;a follow-up discussion&rdquo; with the Tunisian government. &ldquo;We, again, affirmed our concerns not only about the ongoing violence, the importance of respecting freedom of expression, but also the importance of the availability of information,&rdquo; Mr. Crowley said.        

The riots began about three weeks ago after a 26-year-old man with a college degree, in despair at his dismal prospects, committed suicide by setting himself on fire. He had been trying to sell a container of fruits and vegetables, and the police confiscated his merchandise because he had no permit.        

His self-immolation unleashed the pent-up anger of Tunisia&rsquo;s educated and underemployed youth, and soon that of others as well.        

On Monday, security forces surrounded a university where hundreds of students were trying to protest, according to Reuters. The rioting showed signs of spreading from provincial towns toward the cities of the Mediterranean coast which are central to the tourist industry, Reuters reported.        

The riots are believed to have spread in part through social-media Web sites, and the Tunisian government reportedly directed Internet service providers to hack into the accounts of individual users. As the riots mounted over the weekend, the State Department expressed concern about intrusions into the privacy of Tunisian customers of American companies like Facebook, Yahoo and Google.        

The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, urged restraint and respect for freedom of expression.        

Since taking power in a bloodless coup more than two decades ago, President Ben Ali has enforced strict censorship and tolerated little dissent. Although Tunis markets itself as a peaceful tourist haven, it earns dismal marks from international human rights groups.        

Official figures put unemployment at about 14 percent, with much higher levels among young people.        
