
TRIPOLI &mdash; The question has hovered over the Libyan uprising from the moment the first tank commander defected to join his cousins protesting in the streets of Benghazi: Is the battle for Libya the clash of a brutal dictator against a democratic opposition, or is it fundamentally a tribal civil war?        

The answer could determine the course of both the Libyan uprising and the results of the Western intervention. In the West&rsquo;s preferred chain of events, airstrikes enable the rebels to unite with the currently passive residents of the western region around Tripoli, under the banner of an essentially democratic revolution that topples Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

He, however, has predicted the opposite: that the revolt is a tribal war of eastern Libya against the west that ends in either his triumph or a prolonged period of chaos.        

&ldquo;It is a very important question that is terribly near impossible to answer,&rdquo; said Paul Sullivan, a political scientist at Georgetown University who has studied Libya. &ldquo;It could be a very big surprise when Qaddafi leaves and we find out who we are really dealing with.&rdquo;        

The behavior of the fledgling rebel government in Benghazi so far offers few clues to the rebels&rsquo; true nature. Their governing council is composed of secular-minded professionals &mdash; lawyers, academics, businesspeople &mdash; who talk about democracy, transparency, human rights and the rule of law. But their commitment to those principles is just now being tested as they confront the specter of potential Qaddafi spies in their midst, either with rough tribal justice or a more measured legal process.        

Like the Qaddafi government, the operation around the rebel council is rife with family ties. And like the chiefs of the Libyan state news media, the rebels feel no loyalty to the truth in shaping their propaganda, claiming nonexistent battlefield victories, asserting they were still fighting in a key city days after it fell to Qaddafi forces, and making vastly inflated claims of his barbaric behavior.        

Skeptics of the rebels&rsquo; commitment to democracy point to Libya&rsquo;s short and brutal history. Until Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s revolution in 1969, Libya could scarcely be considered a country, divided as it was under its former king into three separate provinces, each with myriad tribes of rural, semi-nomadic herders. Retaliatory tribal killings and violence were the main source of justice.        

Although Colonel Qaddafi worked hard to forge the provinces into a single state, he did little to calm the culture of violence, among other things ordering his revolutionary committees to shoot the &ldquo;stray dogs&rdquo; of the revolution and staging public hangings of his political opponents in neighborhood squares or even school gymnasiums.        

And, historians say, Colonel Qaddafi has often sought to capitalize on the bellicose culture of many tribes, including supplying arms to Sahara tribes to fight others across the border in Chad or, more recently, arming the tribes of the central coast to fight against the eastern rebels.        

In the neighborhoods of the capital that have staged major peaceful protests against Colonel Qaddafi, many have volunteered &mdash; speaking on the condition of anonymity &mdash; that their demonstrations were nonviolent mainly because they could not obtain weapons fast enough.        

Even one religious leader associated with Sufism &mdash; a traditionally pacifist sect something like the Islamic equivalent of the Quakers &mdash; lamented his own tribe&rsquo;s lack of guns for the fight.        

That stands in sharp contrast to Libya&rsquo;s neighbors, Tunisia and Egypt. In Egypt, in particular, the young leaders of the revolution were so seized with an ethic of nonviolence that in the middle of winning a battle of thrown stones against a loyalist mob, two young protesters said they believed they had lost, simply because they had resorted to violence.        

Nor did Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s Libya ever do much more than place a veneer over the long-simmering tribal animosities.        

The eastern region around Benghazi had always been a hotbed of opposition to the colonel, in part because tribes there had enjoyed the favoritism of the former king, Idriss I, whom the colonel overthrew, while he in turn favored the tribes of the central and western coast.        

When the uprising came, many of the most significant defectors &mdash; including Gen. Abdul Fattah Younes, the rebel army head and a former interior minister &mdash; were members of the eastern tribes.        
Kareem Fahim contributed reporting from Benghazi.
