
Harmless traces of radiation from the stricken nuclear complex in Japan have been detected wafting over the East Coast of the United States, European officials said Monday.        

Since last week, the officials have tracked the radioactive plume as it has drifted eastward on prevailing winds from Japan &mdash; first to the West Coast and now over the East Coast and the Atlantic, moving toward Europe.        

Health experts said that the plume&rsquo;s radiation had been diluted enormously in its journey of thousands of miles and that &mdash; at least for now, with concentrations so low &mdash; its presence will have no health consequences in the United States. In a similar way, faint radiation from the Chernobyl disaster spread around the globe and reached the West Coast in 10 days, its levels detectable but minuscule.        

Atomic and atmospheric specialists expect that, in time, the extremely diffuse Japanese plume will spread so that it extends over most of the planet&rsquo;s northern regions.        

The global network of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization, an arm of the United Nations in Vienna, has detected the movements of the plume. The organization&rsquo;s mandate is to monitor the global ban on the testing of nuclear arms, and it has more than 60 stations that sniff the air for radiation spikes.        

The group has declined to make the recent findings public, but it shares its information with 120 member states, some of which have divulged the status of the plume&rsquo;s movements.        

On Friday, European officials said that network sensors in Sacramento had detected the radioactive plume, picking up traces of iodine 131 and cesium 137 &mdash; highly dangerous byproducts of reactor operation that in large amounts can cause cancer. The measured levels were judged to be many millions of times lower than concentrations that would pose a danger to human health.        

Late Friday, the Department of Energy confirmed the European statements about the arrival of the radioactive plume in the continental United States, saying its &ldquo;minuscule quantities&rdquo; of radiation posed no health hazard.        

On Monday, European officials said the plume had reached the East Coast after drifting over North America. One station that detected the fresh radioactivity is in Charlottesville, Va., officials said.        

Although the legal mandate of the treaty organization is to scan the globe for inconspicuous signs of clandestine bomb blasts &mdash; not the repercussions of reactor accidents &mdash; its officials recently decided to start sharing their data more widely in an effort to help international authorities who are struggling with the Japanese crisis.        

In a statement on Friday, the Vienna group said it had begun sharing the monitoring information with the International Atomic Energy Agency and the World Health Organization. The group explained that it was &ldquo;responding to respective requests&rdquo; from the two organizations that it received Thursday for aid in &ldquo;assessing the situation.&rdquo;        
