
WASHINGTON &mdash; An American-led military campaign to destroy Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s air defenses and establish a no-fly zone over Libya has nearly accomplished its initial objectives, and the United States is moving swiftly to hand command to allies in Europe, American officials said Monday.        

But the firepower of more than 130 Tomahawk cruise missiles and attacks by allied warplanes have not yet succeeded in accomplishing the more ambitious demands by the United States &mdash; repeated by President Obama in a letter to Congress on Monday &mdash; that Colonel Qaddafi withdraw his forces from embattled cities and cease all attacks against civilians.        

Libyan government forces continued to engage in scattered fighting on Monday, defying the United Nations resolutions authorizing the allied strikes. The resolution demands an immediate cease-fire by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces and an end to attacks on civilians.        

Pentagon officials are eager to extract the United States from a third armed conflict in a Muslim country as quickly as possible. But confusion broke out on Monday among the allies in Europe over who exactly would carry the military operation forward once the United States stepped back, and from where.        

In Washington, lawmakers from both parties argued that Mr. Obama had exceeded his constitutional authority by authorizing the military&rsquo;s participation without Congressional approval. The president said in a letter to Congress that he had the power to authorize the strikes, which would be limited in duration and scope, and that preventing a humanitarian disaster in Libya was in the national interest.        

At the United Nations, the Security Council rejected a request from Libya for a meeting to discuss the situation.        

Qaddafi forces were holding out against the allied military campaign to break their grip. Rebel fighters trying to retake the eastern town of Ajdabiya said their advance was halted on Monday by tank and rocket fire from government loyalists still controlling entrances to the city. Dozens of fighters fell back to a checkpoint about 25 miles north of Ajdabiya, in Zueitina.        

By the early afternoon, the fighters said at least eight of their confederates had been killed in the day&rsquo;s fighting, including four who were killed when a tank shell struck their pickup truck.        

In the western city of Misurata, forces loyal to Colonel Qaddafi were still at large and were using civilians as human shields, Reuters reported, but that could not be immediately confirmed.        

At the Pentagon, officials said that the intensive American-led assault unleashed over the weekend was a classic air campaign, chosen by Mr. Obama among a range of military options, which was intended to have coalition aircraft in the skies above Libya within days and without fear of being shot down. &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t do that piecemeal,&rdquo; a United States military official said. &ldquo;You do it all at once, and you do it as fast as you can.&rdquo;        

The targets included radar installations, fixed and mobile antiaircraft sites, Libyan aircraft and hangars, and other targets intended to make it safe for allied aircraft to impose the no-fly zone. They also included tanks and other ground forces engaged with the rebels around the country, reflecting the broader aim of pushing Colonel Qadaffi&rsquo;s forces to withdraw from disputed cities. Communications centers and at least one Scud missile site were also struck.        

Explosions and antiaircraft fire could be heard in and around Tripoli on Monday in a third straight night of attacks there against Colonel Qadaffi&rsquo;s forces.        

United States military officials said that there were&nbsp;fewer American and coalition airstrikes in&nbsp;Libya&nbsp;on Sunday night and&nbsp;Monday, and that the number would probably decline further in coming days. But&nbsp;Gen. Carter F. Ham, the head of the United States Africa Command, who is in charge of the coalition effort, said that there would be strikes on Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s mobile air defenses and that some 80 sorties &mdash; only half by the United States &mdash; were flown on Monday.        

General Ham also said he had &ldquo;full authority&rdquo; to attack the regime&rsquo;s forces if they refused to comply with President Obama&rsquo;s demands that they pull back from Ajdabiya, Misurata and Zawiya.        

By Monday night, explosions and antiaircraft fire could be heard in and around Tripoli in the third straight day of attacks.        

Elisabeth Bumiller reported from Washington, and Kareem Fahim from Benghazi, Libya. Contributing reporting were David D. Kirkpatrick from Tripoli, Libya; Eric Schmitt and Thom Shanker from Washington; Steven Erlanger and Alan Cowell from Paris; Clifford J. Levy from Moscow; and Julia Werdigier from London.
