
MAZAR-I-SHARIF, Afghanistan &mdash; The target could not have been more inviting: hundreds of thousands of Afghans, government officials and foreign dignitaries converging on the ancient blue-tiled shrine in the center of this relatively peaceful northern city for the celebration of Nowruz, the Persian New Year.        

Each year the Taliban, who had forbidden the celebration as un-Islamic under their rule, have threatened to disrupt the festivities at the Blue Mosque with violence. The intelligence chatter seemed particularly alarming this year, government officials say, coming with an influx of violence and assassinations in neighboring provinces.        

Despite the threats, there were no American or international soldiers to be seen here during this week&rsquo;s celebration. The thousands of uniformed police officers, border guards and army soldiers trucked in to secure the festivities were all Afghan.        

As the United States begins withdrawing several thousand troops from Afghanistan this July, the first step toward Afghans&rsquo; assuming responsibility for their own security by the end of 2014, the festival provided a precursor of what post-NATO-led security might be like in places like Mazar-i-Sharif.        

Mazar-i-Sharif is one of seven areas that will be the first to be transferred to full Afghan control, President Hamid Karzai said Tuesday in a speech in Kabul. Mr. Karzai said that by mid-July Afghans would begin taking over from the NATO-led coalition in all of Panjshir and Bamian Provinces and in several cities: here in Mazar-i-Sharif; Herat in the west; Lashkar Gah, capital of Helmand Province in the south; and Mehtarlam, capital of Laghman Province in the east.        

In addition, he listed all of Kabul Province except the troubled Sarobi District, although Afghan forces have been in effective charge of Kabul for two years now, aside from NATO forces guarding their own bases.        

But as a precondition, Mr. Karzai insisted that the international community funnel aid money directly to his government, and many donors do not feel Afghanistan is ready to handle it. Mr. Karzai also criticized his coalition partners, three times denouncing instances of civilian casualties and calling for night raids to be stopped.        

This, he said, &ldquo;is a prerequisite for any successful partnership and collaboration to continue.&rdquo;        

The transition announcement, made in a speech before graduating military cadets, had been widely anticipated. The only modest surprises were Lashkar Gah and Mehtarlam, both in provinces with widespread insurgent activity. Bamian and Panjshir are peaceful, and the cities of Herat and Mazar-i-Sharif have only small coalition contingents now, all non-American.        

Mazar-i-Sharif was the first city to be abandoned by the Taliban during the United States-led invasion in 2001. American and NATO soldiers rarely patrol here.        

In Helmand and Laghman Provinces, skepticism greeted the president&rsquo;s announcement. &ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s too early even to think about the security transition to Afghan forces,&rdquo; said Mohammad Hassan Mamozia, a member of Parliament from Laghman, who complained that police and army forces there were far too few in number to stand up to the Taliban alone.        

In Lashkar Gah, a member of the provincial council, Malika Helmandi, also said Afghan forces were too few in number. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s still early to say goodbye to foreigners,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Afghan national security forces have not gained the trust of the public so far. Most of them are drug users, mostly poorly trained, poorly equipped with low morale and no public support.&rdquo;        

A Taliban spokesman, Zabiullah Mujahid, called the announcement nothing more than a &ldquo;symbolic act to deceive the people,&rdquo; and he added that &ldquo;it won&rsquo;t help resolve the main problem, which is the occupation of Afghanistan by foreign forces.&rdquo;        

What exactly the transition will mean here in Mazar-i-Sharif, where Afghan forces have already been largely in control for most of the war, is hard to say. Local military commanders and political officials say they expect business as usual, but intoned a sense of dread if things like training, equipment and air support from international forces were suddenly cut off.        

The resurgence of Taliban in the neighboring provinces of Kunduz and Baghlan has deepened those worries, as well as disrupting the bustling trade that has made Mazar-i-Sharif one of the country&rsquo;s economic hubs. &ldquo;If the international forces just pulled up and left, it would be a disaster,&rdquo; said Gen. Abdul Rauf Taj, the deputy police chief of Balkh Province, of which Mazar-i-Sharif is the capital.        

At the same time, though, government officials point to Monday&rsquo;s New Year&rsquo;s celebration as evidence that Afghan forces are capable of securing themselves.        

Afghan security checkpoints dotted the roads leading into Mazar-i-Sharif. Heavily armed checkpoints outside the city stopped every car before entering the city, checking for weapons and explosives. And hundreds of thousands of visitors were herded into small groups &mdash; sometimes, harshly, with rifle butts &mdash; and patted down before passing into the shrine.        

&ldquo;This is an example of our Afghan forces stepping up security,&rdquo; said Atta Muhammad Noor, the governor of Balkh Province and a former mujahedeen commander who has been credited with helping create stability here since taking leadership in 2004. &ldquo;We told the international forces we didn&rsquo;t need them on our roads.&rdquo;        

Still, he cautioned, the security gains here could be fragile if more is not done to improve local forces before international forces depart.        

That includes paying close attention to quality and quantity of training and educating Afghan security forces, supplying them with modern weapons and vehicles, and rehabilitating the Afghan air force, he said.        

In a news conference last week, Maj. Gen. Markus Kneip of Germany, commander of the International Security Assistance Force, or ISAF, in the north, vowed to continue supporting Afghan troops with equipment, training and recruitment.        

&ldquo;However,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;in recent months we have had many operations in the north in which Afghan security forces were leading it and ISAF was just acting as a supporter.&rdquo;        
Ray Rivera reported from Mazar-i-Sharif, and Rod Nordland from Kabul, Afghanistan. Enayat Najafizada and Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Mazar-i-Sharif, and Sangar Rahimi from Kabul.
