
LONDON &mdash; The unmasking of an undercover police officer who spent seven years infiltrating environmental protest groups in Britain and more than 20 other countries caused the collapse on Monday of a trial involving activists accused of planning to occupy and immobilize Britain&rsquo;s  largest coal-fired power station.        

The incident put a halt to a controversial case that began with the largest number of pre-emptive arrests of political activists ever made in Britain. It cast a harsh spotlight on an elite undercover unit at Scotland Yard, just as Britain prepares for an expected wave of protests against a harsh government austerity drive, with critics pressing police commanders to improve their intelligence on groups that have turned some of the early student protests violent.        

The trial, scheduled to start on Monday in the Midlands city of Nottingham, ended precipitately when prosecutors said they had decided to submit no evidence against 6 defendants charged with being part of a group of 114 arrested in April 2009 on suspicion of planning to occupy the Ratcliffe-on-Soar power station, immobilize coal conveyor belts and scale the station&rsquo;s chimney. The prosecutors gave no reasons for their action, but it came 12 hours after The Guardian revealed the role of the undercover officer.        

The protesters were accused of planning to halt power production at the plant for a week, stopping operations that would have pumped 150,000 tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. Twenty of them admitted to the charge and were convicted after failing to persuade a jury that their actions were justified under the principle of &ldquo;lawful excuse.&rdquo; They said they had been acting to prevent the greater crimes of death and serious injury brought about by power station emissions, which many scientists believe have contributed to long-term climate change.        

But six of the activists refused to admit to planning the break-in and were prepared to argue that the undercover officer, Mark Kennedy, had acted as an agent provocateur and had &ldquo;actively encouraged participation in the action,&rdquo; according to papers drawn up by their lawyers and cited by The Guardian.        

Mr. Kennedy was said by The Guardian to have renounced his role last month and to have told lawyers for the defendants that he was prepared to testify on their behalf. The newspaper said Mr. Kennedy had quit the police force and moved abroad, fearing retaliation against himself and his family.        

Officials at Scotland Yard and at the National Public Order Intelligence Unit, the agency responsible for undercover police operations, declined to comment on the case. The Guardian&rsquo;s account, published on the newspaper&rsquo;s Web site and in its Monday editions, said that Mr. Kennedy had been assigned to infiltrate various protest groups, including environmentalist ones, beginning in 2003, when he was said to have been 33.        

It said he was given a new name, Mark Stone, and equipped with a false passport and driver&rsquo;s license. He also grew his hair long and sported earrings and tattoos. The paper said he traveled widely at home and abroad, chaining himself to the gates of a British nuclear power station, halting a coal train, scaling a dam in Iceland and volunteering to be one of two climbers who would chain himself to the coal conveyor belt at the Ratcliffe-on-Soar power station.        

The paper said he had become a popular figure at almost every environmental protest in Britain, renowned for two things that were uncommon in those circles &mdash; providing transport for protesters, including a heavy truck for the coal station protest, and having generous amounts of money, which the paper said earned him the nickname &ldquo;Flash Stone.&rdquo;        

The Scotland Yard unit to which Mr. Kennedy belonged grew out of events in 1968, when a protest against the Vietnam war in London&rsquo;s Grosvenor Square, site of the United States Embassy, turned violent, and outstripped police efforts to control it.  Mr. Kennedy, according to The Guardian, had been a policeman for nine years when he was recruited to the unit.        

The case had already taken an unusual turn, when the 20 already convicted were given minimal sentences last week by a judge who took a strong stand in their support. The judge, Jonathan Teare, handing out sentences that ranged from conditional discharges to periods of unpaid community work, called the defendants &ldquo;decent men and women with a genuine concern for others,&rdquo; and said, &ldquo;I have no doubt that each of you acted with the highest possible motives.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kennedy&rsquo;s role in the affair was uncovered in October, according to The Guardian, when some of those involved in the environmental movement discovered a passport in his real name, and uncovered evidence that he had been a policeman since 1994. In a secretly made video released by the protesters, Mr. Kennedy expressed his remorse. &ldquo;I hate myself so much, I have betrayed so many people,&rdquo; he said.        
