
CAIRO &mdash; Flames engulfed the upper floors of a building in Egypt&rsquo;s Interior Ministry compound on Tuesday, after a protest by thousands of police officers demanding higher wages and the resignation of the newly installed interior minister. It was the second time in a month that a police protest at the ministry ended with the building ablaze.        

The seven-story building houses the ministry&rsquo;s communications center and is topped by a towering radio antenna. Ambulances and fire engines raced to the scene under a thick plume of black smoke that hung over downtown Cairo.        

More than a thousand onlookers &mdash; most uniformed police officers &mdash; stared up at the flames as paramedics and firefighters pushed through the throngs. At least eight people were injured, security sources said, and 12 protesters were arrested on suspicion of arson.        

The police officers had spent the day demonstrating for higher wages, health care benefits and the return of Mahmoud Wagdy as interior minister.  Mr. Wagdy had been replaced by Mansour el-Essawy after a cabinet shake-up on March 3 removed the last officials from the era of former President Hosni Mubarak.        

The police are little loved in Egypt; their reputation for violence and corruption helped fuel the popular uprising that forced Mr. Mubarak from power on Feb. 11.        

The country&rsquo;s more widely respected military took the reins of state after his ouster. Police officers fled their posts even before that, leaving the military to struggle to rein in waves of labor protest and return law and order to the streets.        

On Tuesday, many gawkers attributed the fire to conspirators inside the ministry or to agents of the country&rsquo;s feared state security service, which was officially dissolved March 15.        

&ldquo;They lit it from inside, people from the ministry,&rdquo; said a uniformed policeman smiling quietly on the sidewalk under the blaze. Like many police officers who have taken to street protests, he refused to provide his name.        

Others in the crowd were more animated.        

&ldquo;State security did this! The ministry did this!&rdquo; screamed an older woman selling packets of tissues emblazoned with the Egyptian flag. &ldquo;Not a single protester went inside and lit that fire!&rdquo;        

The previous fire was Feb. 23. When firefighters tried to respond, security sources said the protesters pelted them with a shower of stones. Only the army was allowed to extinguish the fire; the lower floors remained heavily scarred.        
