
OTTAWA &mdash; Canada&rsquo;s Conservative government appeared destined for certain defeat after all three opposition parties said that they would not support its budget after its release Tuesday.        

Under Canadian parliamentary tradition, the defeat of a budget bill immediately prompts an election.        

Exactly how long Parliament will remain in session is unclear. Most political analysts anticipate that a vote bringing it to a close will come by next week, at the latest. If they are correct, an election would be held in early May.        

&ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s very likely we&rsquo;re in an election,&rdquo; Michael Ignatieff, the leader of the opposition Liberal Party told reporters. &ldquo;Whenever it comes, bring it on.&rdquo;        

While Prime Minister Stephen Harper and other prominent Conservatives have repeatedly said they do not want an election, their party holds the strongest position in recent polls and has the best funded and developed campaign machine.        

Numerous polls have also suggested, however, that unless public sentiment shifts during a campaign, Canadians, for the third time in a row, will elect a Conservative government that does not control a majority of the seats in the House of Commons.        

Leading to Tuesday, the Conservatives, who are the farthest to the right in Parliament, had been courting the labor-backed New Democratic Party, which holds the opposite position along the political spectrum. Mr. Harper met with Jack Layton, leader of the New Democrats, to determine what it would take to gain that party&rsquo;s support in a budget vote.        

It appeared that the Conservatives might have been hoping that the New Democrats wanted to avoid a spring election. Mr. Layton, who is being treated for prostate cancer and had hip surgery about two weeks ago, might find campaigning difficult.        

While the budget contained some relatively small measures based on requests from the New Democrats, Mr. Layton was very critical of its contents.        

&ldquo;Nothing in this budget has persuaded me that Mr. Harper has changed his ways,&rdquo; Mr. Layton said outside the House of Commons.        

Mr. Harper&rsquo;s government was first elected in 2006, partly because of a public backlash over a corruption scandal involving the Liberals. Now, with another vote imminent, Mr. Harper and his Conservatives find themselves defending alleged ethical lapses involving their party.        

Last week, Mr. Harper asked the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to look into the activities of Bruce Carson, a prominent Conservative who was a key aide to Mr. Harper until 2008. The request followed a report by the Aboriginal Peoples&rsquo; Television Network indicating that Mr. Carson, 66, broke influence peddling laws by lobbying the government on behalf of a company controlled by his 22-year-old wife, a former escort.        
