
MOSCOW &mdash; The former president of Ukraine whose political skulduggery helped precipitate that country&rsquo;s democratic Orange Revolution seven years ago was officially named on Tuesday as a suspect in the killing of a prominent investigative journalist.        

Former President Leonid D. Kuchma, who served from 1994 to 2005, has repeatedly denied involvement in the 2000 murder of the journalist, Georgy Gongadze, and has withstood numerous efforts to bring him to trial for the crime.        

But, in a case that has become a test of Ukraine&rsquo;s ability to break fully with an era of raucous and sometimes bloody politics after the Soviet collapse, the Prosecutor General&rsquo;s Office said Tuesday that it now had enough evidence to link Mr. Kuchma, that era&rsquo;s most prominent official, to the killing.        

&ldquo;Leonid Danilovich Kuchma is suspected of overstepping his authority, giving illegal orders to officials from the Interior Ministry that led to the murder of the journalist,&rdquo; Renat Kuzmin, Ukraine&rsquo;s first deputy prosecutor general, told journalists in Kiev.        

Mr. Kuzmin did not elaborate on the former president&rsquo;s precise role, saying only that the investigation was proceeding. Mr. Kuchma has not been arrested, and it is not certain that he will be. He has been forbidden to leave Ukraine.        

It is unclear why prosecutors have only now opened a criminal case against Mr. Kuchma, nearly 11 years after Mr. Gongadze&rsquo;s headless corpse was discovered in a forest outside Kiev.        

The decision comes a year after Mr. Kuchma&rsquo;s onetime prot&eacute;g&eacute;, Viktor F. Yanukovich, was elected president. Yet, it was the killing of Mr. Gongadze that became a rallying point for leaders of the Orange Revolution in 2004, which thwarted Mr. Yanukovich&rsquo;s first presidential bid after it became clear he stole the elections with Mr. Kuchma&rsquo;s aid.        

Mr. Gongadze, a young, technologically savvy journalist, founded a muckraking Internet newspaper, Ukrainska Pravda, shortly before he was killed. He had rankled the authorities with reports on corruption and nefarious political dealings.        

Almost immediately after his killing in September 2000, Mr. Kuchma&rsquo;s opponents began accusing him of complicity in the crime. That year, a former bodyguard released tapes in which a voice similar to Mr. Kuchma&rsquo;s is heard discussing Mr. Gongadze with Ukraine&rsquo;s interior minister, telling the official to &ldquo;drive him out; throw him out.&rdquo;        

The authorities have jailed two former police officers for carrying out the murder, and a third is awaiting trial.        

The identity of the mastermind, however, has long been elusive. Last year, prosecutors said that Mr. Kuchma&rsquo;s former interior minster, Yuri F. Kravchenko, had ordered the killing.        

But, by that point Mr. Kravchenko was already dead, shot to death in 2005 in what the authorities said was a suicide.         
