
GAZA &mdash; An Israeli attempt to hit Palestinian militants who had fired rockets at Israel went horribly wrong on Tuesday, with mortar shells killing three youths playing soccer and a 60-year-old grandfather leaving his house.        

Later, in an unrelated attack, the Israeli Air Force killed four militants in a car, all members of Islamic Jihad, the organization and the Israeli military said. The army said the men had been on their way to launch rockets at Israel.        

Tuesday&rsquo;s violence came amid a sharp increase in tensions along the Israel-Gaza border in recent days. Hamas has fired more than 60 rockets at Israel since Saturday, and Israeli warplanes and artillery units have carried out repeated attacks. Both sides claim they are retaliating and not seeking an escalation in the conflict, but fears of a repeat of the Israeli war here two years ago were palpable.        

After rockets were fired from a citrus grove behind houses in eastern Gaza City on Tuesday afternoon, the Israelis fired mortar rounds at the source. Three shells landed on a sandy street in front of a home about half a mile from the border, killing three members of the Helou family and a neighbor.        

The dead were Yasser Hamed al-Helou, 60, who was just coming out of his garden by the street, his 15-year-old grandson, a 10-year-old relative, and a 17-year-old neighbor, Mohammed Harrara. The boys had been playing soccer, witnesses said.        

Two other mortar shells landed behind the house, spreading shrapnel that created fist-size holes in nearby houses. Adham Abu Selmiya, an emergency services spokesman, said the Israeli attack also wounded 10 people, some of them seriously.        

Israel&rsquo;s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, expressed regret at the deaths of civilians, adding, &ldquo;It is regrettable that Hamas continues to intentionally rain down dozens of rockets on Israeli civilians even as it uses civilians as human shields.&rdquo;        

The Israeli military also said it regretted the loss of civilian life and placed the blame on Hamas. &ldquo;We do not target civilians,&rdquo; Lt. Col. Avital Leibovich, a military spokeswoman, said by telephone. &ldquo;This was not our initiative. It was reactive.&rdquo;        

Colonel Leibovich said the army believed that a militant was also killed in that attack. But there was no evidence of that from the hospital or neighbors.        

Relatives and neighbors were unusually open about the fact that the Israeli mortar attack was an attempt to hit militants firing rockets from the nearby grove.        

&ldquo;We heard the sound of four mortars being fired by militants from a grove just beyond our house,&rdquo; said Hassan, the older brother of Mohammed Harrara. &ldquo;A few minutes later, the Israeli shells landed in the area.&rdquo;        

Hamas appears to have ended a two-year cease-fire that had held since the three-week Israeli military operation in Gaza ended in early 2009. But it was unclear if policy had shifted; there have been signs of a rift between Hamas&rsquo;s hard-line military wing and the government, which may have led to the escalation. Hamas statements have said the recent attacks are a response to &ldquo;ongoing Israeli crimes.&rdquo;        

Abu Obaida, a spokesman for the military wing, told reporters on Tuesday that his men &ldquo;cannot be deterred&rdquo; by Israeli attacks.        

He said that Hamas respected the cease-fire with Israel and had tried to enforce it, but that &ldquo;the resistance cannot control itself forever.&rdquo; He added that if Israel stopped its attacks on Gaza, Hamas would hold back as well.        

Overnight on Monday, Israeli F-16s carried out eight airstrikes, hitting a Hamas training camp, a brick factory, a metal workshop and a mechanic&rsquo;s garage. Local reports said that at least five people, including a woman and two children, sustained moderate injuries.        
Ethan Bronner contributed reporting from Jerusalem.
