
SANA, Yemen &mdash; President Ali Abdullah Saleh of Yemen, increasingly isolated amid defections and resignations, clung to power on Tuesday despite continuing protests and ominous signs of fragmentation among the nation&rsquo;s main military units.        

Forces loyal to the Republican Guard, led by Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s son Ahmed Ali Saleh, surrounded an air base in the western province of Hodeidah on Tuesday night after the base&rsquo;s commander, Brig. Gen. Ahmed Sinhani, announced his support for the youth revolt. There were also clashes between Republican Guard troops and the army in front of the presidential palace in the southeastern port city of Mukalla. The provincial army commander announced his support Monday for the revolt against Mr. Saleh, a local reporter and news agencies said.        

The fighting seemed to hint at a long-feared scenario in which Yemen&rsquo;s military splits, reflecting a deeper power struggle between Mr. Saleh and his rivals. On Monday, Yemen&rsquo;s most powerful military leader, Maj. Gen. Ali Mohsin al-Ahmar, declared his support for the revolt; some analysts view that as a blow from which the president cannot recover.        

Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s plans were far from clear, and at one point on Tuesday he said he would accept an opposition deal for his exit before 2013 &mdash; proposed weeks ago &mdash; to head off the deepening crisis in the country.        

The opposition derided his suggestion and declared that only his immediate departure would appease the rising tide of street protests.        

&ldquo;He has one option, and it is to leave now, right now, without delaying, without conditions,&rdquo; said Mohammed Qahtan, a spokesman for the Joint Meeting Parties, a coalition of opposition groups.        

Throughout much of Tuesday, spokesmen for the government and opposition groups traded barbs, and there were conflicting reports about the nature of the proposal that Mr. Saleh had endorsed. Mr. Qahtan called the president a &ldquo;liar&rdquo; and said the opposition coalition had not been in communication with him since dozens of demonstrators were killed by pro-Saleh forces Friday.        

Mr. Saleh, too, struck a defiant tone in a short, nationally televised address on Tuesday before the country&rsquo;s National Defense Council. He told military officers still loyal to him that &ldquo;the winds won&rsquo;t shake you&rdquo; and warned against a coup.        

The shifting signals from the president &ldquo;may reflect Saleh&rsquo;s personality,&rdquo; said Edmund J. Hull, who was the American ambassador to Yemen from 2001 to 2004. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s a mercurial fellow. Unless he&rsquo;s getting strong advice from someone, he tends to be erratic,&rdquo; Mr. Hull said.        

A Yemeni government official, who spoke in return for anonymity because he was not authorized to brief reporters, said Tuesday that the details of Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s proposal were &ldquo;still in the works.&rdquo; The opposition parties&rsquo; plan, proposed earlier this month, urged Mr. Saleh to complete arrangements by the end of the year for his early departure. But the parties have since backed away from the offer, joining with street demonstrators calling for Mr. Saleh to quit immediately.        

The United States again expressed concern on Tuesday that a power vacuum in Yemen could provide an opening for terrorist groups, including Al Qaeda&rsquo;s local affiliate, Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, which since 2009 has mounted multiple terrorist plots against the United States.        

&ldquo;We are obviously concerned about the instability in Yemen,&rdquo; Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates said Tuesday while traveling in Russia. &ldquo;We consider Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, which is largely located in Yemen, to perhaps be the most dangerous of all of the franchises of Al Qaeda right now.&rdquo;        

Obama administration officials acknowledged that they were watching events unfold in Sana with relatively little ability to influence them. They have limited their official statements to condemnations of violence and calls for a peaceful move to more democratic rule.        

Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s indication on Tuesday that he might be willing to step down early came after four top military commanders, including General Ahmar, joined a wave of defections by diplomats and other officials. Previously, Mr. Saleh had offered to leave by 2013, when his current term ends.        

The latest of the defections came on Tuesday when Abdel-Malik Mansour, Yemen&rsquo;s representative to the Arab League, told Al Arabiya television that he had thrown his support behind the protesters. Abdul-Rahman al-Iryani, the minister of water and environment, who was dismissed by Mr. Saleh with the rest of the cabinet on Sunday, also said he was joining the &ldquo;revolutionaries.&rdquo;        

The defection of General Ahmar, who has long been a pillar of support for the president, was seen by many as a possible sign that government leaders could be negotiating a peaceful exit for the president. But the defense minister, Brig. Gen. Muhammad Nasir Ahmad Ali, later said on television that the armed forces were loyal to Mr. Saleh.        

That suggested the possibility of a rift within the military should Mr. Saleh decide to fight to preserve his 32-year rule. His family members hold critical posts in Yemen&rsquo;s military and intelligence apparatus, and their ability to retain the loyalty of their troops in the face of ballooning opposition has yet to be tested.        

Starting on Monday, military units appeared to take sides in the capital, with the Republican Guard protecting the palace of President Saleh and General Ahmar&rsquo;s soldiers (from the First Armored Division) protecting the throngs of protesters in Sana.        

Some specialists doubted that General Ahmar was a likely successor to Mr. Saleh. A commander with no political profile, he has preferred to operate in the background, they said.        

&ldquo;Mohsin is a thoroughly military guy, very disciplined,&rdquo; said Mr. Hull, the former ambassador. &ldquo;When you go to his military headquarters, it&rsquo;s very tightly run. I don&rsquo;t see him as comfortable in a political role, and Yemenis aren&rsquo;t looking for a military strongman.&rdquo;        
Laura Kasinof reported from Sana, Yemen, and Robert F. Worth from Dubai, United Arab Emirates. J. David Goodman contributed reporting from New York, and Scott Shane from Washington.
