
YONGDING, China &mdash; The gargantuan buildings are so iconic that they appear on a Chinese stamp. The most famous have distinctive round shapes, appearing from a distance like flying saucers that have plopped down in the middle of farm fields. Some were reportedly mistaken for missile silos by American officials poring over satellite images.        

But the thousands of &ldquo;earthen buildings&rdquo; here, built by the ethnic Hakka and Minnan people of rural Fujian Province, are the ultimate architectural expression of clan existence in China.        

For centuries, each building, called a tulou in Mandarin Chinese, would house an entire clan, virtually a village. Everyone living inside would have the same surname, except for those who had married into the clan. The tulou usually tower four floors and have up to hundreds of rooms that open out onto a vast central courtyard, like the Colosseum.        

The outer walls, made of rammed earth, protected against bandits. The forms vary. Many are square, resembling medieval keeps. With stockpiles of food, people could live for months without setting foot outside the tulou.        

But as the clan traditions of China dwindle today, more and more people are moving out of the tulou to live in modern apartments with conveniences absent from the earthen buildings &mdash; indoor toilets, for example.        

The construction of tulou ended last century. The art of building them is fading. The United Nations is seeking to shield those that survive from the ravages of time. Some scholars contend that Chinese officials &mdash; though they promote the tulou as tourist attractions, and President Hu Jintao visited them during the 2010 Lunar New Year festivities &mdash; have done little to systematically preserve the buildings or modernize them so people will continue living in them.        

&ldquo;People don&rsquo;t clean it anymore,&rdquo; said Jiang Qing, 28, as she stood on an upper balcony in Huan Xing tulou, whose name means &ldquo;embracing prosperity.&rdquo; &ldquo;As long as people live here, the ecosystem thrives. Once people move out, then it all falls apart.&rdquo;        

Huan Xing is a typical tulou, one of many in Yongding County. It is 500 years old. Chickens saunter across the grounds. Wooden pillars along the balconies were erected long ago at leaning angles to give the structure greater strength.        

The tulou once housed 100 families, but only 10 or so people live here now. The elderly residents shuffle back and forth, cooking in kitchens on the first floor or sitting around the central courtyard chatting. One afternoon, they were moving firewood stacked outside the front entrance of the tulou to nearby storage sheds; the local government had asked them to do this to hide the messy stacks from tourists.        

The young have all moved out. Many live two hours away in the coastal city of Xiamen, where they largely do menial work.        

Ms. Jiang, the mother of a 3-year-old child, moved here from another village when she married into the Li clan. She was used to tulou living &mdash; she had grown up in a square one herself. She and her husband recently moved out of Huan Xing to an apartment with running water and indoor plumbing. Her husband&rsquo;s parents still live in a tulou, a ramshackle one across the street.        

&ldquo;People used to live in the tulou for safety, but that&rsquo;s not needed anymore,&rdquo; said the husband, Li Jingan, 28, a restaurant owner.        

Unesco, the United Nations agency that oversees cultural preservation, declared 46 tulou together to be a World Heritage Site in 2008. A Unesco museum in one of the tulou says the structures were built between the 13th and 20th centuries. One exhibit says there are 30,000 tulou in Fujian Province, more than 20,000 of those in Yongding County.        

But Huang Hanmin, a scholar of the tulou who lives in Fujian, said there were many myths about the tulou, including the number. He said his research showed there were only 3,000 tulou in the province. A report by Global Heritage Fund, a preservation organization based in California that has a tulou project, gives the same number.        

Mr. Huang said about 1,100 are round, the kind that appear on stamps, postcards and tourism posters. The rest are square or rectangular.        

Another myth, he said, is that the tulou were all built by the Hakka, called kejiaren in Mandarin Chinese, meaning &ldquo;guest people.&rdquo; They are called guests because they began migrating to southern China from the Yellow River basin in the fourth century to escape war and natural disasters.        

Linguists say the Hakka language is closer to the ancient Chinese of the Yellow River area, considered the birthplace of Chinese civilization, than any other language spoken today. Many of the Hakka settled in Fujian and Guangdong Provinces. In the hilly terrain of Fujian, rife with bandits and with residents hostile to the &ldquo;guests,&rdquo; they built the tulou. But Mr. Huang said that their counterparts there, who mostly speak a language called Minnan, also constructed many tulou for security.        

&ldquo;Historically the Hakka people and Minnan people didn&rsquo;t live peacefully side by side,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;So safety became a paramount issue.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The Minnan ones are older, and there are probably more of them,&rdquo; he added. The Minnan people also built some of the largest tulou, with diameters of nearly a tenth of a mile.        
Zhang Jing contributed research.
