
LONDON &mdash; Britain&rsquo;s chancellor of the Exchequer presented a budget Wednesday that veered little from the government&rsquo;s commitment to sharp and controversial cuts in public spending, despite new signs of slowing growth.        

In his second budget as steward of Britain&rsquo;s still faltering economy, the chancellor, George Osborne, presented to Parliament a medley of fairly small-bore measures aimed at spurring growth and easing the pain for the country&rsquo;s increasingly pinched middle class.        

But Mr. Osborne ceded little ground on the issue that has come to define not only him but also &mdash; for better or for worse &mdash; the philosophy of the coalition government as a whole: that the first priority must be to reduce the national debt and narrow a budget deficit that, at 10 percent of gross domestic product, remains one of Europe&rsquo;s highest.        

&ldquo;This is not a tax-raising budget, nor can we afford giveaways,&rdquo; he announced to a packed House of Commons. &ldquo;This is a budget built on sound money. Britain has a plan, and we are sticking to it.&rdquo;        

Optimistically called a &ldquo;Budget for Growth,&rdquo; the plan included tax cuts for lower-income families. The 50-percent rate for high earners remained in place despite calls from the conservative party&rsquo;s right flank to lower it.        

The government also scrapped a planned increase in fuel taxes, set up a fund for first-time home buyers and imposed what is being called a &ldquo;Learjet levy&rdquo; on private planes flying into the country.        

The government&rsquo;s newly independent economic forecast body also lowered its estimate for growth in gross domestic product for 2011 to 1.7 percent from the 2.1 percent seen in November. For 2012, the forecast was trimmed to 2.5 percent, from 2.6 percent.        

Mr. Osborne&rsquo;s austerity budget comes at a time of growing political pressure for similarly minded governments in Europe. Irish voters recently voted out the long-ruling Fianna Fail party, which had agreed to terms on a tough bailout package with the International Monetary Fund and the European Union. In Greece, Prime Minister George Papandreou&rsquo;s Socialist Party is rapidly losing popularity, and in Portugal, the government is teetering on a knife&rsquo;s edge as opposition to its own austerity program builds.        

Unlike those countries in the euro zone, though, Britain retains the luxury of being in control of its own monetary policy, and the Bank of England&rsquo;s governor, Mervyn King, has taken full advantage. Mr. King has flooded the economy with liquidity, keeping interest rates close to zero and, crucially, providing an essential boost to the millions of Britons who have benefited from low payments on their variable-rate mortgages.        

But with inflation set to push beyond 5 percent, it is unclear how much longer Mr. King can hold the line on rates, increasing the pressure on Mr. Osborne to get results with his deficit-cutting strategy sooner rather than later.        

Britain&rsquo;s stubbornly high rate of inflation &mdash; one of the steepest in Europe &mdash; also poses problems for the deficit, as inflation-linked benefits and bond payments will require increased government outlays.        

For all the outcry, spending cuts have not yet really begun. They start to kick in next month and will be felt most keenly within communities small and large throughout the country. Local governments will have to cut staff and make difficult choices about what public services to eliminate or pare down.        

Public opposition has so far been fairly muted. There have been brief spasms of unrest &mdash; like the protests by university students in London several months ago &mdash; but nothing yet that has come close to replicating the reaction to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher&rsquo;s program of liberalization in the 1980s.        

Unions are gearing up for what they hope will be one of the largest protests the country has seen this Saturday, when many thousands of public sector workers and others will gather in London to have their say.        
