
MANILA &mdash; He has been chided for an easygoing work ethic and for his flashy new Porsche, but more than eight months into his presidency, Benigno S. Aquino III still carries with him a glow of hope, much of it inherited along with his family name.        

In a nation where pedigree is a prime political asset, Mr. Aquino&rsquo;s credentials are unmatched. When he recently put his signature to a new 500 peso bill, he signed beneath the twin portraits of his parents, former President Corazon C. Aquino and her husband, Benigno S. Aquino Jr., who became a national icon when he was assassinated in 1983.        

&ldquo;I like to look at it as the last act of this particular play,&rdquo; he said in January on the birthday of his mother, who died in August 2009. As the heir of her husband&rsquo;s mantle as opposition leader, she had ousted former President Ferdinand Marcos in 1986 after a &ldquo;people power&rdquo; uprising and ushered in an era of unfulfilled hopes that continues today.        

Recalling that his mother had entered into office with &ldquo;no blueprint&rdquo; but rather a set of beliefs and values, Mr. Aquino said, &ldquo;I will follow that formula to a large degree.&rdquo;        

He has set out priorities: a squeeze on corruption, a cash-handout kick-start to the economy, a more liberal approach to family planning and respect for human rights.        

But he is facing resistance led by the powerful Roman Catholic church to a bill that would improve access to information on contraception, and perceptions of his commitment to human rights received a jolt last December when he chose not to send a representative to Oslo for the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to the Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo.        

&ldquo;The first six months were amateur hour,&rdquo; said Rene Saguisag, a former senator who was a close adviser to Mrs. Aquino during her own first difficult months. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s O.K., but now they are among the big guys playing the big game.&rdquo;        

However, given the Philippines&rsquo; level of corruption, powerful entrenched interests and what he called the &ldquo;circular firing squad&rdquo; of public acrimony, Mr. Saguisag said the political space for real change is narrow. &ldquo;This is an ungovernable country,&rdquo; he said.        

Nevertheless, at the end of last year, Mr. Aquino&rsquo;s administration was maintaining a satisfaction rating of 64, the highest score by any president since polling began during his mother&rsquo;s tenure, according to a survey released last month by the Social Weather Stations, the country&rsquo;s most respected public opinion polling agency.        

The survey was conducted at the end of November in face-to-face interviews with 1,200 adults and carried a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percent.        

The president &mdash; known by the nicknames Noynoy and P-Noy &mdash; benefits not only from the popularity of his mother but from the unpopularity of his predecessor, Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, who faces possible investigations into accusations of corruption as well as allegations of widespread violations of human rights.        

The expressions of the national mood of hope have come from the left, where the House deputy speaker, Lorenzo R. Ta&ntilde;ada III, has said, &ldquo;The people can breathe easier, with P-Noy leading the way, hopefully, we can work together and put a stop to all enforced disappearances and extrajudicial killings.&rdquo;        

They have also come from the right, where Senator Antonio F. Trillanes, a former navy lieutenant who led a mutiny in 2003, said there was no need today for a corrective coup because the nation was &ldquo;moving in the right direction.&rdquo;        

He said these hopes, like those of many others, were based largely on the president&rsquo;s family background.        

&ldquo;I believe being an Aquino himself, he&rsquo;s in a position to complete that promise, the legacy of the mother,&rdquo; said Mr. Trillanes, who was elected to the Senate last May while serving a prison sentence for his part in the mutiny. &ldquo;By extension he was part of that promise.&rdquo;        

At the same time, the circular firing squad of the press has seized on the &ldquo;work ethic&rdquo; issue, in which it has become the conventional wisdom of gossip that Mr. Aquino does not put in long hours at the office and holds relatively few meetings of his full cabinet.        

&ldquo;Some questions have started to be asked if he is serious in providing inspiring leadership to make the presidency an engine for political reform,&rdquo; wrote Amando Doronila, an influential columnist, in The Philippine Daily Inquirer earlier this month. &ldquo;Or even, is he working hard enough to deliver results?&rdquo;        

There has been a good deal of discussion of his purchase of what he called a thirdhand Porsche, with the president saying he hoped people would understand that it helped him &ldquo;to smile in the face of the many problems that have been left for me to deal with.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
Spinning the family connection in a less appealing direction, Mr. Doronila declared: &ldquo;The issue is that the acquisitions have revealed Mr. Aquino to be a pampered son of a wealthy family living an unfrugal life.&rdquo;        

Mr. Aquino is seen as clean and honest, in his mother&rsquo;s image, and many Filipinos are giving him the benefit of the doubt as he promises to attack the debilitating corruption that has defeated previous efforts at reform. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s just a universal sense that he&rsquo;s not corrupt,&rdquo; said Walden Bello, a congressman and prominent political commentator.        

On the issue of human rights, Mr. Aquino showed a pragmatic side when the Philippines became one of just 18 nations to honor China&rsquo;s request to boycott the Peace Prize ceremony.        

In making that decision, analysts say Mr. Aquino focused on two issues of major importance to the Philippines: its eight million overseas workers, who send home $17 billion or more a year, and economic relations with China, the country&rsquo;s third largest trading partner with bilateral trade reaching about $30 billion last year, as well as billions of dollars a year in soft loans.        

At the time of the ceremony, three Filipinos were facing the death penalty in China on charges of drug smuggling, and analysts believe that the president was angling for lenient treatment for them. Although his efforts had seemed to have won them a reprieve last month, the Chinese ambassador to the Philippines, Liu Jianchao, said last Thursday that the executions would be carried out &ldquo;sooner or later.&rdquo;        

In addition, China was angered last August, when eight tourists from Hong Kong died in a shootout on a bus in Manila.        

&ldquo;It was seen in some quarters as a retreat from the image of firmly upholding human rights and was also seen as making our diplomacy subservient to China,&rdquo; said Mr. Bello, the congressman, referring to the decision not to send a representative to the Nobel ceremony.        

Randy David, an emeritus professor of sociology at the University of the Philippines, said the decision was motivated more by political calculation than principle.        

&ldquo;I think Noynoy is very pragmatic,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;He knows to a certain extent what is popular and what is not. He didn&rsquo;t give it much serious thought, I think. He just went ahead.&rdquo;        
