
DAMASCUS, Syria &mdash; Syrian security forces continued their crackdown on protests in the southern city of Dara&rsquo;a, reportedly firing on demonstrators on Wednesday after the funeral of a prominent doctor shot dead overnight.        

With the city in lockdown and communications limited, the death toll was unclear, though reports ranged from 6 to 15 &mdash; the most in nearly a week of pro-democracy demonstration there.        

Activists and Web sites following the crackdown said the number killed could be much higher.        

The crackdown began early on Wednesday after the Syrian Army reinforced the police presence in the city, near the Jordanian border, and confronted a group of protesters who had gathered in and around the Omari mosque in the city center. Activists and news reports said five or six people were killed after the forces tried to disperse the crowd with tear gas and then live ammunition.        

Among the dead was Ali al-Mahameed, a doctor, who witnesses said was shot while tending to the injured. At least one person was killed after Dr. Mahameed&rsquo;s funeral on Wednesday afternoon, attended by thousands of people, some of whom tried to return to the city center. In various incidents, The Associated Press reported a total of 15 dead during the entire day, among them four bodies seen near the offices of a security agency.        

Syrian state television described a different scene at the Omari mosque, showing guns, grenades, ammunition and money that it said had been taken from the mosque after a police raid. The report acknowledged four dead, but said the deaths were the result of an attack on an ambulance by &ldquo;an armed gang.&rdquo;        

The official SANA news agency reported that the &ldquo;gang&rdquo; had killed a doctor, a medical worker and a driver in an ambulance and &ldquo;security forces faced down those aggressors and managed to shoot and wound a few of them.&rdquo;        

Despite emergency laws that have banned public gatherings for nearly 50 years, protests have grown in the last week in several cities around Syria, one of the most oppressive Arab states. The largest have been in Dara&rsquo;a, with thousands taking to the streets on Friday and again on Sunday, when protesters burned government buildings and clashed with the police. Several people were reported to have died.        

The mosque&rsquo;s imam, Ahmed al-Sayasna, told the news channel Al Arabiya that there were no weapons in the mosque, which he said was under police control.        

A video posted on YouTube showed the mosque with a voice coming from the loudspeakers addressing the police: &ldquo;Who would kill his own people? You are our sons, you are our brother.&rdquo; Armed security forces could be seen running at a distance, amid gun shots and cries for help.        

&ldquo;Streets are full of scores of wounded and many dead, and no one can go to their rescue,&rdquo; a witness said.        
