
WASHINGTON &mdash; In 2009, top aides to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi called together 15 executives from global energy companies operating in Libya&rsquo;s oil fields and issued an extraordinary demand: Shell out the money for his country&rsquo;s $1.5 billion bill for its role in the downing of Pan Am Flight 103 and other terrorist attacks.        

If the companies did not comply, the Libyan officials warned, there would be &ldquo;serious consequences&rdquo; for their oil leases, according to a State Department summary of the meeting.        

Many of those businesses balked, saying that covering Libya&rsquo;s legal settlement with victims&rsquo; families for acts of terrorism was unthinkable. But some companies, including several based in the United States, appeared willing to give in to Libya&rsquo;s coercion and make what amounted to payoffs to keep doing business, according to industry executives, American officials and State Department documents.        

The episode and others like it, the officials said, reflect a Libyan culture rife with corruption, kickbacks, strong-arm tactics and political patronage since the United States reopened trade with Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government in 2004. As American and international oil companies, telecommunications firms and contractors moved into the Libyan market, they discovered that Colonel Qaddafi or his loyalists often sought to extract millions of dollars in &ldquo;signing bonuses&rdquo; and &ldquo;consultancy contracts&rdquo; &mdash; or insisted that the strongman&rsquo;s sons get a piece of the action through shotgun partnerships.        

&ldquo;Libya is a kleptocracy in which the regime &mdash; either the al-Qadhafi family itself or its close political allies &mdash; has a direct stake in anything worth buying, selling or owning,&rdquo; a classified State Department cable said in 2009, using the department&rsquo;s spelling of Qaddafi.        

The wealth that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s family and his government accumulated with the help of international corporations in the years since the lifting of economic sanctions by the West helped fortify his hold on his country. While the outcome of the military intervention under way by the United States and allied countries is uncertain, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s resources &mdash; including a stash of tens of billions of dollars in cash that American officials believe he is using to pay soldiers, mercenaries and supporters &mdash; may help him avert, or at least delay, his removal from power.        

The government not only exploited corporations eager to do business, but willing governments as well. Libya&rsquo;s banks apparently collected lucrative fees by helping Iran launder huge sums of money in recent years in violation of international sanctions on Tehran, according to another cable from Tripoli included in a batch of classified documents obtained by WikiLeaks. In 2009, the cable said, American diplomats warned Libyan officials that its dealings with Iran were jeopardizing Libya&rsquo;s enhanced world standing for the sake of &ldquo;potential short-term business gains.&rdquo;        

In the first few years after trade restrictions were lifted &mdash; Colonel Qaddafi had given up his country&rsquo;s nuclear capabilities and pledged to renounce terrorism &mdash; many American companies were hesitant to do business with Libya&rsquo;s government, officials said. But with an agreement on a settlement over Libya&rsquo;s role in the Pan Am bombing over Lockerbie, Scotland, finally reached in 2008, officials at the United States Commerce Department began to serve as self-described matchmakers for American businesses.        

At least a dozen American corporations, including Boeing, Raytheon, ConocoPhillips, Occidental, Caterpillar and Halliburton, gained footholds, or tried to do so. In May, the Obama administration and the Qaddafi government signed a new trade agreement, designed, according to Gene Cretz, the American ambassador to Libya, to &ldquo;broaden and deepen our bilateral economic relations.&rdquo;        

Libya became so flush with cash that Bernard L. Madoff, the New York financial manager who stole billions of dollars in a long-running Ponzi scheme, approached officials overseeing the country&rsquo;s $70 billion sovereign fund a few years ago about an &ldquo;investment opportunity,&rdquo; according to a State Department summary of the episode in 2010. &ldquo;We did not accept,&rdquo; a Libyan official reported.        

Colonel Qaddafi, the State Department said, was personally involved in many business decisions. He worked with local &ldquo;riqaba&rdquo; councils, an oversight committee set up by the Libyan government to dole out business with foreign firms, and insisted on signing off on all contracts worth more than $200 million. He also learned how to hide money and investments in case sanctions were ever imposed again, as they recently have been.        

Colonel Qaddafi and his family set up accounts in banks around the world that are in the names of members of Libyan tribes that remain loyal to his government, said Idris Abdulla Abed Al-Senussi, a member of the exiled Libyan royal family, who is familiar with many of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s business dealings. (Some accounts may have been frozen by authorities, who have blocked access to tens of billions of dollars.) And Qaddafi relatives adopted lavish lifestyles &mdash; including posh homes, Hollywood film investments and private parties with American pop stars.        

When Colonel Qaddafi was not making the decisions, one of his sons &mdash; whom he has anointed to run various sectors of the country&rsquo;s economy &mdash; often was.        

Daniel E. Karson, executive managing partner at Kroll, a risk-consulting firm, recalled in an interview that an international communications company he represented tried to enter the Libyan cellular phone market in 2007. From the outset, Libyan officials made it clear that the foreign company&rsquo;s local business partner would have to be Muhammad Qaddafi, the eldest son of the Libyan ruler.        

&ldquo;We advised them they would have to go through Muhammad Qaddafi,&rdquo; said Mr. Karson, who declined to identify the client. &ldquo;This was not going to be done on the basis of, as they say in retail, price, quality and delivery.&rdquo; Fearful of going into business with the Qaddafis, he said, the company made no investments in Libya.        

Coca-Cola got caught in the middle of a fierce dispute between Muhammad Qaddafi and his brother Mutassim over control of a bottling plant the soda maker had opened in 2005, forcing it to shut down the plant for months amid armed confrontations, a diplomatic cable noted.        

Barclay Walsh contributed research.
