
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; A NATO airstrike killed three Afghan police officers in central Afghanistan on Sunday in what Afghan officials said was friendly fire. Two more police officers died Monday in a suicide car bomb attack in the southern Taliban stronghold of Kandahar Province.        

Also on Monday, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. made an unannounced visit to Afghanistan to assess progress toward the transfer of military authority to the country and to meet with President Hamid Karzai.        

NATO said it was sending an assessment team to investigate the airstrike, which occurred early Sunday morning in the central province of Daykondi. The coalition said a team was conducting a patrol in the village of Baladas when it spotted &ldquo;nine armed individuals setting up what appeared to be an ambush position.&rdquo; The team called in a helicopter strike, killing three men and wounding three.        

Gen. Abdul Baqir Murtzawi, deputy police chief of the province, said the Afghans were members of a local police team who were on their way to meet a unit of the American Special Forces for a joint patrol when the helicopters swept in. Before joining the police, the men were members of a local self-defense force called Arbakai, General Murtzawi said.        

Lt. Cmdr. Katie Kendrick, a coalition spokeswoman, said she could not confirm General Murtzawi&rsquo;s account because she was not familiar with all of the details of the operation. &ldquo;This is information the assessment team is going out to gather,&rdquo; she said.        

Coalition forces have struggled to recruit local police officers, who are seen as a temporary measure to provide security until national police and army forces can be fully built up and trained. In a statement, NATO offered condolences to the friends and families of those killed.        

&ldquo;While we take extraordinary precaution while conducting operations to avoid friendly casualties, it appears innocent people may have been mistakenly targeted,&rdquo; said the statement from a coalition spokesman, Col. Rafael Torres of the United States Army.        

In Kandahar, a suicide bomber drove a white Toyota Corolla into a border police convoy on the highway between Spinbaldak, on the Pakistani border, and the city of Kandahar, killing two officers and a civilian, said Gen. Abdul Raziq, the border police commander of Kandahar Province.        

It was the second suicide attack on border police officers in the past few days. On Friday, a bomber killed a senior commander, two other officers and 14 civilians in a crowded bathhouse in Spinbaldak.        

&ldquo;They have tried to attack and kill me many times but they have failed,&rdquo; General Raziq said. &ldquo;We will continue our fight against them.&rdquo;        

The general said his officers shot and killed another suicide bomber before he reached his target. He said the bomber was found to have Pakistani identification, which is not uncommon as Taliban and Pakistani extremists move back and forth across the border.        

Elsewhere on Monday, NATO said, coalition and Afghan forces killed 10 insurgents in a raid focused on a Taliban leader in the northern province of Kunduz, where insurgent activity has intensified in recent months. Two people suspected of being insurgents were detained. It was not immediately clear whether the leader being sought, who officials say has close ties to several senior Taliban leaders in Pakistan, was among those killed or captured.        
Sharifullah Sahak and Sangar Rahimi contributed reporting.
