
ZARZIS, Tunisia &mdash; The revolution has changed much in this low-slung, whitewashed city on the Mediterranean coast. Residents no longer live in fear of the secret police, and speak openly of politics. Devout Muslims say they feel a new freedom to practice their faith. The red national flags that hang almost everywhere are no longer joined by the portrait of the ousted president, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali.        

But scores of unemployed young men still slouch in the cafes in the afternoons, smoking water pipes, playing cards and sipping coffee. And at night, the fishing boats still ferry thousands of desperate workers across the Mediterranean to Europe.        

&ldquo;If I could swim to Lampedusa, I&rsquo;d do it,&rdquo; said Walid Bourwina, 23, referring to the Italian island to which thousands of Tunisians have recently fled. A small red satchel, stretched tight with all his belongings, leaned against his foot.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to spend a minute more here,&rdquo; he said.        

He had come to Zarzis, long a major port of departure for Tunisians leaving for Europe, two weeks earlier from a village farther north. He was waiting &mdash; like dozens and dozens of other young men, their faces tired and drawn, wandering this city with their own small bags &mdash; to be approached by local people who quietly offer passage to Lampedusa for about $1,450.        

Tunisians young and old tell of their pride at felling a dictator and touching off the uprisings that have spread across the Arab world. But the exaltation of mid-January has begun to give way to more sober realities. The revolution has not solved chronic youth unemployment, and the unrest has battered the economy with the flight of tourists and capital. The government is in upheaval, and many also fear it will be years before a pre-revolution culture of mistrust and corruption fades.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s an entire country that needs to be remade,&rdquo; said Ahmed Faouzi Khenissi, the mayor of Zarzis, a city of 70,000. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not going to be one year, or two years, or three years. It&rsquo;s going to be an entire generation.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;If I were their age,&rdquo; he said of the young men who flee to Europe, &ldquo;I would have emigrated.&rdquo;        

With the border police suddenly absent after the departure of Mr. Ben Ali on Jan. 14, more than 15,000 Tunisians have left in boats for Europe, according to the United Nations, most setting off from the beaches of Zarzis. In response, Italy&rsquo;s various regions agreed Tuesday to temporarily share the responsibility of taking in as many as 50,000 migrants leaving North Africa.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to wait, unemployed, for another year, before things start getting better,&rdquo; Mr. Bourwina said.        

The eldest son of a day laborer, he dropped out of high school because his family could no longer afford to pay for his schooling, he said. He had been out of work for the past year, though earlier he had been a painter in Tunis, the capital, earning 300 dinars each month. It was more than the minimum wage, but far from enough to pay for the home and car he covets, let alone the European lifestyle &mdash; discovered through Facebook, he said &mdash; to which he aspires, like many Tunisian youths.        

For years, the unemployment rate here has hovered near 13 percent, according to official statistics. And in a nation where more than half the population is under 30, youth unemployment is at 30 percent, and even higher among university graduates.        

Tunisia&rsquo;s interim prime minister, B&eacute;ji Ca&iuml;d Essebsi, has said that reducing unemployment will very likely prove &ldquo;arduous,&rdquo; and would require an improbable economic growth rate of 8 or 9 percent.        

&ldquo;Tunisia is capable of this,&rdquo; Mr. Essebsi vowed in an interview this month with Le Monde.        

It would have been an ambitious goal even for pre-revolutionary Tunisia, where in the past decade annual growth only once exceeded 6 percent, in 2007. And it is a task made harder by the social and political unrest that has continued since mid-January. Planned elections remain several months away, and a number of interim ministers have resigned or been forced out of office. Several people have died in continuing street protests.        

The tensions have sapped investor confidence, and agencies have downgraded Tunisia&rsquo;s credit rating to near junk status.        

The country&rsquo;s economy weathered the global downturn with relative poise &mdash; growing 3 percent in 2009 &mdash; but it was dealt a harsh blow by the revolution. The upheaval crippled the critical tourism sector, which typically employs 400,000 of the country&rsquo;s 3.3 million workers and accounts for 7 percent of gross domestic product. Tourism revenues have dropped 40 percent in the months since Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s ouster. (The government has, however, started a promotional campaign with the cheeky tag line, &ldquo;Finally free to tan.&rdquo;)        
(Page 2 of 2)
Mr. Essebsi, the prime minister, told Le Monde that he predicted that political stability would be achieved by midsummer; he offered no guess as to when the economy might recover, nor when unemployment might begin to fall.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know if things are going to be fixed,&rdquo; said one young man who left Zarzis just three weeks after the revolution. Now in Paris, he has yet to find work, but said he did not regret his departure.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s no hope in Tunisia,&rdquo; said the man, 27, who gave his name only as Walid, fearing deportation. He noted that many regional governments remained controlled by members of Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s now defunct political party.        

He had found occasional work in Zarzis as a laborer, he said, living with his family and earning less than 100 dinars each month. Earlier, he had studied computing in Tunis, but said he left his degree unfinished after repeated beatings by the secret police. Vocally antigovernment, he said even his professors had begun to fail him, at the government&rsquo;s behest.        

&ldquo;They made me hate my country,&rdquo; he said, though he plans to return to Zarzis to build a house once he has earned 20,000 euros in France.        

Tunisians have been leaving Zarzis with similar hopes for generations. Walid&rsquo;s own father worked in a Renault automobile plant in France for 23 years, he said. Local lore holds that there are 25,000 Zarzisian families living in France, many sending money home each month.        

&ldquo;Without that income, Zarzis could not survive,&rdquo; said Mr. Khenissi, the mayor. Emigration from the city &ldquo;is not a new phenomenon,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It will never stop.&rdquo;        

The recent exodus is unprecedented in scale, though. It has devastated the local fishing fleet, the largest source of boats used to ferry migrants across the Mediterranean. Italian border authorities have seized 70 percent of the Zarzis fishing fleet in Lampedusa, Mr. Khenissi said. He estimated it would take a full year to rebuild it.        

With so many young men suddenly gone &mdash; about 2,500 Zarzis residents are thought to have left since mid-January &mdash; businesses here have also reportedly been finding themselves short-handed.        

&ldquo;But on the other hand,&rdquo; Mr. Khenissi noted wryly, &ldquo;we have less unemployment.&rdquo;        
