
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; More than 30 coffins were carried to Martyrs Cemetery here Thursday, escorted by hundreds of flag-waving supporters of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi chanting condemnation of what the state media said were civilian casualties of American and European airstrikes.        

But after two hours of noisy pro-Qaddafi, anti-Western cheers &mdash; and very little grief &mdash; for what state television called &ldquo;victims of the crusader colonialist aggression,&rdquo; most of the coffins were taken away. Only about a dozen coffins were actually buried, and two Western photographers said some smelled of corpses dead for days. There was no way to know who or what was in the others, or for that matter what was going through the minds of those who turned up to cheer.        

Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s Libya is a country where even a coffin is sometimes a question mark. Four decades of ruthless penalties for political dissent &mdash; and vast rewards for Qaddafi loyalty &mdash; long ago transformed Libyan public life into a kind of elaborate theater, dropping a heavy curtain between public expression and private opinion. And that curtain has made the current conflict between Colonel Qaddafi and the rebels trying to unseat him a shadowy affair in which it is often hard to tell just who is playing what role &mdash; from the colonel&rsquo;s closest associates to the flag-waving crowds in the street.        

At the pro-Qaddafi rallies in the city&rsquo;s central Green Square and the colonel&rsquo;s compound, Western journalists have run into at least three Libyans who had previously attended protests or made anonymous statements against the Qaddafi government. A participant in an anti-Qaddafi protest in the neighborhood of Tajoura cheerfully reintroduced himself days later to a photographer for The New York Times in the middle of Green Square. &ldquo;Sad,&rdquo; he said of the events in Libya, without specifying whether he was referring to the protests or the crackdown.        

For some political camouflage is just part of doing business. Delphine Minoui, a correspondent for the French newspaper Le Figaro, reported visiting a hair salon whose owner alternately praised or criticized Qaddafi &mdash; depending on the client &mdash; and then turned up as a voluntary human shield at a rally in the Qaddafi compound.        

Some shadows extend even into the Qaddafi family. A week after the uprising began, for example, the official Egyptian news agency reported that Ahmed Qaddaf al-Dam, the colonel&rsquo;s cousin and aide, had flown to Egypt and resigned. He had turned against the government &ldquo;to protest against the handling of the Libyan crisis,&rdquo; the agency reported, and his associates issued a statement calling for &ldquo;a halt to the bloodbath and a return to reason in order to preserve the unity and future of Libya.&rdquo;        

Recently, however, rebel supporters working in Cairo have asserted that the cousin&rsquo;s defection was some sort of ruse. &ldquo;That was a lie,&rdquo; said Hany Soufrakis, a rebel organizer in Cairo. &ldquo;He is very active in supporting Qaddafi in Cairo and the region,&rdquo; Mr. Soufrakis added, in an e-mail.        

Mr. Dam could not be reached but Ali Maria, the Libyan ambassador to Egypt and a Qaddafi loyalist, said in an interview this week that he too believed Mr. Dam had resigned but continued to support the colonel&rsquo;s cause.        

In the rebel stronghold of Benghazi, the insurrection leaders say the same phenomenon has now complicated their search for Qaddafi loyalists who turned up in their streets. They started looking for members of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s network of civilian supporters known as the &ldquo;revolutionary committees.&rdquo; But plenty of Qaddafi skeptics had also joined these committees in order to gain a visa to study abroad, paperwork to buy a car, or various other perks.        

Perhaps most discussed of all is the case of Abdul Fattah Younes. Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s former interior minister &mdash; in charge of the extralegal detention and torture of untold numbers of dissenters &mdash; Mr. Younes comes from a Benghazi-area tribe and became an early defector to the rebel cause. Now he is in charge of the rebels&rsquo; military operation and a perpetual target of distrust by many of his colleagues.        

Then last weekend, state television began reporting that, far from deserting, he had recovered from a sick leave and returned to his job, sending rebels and journalists alike scurrying to figure out just which side he had betrayed.        

The rebels say he is still working for them. But asked recently about Mr. Younes, Ali Tarhouni, a newly appointed minister in the rebel&rsquo;s shadow government, sounded a little equivocal. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not sure we have somebody better,&rdquo; he said.        

On Monday, the Qaddafi government said it would bury 28 civilian casualties in the same cemetery. But none of the deaths could be confirmed and 24 graves were left empty. More than half were still empty at the end of the day Thursday.        

Qaddafi government officials have denied repeated requests by Western journalists for a chance to visit hospitals where civilian casualties were said to be treated, so on Thursday 10 British and American journalists who are in Tripoli as guests of the Qaddafi government tried to visit a hospital on their own. But Qaddafi security forces intercepted them and returned them to their hotel, and so the contents of the coffins remained a mystery.        
Moises Saman contributed reporting.
