
AMMAN, Jordan &mdash; More than 1,000 pro-democracy demonstrators set up a tent camp in the center of Amman, the Jordanian capital, on Thursday in conscious imitation of Tahrir Square in Cairo, saying they would stay put until they saw real change.        

The group, which has taken the name &ldquo;March 24th Movement&rdquo; after the date they began camping out, says it wants an end to corruption and autocracy as well as an increase in economic equality. Scores of young adults had &ldquo;24&rdquo; scrawled in marker on their faces to indicate their affiliation with the movement, which many learned of on the Internet.        

&ldquo;This is my first demonstration, and I heard about it on Facebook,&rdquo; said Abdullah Habiba, 22. &ldquo;I study political science in the university. I want the Parliament dissolved and new elections. Now this is the only way forward.&rdquo;        

As in Tahrir Square and in Pearl Square in Bahrain, the site&rsquo;s organizers have established cooking and cleaning services and put an emphasis on orderliness. Participants include doctors, engineers and other professionals. They have set up camp in what is known as the Interior Ministry Circle because the ministry used to be located here.        

Not far away were several dozen counterdemonstrators holding pictures of King Abdullah II and chanting, &ldquo;We sacrifice our blood and soul for you, O King Abdullah.&rdquo; Police officers linking arms kept the counterdemonstrators from interfering with the main protesters.        

On Feb. 1, the king fired his cabinet after weeks of demonstrations that followed similar movements in Tunisia and Egypt. The palace said then that the new prime minister, Marouf al-Bakhit, had the task of &ldquo;taking practical, swift and tangible steps to launch a real political reform process, in line with the king&rsquo;s version of comprehensive reform, modernization and development.&rdquo;        

Since then, it seemed that the protest movement had gone relatively quiet while reforms were negotiated. The government set up a group of 50 people to discuss changes in the electoral law, which favors certain constituents over others. As that discussion has taken place, though, new demands have arisen in the public.        

Among those clamoring for more reform include former generals, teachers seeking a union, day laborers unhappy with wages and prices, Muslim Brotherhood members and tribe members normally thought of as the bedrock of royal support.        

A Muslim Brotherhood official said that his group was leaving it up to individuals whether to take part. While Muslim activists were in evidence, the thrust was for democratic government.        

One poster referred to previous battles, saying, &ldquo;My grandfather was a martyr for Palestine, my father was a martyr for the battle of Karameh, but I am going to be a martyr for freeing my country of corruption.&rdquo;        

Lubna Ahmed, 29, had 24 written on her face. She said she had studied economics at the university but was now unemployed and looking for work: &ldquo;We need to be able to eat and live.&rdquo;        

Three young women stood behind her. Asked whether they were with her, she stepped back, pointed to the hundreds of people all over the circle and said, &ldquo;We are all together, all 2,000 of us.&rdquo;        
Ranya Kadri reported from Amman, and Ethan Bronner from Jerusalem.
