
WASHINGTON &mdash; NATO will assume leadership from the United States of patrolling the skies over Libya but the military alliance remains divided over who will command aggressive coalition airstrikes on Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s ground troops, NATO and American officials said Thursday.        

After a day of confusion and conflicting reports out of NATO headquarters in Brussels, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton announced late Thursday in Washington that NATO had agreed to lead the allies in maintaining the no-fly zone. Effectively, that means that planes from NATO countries will fly missions over Libya with little fear of being shot down since Tomahawk missiles, most of them American, largely destroyed Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s air defenses and air force last weekend.        

But NATO and American officials said NATO had balked at assuming responsibility, at least for now, of what military officials call the &ldquo;no-drive zone,&rdquo; &nbsp;which would entail &nbsp;bombing Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s ground forces, tanks and artillery that are massing outside crucial Libyan cities, and doing so without inflicting casualties on &nbsp;civilians. &nbsp;        

Late Thursday night a senior Obama administration official insisted that NATO had agreed to assume responsibility for the no-fly and &ldquo;no-drive&rdquo; zones but said the details remained to be worked out. The official&rsquo;s statements appeared to contradict those of the secretary-general of NATO, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, who said in Brussels earlier Thursday that NATO was still considering whether to take on &ldquo;broader responsibility&rdquo; for the war.        

A NATO official said that two member nations, Germany and Turkey, objected to NATO participating in strikes that they consider beyond the mandate of the United Nations Security Council resolution that authorized the military action in Libya.        

The announcement of at least a partial handoff of responsibility to NATO came only five days after the conflict started and reflected the intense pressure on President Obama to deliver on his promise that the United States would step back &ldquo;within days, not weeks&rdquo; from command of the effort.        

Mrs. Clinton, in her comments on Thursday night, said the United States was already cutting back its role. &ldquo;As expected, we are already seeing a significant reduction in the number of U.S. planes,&rdquo; she said.        

At the Pentagon earlier Thursday, Vice Adm. William E. Gortney, the director of the joint staff, said that American fighter jets would continue bombing Libya and that American surveillance planes would provide reconnaissance even after NATO, in partnership with other coalition members, assumes leadership of the coalition. He also said the United States would provide airborne refueling tankers for coalition warplanes as well as other logistical support.        

As the United States and its European allies tried to work out a coherent agreement for control of the war, the allies continued to pound Libyan ground forces, tanks and artillery outside three key Libyan cities &mdash; Misurata, Ajdabiya and Zintan. Admiral Gortney said the airstrikes were aimed at cutting off the communications and supply lines of the Libyan forces. The coalition was not bombing inside the cities to avoid inflicting civilian casualties, he said.        

Admiral Gortney said the coalition would continue to attack Libyan ground forces as long as the Libyan forces threatened the lives of Libyan civilians. He said the United States and its allies had repeatedly told the Libyan forces to cease and desist &mdash; he did not say whether the communications were by radio, leaflets or other means &mdash; and that they had been ignored.        

&ldquo;Our message to regime troops is simple: stop fighting, stop killing your own people, stop obeying the orders of Colonel Qaddafi,&rdquo; Admiral Gortney said. &ldquo;To the degree that you defy these demands, we will continue to hit you and make it more difficult for you to keep going.&rdquo;        

In Libya, it appeared that the barrage of coalition airstrikes &mdash; the Pentagon said there had been 49 strikes on Libyan targets on Thursday &mdash; had begun to shift momentum from the forces loyal to Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi to the rebels opposing him.        

In Misurata, rebels said they were feeling reinvigorated by a second night airstrikes against the Qaddafi forces that have besieged them. The rebels said that they continued to battle a handful of Qaddafi gunmen in the city but that the armored units and artillery surrounding the city appeared to have pulled back, their supply and communication lines cut off by the airstrikes.        

Earlier on Thursday a French Rafale fighter jet fired on a Libyan warplane that had been detected by reconnaissance aircraft flying above the embattled city of Misurata, the French Defense Ministry said in a statement. The plane was hit by a missile shortly after landing at a nearby military airbase, the Defense Ministry said.        

At a news conference in Tripoli, the Libyan capital, Khalid Kaim, the deputy foreign minister, issued sweeping denials that the rebels had made battle gains. Contradicting the reports of residents in Misurata, Mr. Kaim said the Qaddafi government had controlled the city for a week &ldquo;except for pockets of violence.&rdquo;        

Again contradicting residents, he said that utility companies had turned on the power and water, and he faulted the rebels and international airstrikes for turning them off.        

Mr. Kaim also denied that French fighters had shot down a Qaddafi warplane, saying that no Libyan warplane had taken off in days in observance of the United Nations resolution.        

Rebels in Libya said that Qaddafi warships that had closed the port in Misurata ( had departed, opening a vital supply outlet and allowing them to make arrangements with an international aid group, Doctors Without Borders, to evacuate 50 of their wounded by boat to Malta on Sunday. A rebel spokesman in Misurata said that only two residents were wounded on Thursday, after 109 deaths over the previous six days.        

In Washington, Mrs. Clinton said that a group supported by the Agency for International Development would soon be able to provide humanitarian relief to Libyan civilians, but she gave no details.        

In what was potentially one of the first signs of breakdown in discipline among the Qaddafi forces, rebels near the eastern city of Ajdabiya said they were in negotiations with a unit of pro-Qaddafi troops who have offered to abandon their position and withdraw further west. The unit, stationed at the northern entrance to the city, had lost contact with its commanders, said a rebel spokesman, Col. Ahmed Omar Bani.        

The negotiations, which were being conducted through a local imam, hit a snag on the issue of whether the troops would keep their weaponry and withdraw further west or simply surrender, as the rebels were demanding. &ldquo;We are trying to lead them to peace,&rdquo; Colonel Bani said.        

The rebels have made inflated claims in the past, and these reports have not been corroborated by independent sources. As rebel leaders continued to plead for weapons, along with communications and night-vision equipment from abroad, they said that no foreign experts had been sent to help train their fighters. &ldquo;The only foreign expert we use is Google Earth,&rdquo; Colonel Bani said.        
Elisabeth Bumiller reported from Washington, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Tripoli, Libya. Reporting was contributed by Kareem Fahim from Benghazi, Libya; Thom Shanker from Cairo; Alan Cowell, Scott Sayare and Steven Erlanger from Paris; and Mark Landler and Steven Lee Myers from Washington.
