
Syria&rsquo;s repressive leadership came under unexpectedly heavy pressure on Thursday as thousands of angry demonstrators massed again in the southern city of Dara&rsquo;a, demanding democratic reform and protesting the deaths of more than a dozen people shot by security forces in the past week.        

The government of President Bashar al-Assad, unaccustomed to concessions, rapidly announced a series of reforms, including a salary increase for public workers, greater freedom for the news media and political parties, and a reconsideration of the emergency rule that has clamped down the nation for 48 years.        

Mr. Assad also ordered prisoners taken during the crackdown this week to be freed. An adviser said publicly that Mr. Assad had ordered troops not to fire live rounds at protesters in Dara&rsquo;a and that &ldquo;there were, maybe, some mistakes.&rdquo;        

The concessions did not appear to satisfy the protesters, who were expected to gather in even larger numbers on Friday, the Muslim day of prayer. Fridays have become a central forum during the recent weeks of tumult around the Middle East.        

&ldquo;We totally refuse&rdquo; the concessions, said one man in a crowd of thousands marching toward the central Omari mosque in Dara&rsquo;a, according to a witness who was interviewed by telephone.        

Early Wednesday morning, security forces fired live rounds at protesters at that mosque, killing at least six people, including a doctor tending to the wounded, witnesses said. People attending funerals later in the day were also fired on.        

An American official who spoke anonymously to discuss intelligence reporting about the unrest said &ldquo;about 15 people&rdquo; had died in all. Reuters quoted an unidentified hospital official in Dara&rsquo;a as putting the death toll at 37 since Wednesday morning. Web sites were collecting names of those believed to have been killed, and bloody videos were posted on YouTube showing the deaths of several young men reportedly in Dara&rsquo;a.        

No violence was reported in the huge gatherings around the funerals on Thursday, and there were reports that the police and the army had pulled back from the city center.        

Information has trickled out slowly and incompletely from Syria, one of the most closed nations in the Middle East and a close ally of Iran and the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah. But as the death toll from the Dara&rsquo;a crackdown has risen, Mr. Assad has faced growing criticism both internally, as the protests spread around the south, and from other nations.        

On Thursday, the White House press secretary, Jay Carney, issued a statement condemning what he called &ldquo;the Syrian government&rsquo;s brutal repression of demonstrations, in particular the violence and killings of civilians at the hands of security forces.&rdquo;        

The Obama administration said that it was watching to see if Mr. Assad would follow through with the promises made Thursday.        

&ldquo;Words are words,&rdquo; Mark Toner, a State Department spokesman, told reporters. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll obviously look for action.&rdquo;        

He added, &ldquo;We were, and obviously remain, deeply troubled by the violence and civilian deaths, especially in Dara&rsquo;a, at the hands of security forces.&rdquo;        

The crisis in Dara&rsquo;a, near the Jordanian border, began as the uprisings spread in Tunisia and Egypt, ultimately overturning those countries&rsquo; governments. Children in Dara&rsquo;a wrote slogans on walls calling for an end to Mr. Assad&rsquo;s rule, and several weeks ago, about 15 children younger than 14 were arrested.        

Starting last Friday, protests broke out in Dara&rsquo;a and several surrounding towns demanding the release of the children. Security forces cracked down with tear gas, water cannons and, ultimately, live rounds, human rights activists say. Several people were reported killed, churning the anger that led to the protests at the Omari mosque on Wednesday.        

Andrew J. Tabler, who lived in Syria for a decade and is now at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, said six days of protests of this size were unknown in Syria since at least 1982. In February of that year, Mr. Assad&rsquo;s father, Hafez al-Assad, killed at least 10,000 people in an assault on the city of Hama to end an Islamist uprising definitively.        

&ldquo;The regime is under serious pressure,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and it&rsquo;s hard to predict where this may lead.&rdquo;        

The protests are in a Sunni area, and Mr. Tabler said the turmoil threatened to &ldquo;crack the Sunni veneer&rdquo; of the government of Mr. Assad, who is of the Alawite religious minority. But he said the protests had not so far taken on a strong sectarian character and were mainly a response to years of broken promises and delays in carrying out political reforms.        

Mr. Tabler noted that the same spokeswoman for Mr. Assad who promised reforms on Thursday made similar promises in 2005. "Nothing happened," he said.        
Scott Shane contributed reporting from Washington, and Thom Shanker from Tel Aviv.
