
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Cheering crowds have gathered in recent days to support the assassin who riddled the governor of Punjab with 26 bullets and to praise his attack &mdash; carried out in the name of the Prophet Muhammad &mdash; as an act of heroism. To the surprise of many, chief among them have been Pakistan&rsquo;s young lawyers, once seen as a force for democracy.        

Their energetic campaign on behalf of the killer has caught the government flat-footed and dismayed friends and supporters of the slain politician, Salman Taseer, an outspoken proponent of liberalism who had challenged the nation&rsquo;s strict blasphemy laws. It has also confused many in the broader public and observers abroad, who expected to see a firm state prosecution of the assassin.        

Instead, before his court appearances, the lawyers showered rose petals  over the confessed killer, Malik Mumtaz Hussain Qadri, a member of an elite police group who had been assigned to guard the governor, but who instead turned his gun on him. They have now enthusiastically taken up his defense.        

It may seem a stark turnabout for a group that just a few years ago looked like the vanguard of a democracy movement. They waged months of protests in 2007 and 2008 to challenge Pakistan&rsquo;s military dictator after he unlawfully removed the  chief justice.        

But the lawyers&rsquo; stance is perhaps just the most glaring expression of what has become a deep generational divide tearing at the fabric of Pakistani society, and of the broad influence of religious conservatism &mdash; and even militancy &mdash; that now exists among the educated middle class.        

They are often described as the Zia generation: Pakistanis who have come of age since the 1980s, when the military dictator, Gen. Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, began to promote Islam in public education and to use it as a political tool to unify this young and insecure nation.        

Today, the forces he set loose have gained such strength that they threaten to overwhelm voices for tolerance in Pakistan&rsquo;s feeble civilian government. They certainly present a nagging challenge for the United States.        

Washington has poured billions of dollars into the Pakistani military to combat terrorism, but has long neglected a civilian effort to counter the inexorable pull of conservative Islam. By now the conservatives have entered nearly every part of Pakistani society, even the rank-and-file security forces, as the assassination showed. The military, in fact, has been conspicuously silent about the killing.        

&ldquo;Over time, Pakistani society has drifted toward religious extremism,&rdquo; said Hasan Askari Rizvi, a political and defense analyst from Lahore. &ldquo;This religious sentiment has seeped deep into government circles and into the army and police at lower levels.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The lower level are listening to the religious people,&rdquo; he said.        

Indeed, the Pakistan of today, and the brand of Islam much of the nation has embraced, is barely recognizable even to many educated Pakistanis older than the Zia generation. Among them is Athar Minallah, 49, a former cabinet minister and one of the leaders of the lawyers&rsquo; protest campaign against Gen. Pervez Musharraf in 2007 and 2008.        

Mr. Minallah studied law at Islamic University in Islamabad from 1983 to 1986, and the first lesson any student learned in his day was that the preservation of life was a pillar of Islamic law, he said.        

But under General Zia in the 1980s, the government began supporting Islamic warriors to fight the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan and the Indian control of Kashmir, and the syllabus was changed to encourage jihad. The mind-set of students and graduates changed along with it, Mr. Minallah said.        

That change is now no more apparent than among the 1,000 lawyers from the capital, Islamabad, and the neighboring city of Rawalpindi, who have given their signed support for the defense of Mr. Qadri, who has been charged with murder and terrorism.        

Their leader is Rao Abdur Raheem, 30, who formed a &ldquo;lawyers&rsquo; forum,&rdquo; called the Movement to Protect the Dignity of the Prophet, in December. The aim of the group, he said, was to counter Mr. Taseer&rsquo;s campaign to amend the nation&rsquo;s strict blasphemy laws, which promise death for insulting the Prophet Muhammad.        

In interviews, Mr. Raheem and six of his colleagues insisted they were not members of any political or religious party, and were acting independently and interested only in ensuring the rule of law.        

All graduates of different Pakistani universities, they insisted they were liberal, not religious conservatives. Only one had religious training. They said they had all taken part in the lawyers&rsquo; protest campaign in 2007 and 2008, and that they were proud that the movement helped reinstate the chief justice.        
Salman Masood contributed reporting from Islamabad, and Waqar Gillani from Lahore, Pakistan.
