
WASHINGTON &mdash; President Obama&rsquo;s intervention in Libya is one of the riskiest gambles of his presidency, but he is doing his best not to make it seem like a major crisis.        

Even as he was ordering American forces into action, the president went ahead with a five-day tour of Brazil, Chile and El Salvador, where he promoted trade relations while getting updates on the military operation from his aides in hotel suites or on Air Force One. (He did skip a tour of Mayan ruins in El Salvador to huddle with his national security team.) Back in his office on Thursday, Mr. Obama held more Libya meetings but made no public statements.        

Six days into the campaign, code-named Operation Odyssey Dawn, Mr. Obama has not delivered an Oval Office address about it, despite intensifying demands by members of Congress from both parties for a clearer statement of what the United States and its allies are trying to accomplish in Libya.        

The president left it to Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton to announce the latest agreement among the allies on Thursday evening about command of the operation and to update the nation on military developments.        

The White House spokesman, Jay Carney, gave his daily briefing on Thursday without TV cameras, saying it was easier that way because some in the press corps were at home resting after the trip &mdash; though a full house in the briefing room suggested that their colleagues were eager to hear the latest on Libya.        

Asked whether the United States was at war, Mr. Carney described it as a &ldquo;time-limited, scope-limited military action.&rdquo; Pressed, he said it was easier to say what the operation was not: a large-scale, open-ended action, &ldquo;the kind of which might otherwise be described as a war.&rdquo;        

Mr. Obama has sought since the November elections to develop a new narrative for his presidency, one that casts him as a pragmatist who can rise above day-to-day partisan bickering to focus on the big challenges facing the country. He has stuck to that strategy even as events have conspired to focus attention on a series of crises.        

Moreover, Mr. Obama has often seemed a reluctant warrior. His lengthy deliberations on deploying more troops to Afghanistan, and the somber speech at West Point in which he announced he would send 30,000 soldiers but begin pulling out in July 2011, attest to his focus on an exit strategy.        

This time, the exit is even more abrupt: Mrs. Clinton said the United States had begun relinquishing its lead role in imposing a no-fly zone over Libya. Now, she said, it will play only a support role in an operation coordinated by NATO and made up of European and Arab participants.        

To some critics on Capitol Hill and elsewhere, Mr. Obama&rsquo;s approach has been so low-key that they say he has failed to provide lawmakers or the public with answers about what is shaping up as a complex military adventure, with a balky coalition, in a poorly understood country.        

There is diplomatic conflict and confusion abroad and shifting political currents at home. Many liberals are uneasy about involvement in another military conflict, even as they applaud the effort to avert a massacre by Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces. Some conservatives back the action as a necessary projection of American force and values; others see it as imprudent and not addressing a compelling national security interest.        

&ldquo;The president&rsquo;s intentions were good,&rdquo; said David Rothkopf, a national security expert who worked in the Clinton administration. &ldquo;But the operational objectives have been confused, the chain of command has been confused, the message has been confused, and the results have been just what you would expect.&rdquo;        

A case in point came when the White House disclosed Tuesday that Mr. Obama had telephoned Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey to discuss the military campaign. The two men &ldquo;underscored their shared commitment to the goal of helping provide the Libyan people an opportunity to transform their country, by installing a democratic system that respects the people&rsquo;s will,&rdquo; according to a White House statement.        

That raised eyebrows on Capitol Hill, with some Republicans saying it amounted to a call for regime change, well beyond the objectives sketched out by the president. Benjamin J. Rhodes, a deputy national security adviser, later said that this was not the objective of the mission, though Mr. Obama believes Colonel Qaddafi needs to go because he has lost his people&rsquo;s confidence.        

The House speaker, John A. Boehner, complained Wednesday in a letter to Mr. Obama about the &ldquo;limited, sometimes contradictory, case made to the American people by members of your administration.&rdquo; The White House, he said, did not adequately consult Congressional leaders before committing to combat.        

Mr. Carney pushed back, reciting a list of Congressional briefings and hearings at which Mrs. Clinton; Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates; Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; and other senior officials testified about Libya. On March 18, the day after the United Nations Security Council passed its resolution authorizing the no-fly zone over Libya, Mr. Obama invited a bipartisan group, including Mr. Boehner, to the White House to brief them.        

The White House now seems to be trying to smooth feathers. Next Wednesday, it will dispatch Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Gates, Admiral Mullen, and Lt. Gen. James Clapper, the director of national intelligence, to give a classified briefing to House members. Mrs. Clinton will have just returned from a meeting of coalition partners in London and may be able to shed light on what has so far been a querulous alliance.        

As for Mr. Obama adhering to his Latin American travel plans, aides noted that he has juggled multiple crises since coming into office and said that Air Force One functions well as a mobile office. The president does not view Libya as an &ldquo;all-consuming crisis,&rdquo; one official said, any more than he viewed the earthquake, tsunami and nuclear crisis in Japan as all-consuming.        
