
BEIJING &mdash; A Chinese court sentenced one of the country&rsquo;s most seasoned pro-democracy activists to 10 years in prison on Friday on charges that his writings slandered the ruling Communist Party and were part of an effort to end its monopoly on power, his lawyer said.        

The activist, Liu Xianbin, 43, a resident of Sichuan Province who previously served nine years for organizing an outlawed political party, was convicted of &ldquo;inciting subversion of state power,&rdquo; a grave charge often subject to broad interpretation by judicial authorities. The conviction was largely based on articles Mr. Liu wrote for overseas Chinese-language publications that advocate for human rights and democracy.        

Rights groups say the unusually harsh sentence is another worrying sign that the government&rsquo;s crackdown on dissent is growing. In recent weeks nearly two dozen writers, lawyers and civil society advocates have been detained on criminal charges and 11 more people have vanished into police custody.        

The wave of detentions and disappearances started in February after an American Web site posted anonymous calls for people in a number of Chinese cities to protest Communist Party rule. Inspired by the uprisings in the Arab world, the protests were promptly quashed by the police, who pre-emptively swept up many of the nation&rsquo;s best-known rights lawyers but also low-profile activists who simply forwarded the protest calls on their microblogs.        

Rights groups said that at least half of the 22 people arrested might face charges of subversion.        

&ldquo;To have this many people disappeared or accused of subversion is unprecedented and very worrying,&rdquo; said Wang Songlian, a researcher at Chinese Human Rights Defenders. &ldquo;People are scared, and no one knows when the crackdown is going to end.&rdquo;        

Mr. Liu is no stranger to China&rsquo;s unforgiving judicial system. A veteran of the 1989 democracy protests in Tiananmen Square, he was arrested two years later and given a two-and-half-year term for &ldquo;counterrevolutionary propaganda and incitement,&rdquo; stemming from posters he made calling for an end to government repression. In 1999, after helping to establish the China Democratic Party, he was given a 13-year sentence.        

In the months after his release, Mr. Liu promptly resumed his agitation for political reform. He signed Charter 08, an online petition calling for expanded liberties and universal suffrage, and wrote articles that promoted nonviolent protest. A number of essays stridently criticized the Communist Party.        

During his two-hour trial on Friday at the Suining Intermediate People&rsquo;s Court, prosecutors introduced two articles as evidence, including one titled &ldquo;Street Protests are an Important Tactic for the Chinese Democratic Movement.&rdquo;        

One of his lawyers, Mo Shaoping, dismissed the accusations against Mr. Liu, saying his writings were protected under China&rsquo;s Constitution, which guarantees free speech. He and others rights advocates have criticized the government&rsquo;s handling of the case, including the many months Mr. Liu was denied access to a lawyer. &ldquo;Not only is this sentence wrong and unfair, but it is a total abuse of judicial procedure,&rdquo; Mr. Mo said.        

In a telephone interview Mr. Liu&rsquo;s wife, Chen Mingxian, who was in the courtroom on Friday, said her husband had been repeatedly cut off by the judge as he tried to speak. She said she doubted he would appeal, given his unhappy experiences with the judicial system.        

A middle-school teacher, Ms. Chen spoke fondly of the 20 months she and her 13-year-old daughter spent with Mr. Liu before his latest arrest in June. But public security agents did not make life easy, she said. When Mr. Liu found a job, they would pressure the prospective employer to rescind the offer. They also would not let him seek work outside Suining.        

Ms. Chen suggested that the restrictions and the harassment frustrated Mr. Liu, nudging him back to his old dissident ways. &ldquo;They deprived him of a chance to live a normal life,&rdquo; she said with resignation. &ldquo;He was forced to live abnormally and again ended up where he is now.&rdquo;        
Zhang Jing contributed research.
