
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; As allied airstrikes pound the military forces of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, rebels in eastern Libya and politicians in Western capitals are watching closely for signs that residents in the colonel&rsquo;s stronghold of Tripoli will rise up to drive him from power.        

But during a rare unsupervised visit Friday to the Tajura neighborhood here &mdash; a rebellious district that led the brief uprising that burned police stations around the city just one month ago&mdash; several residents warned that a crackdown by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s security forces had left them terrified of taking to the streets again anytime soon.        

Two men, speaking anonymously for their safety, said that during Friday Prayer last week about 200 armed militiamen entered the mosque and prayed alongside them, a clear and intimidating message not to join protests after the services.        

&ldquo;Lots of people have been detained, including some of our relatives,&rdquo; one of the men said. &ldquo;They tell people, &lsquo;We will only release your relatives if you don&rsquo;t protest next Friday.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

&ldquo;People are very scared these days,&rdquo; he continued. &ldquo;They are watching from everywhere. They have people on the rooftops.&rdquo;        

Like many others in Tajura, the two men said that they believed their neighborhood was under the control of a private militia loyal to Mansour Dou, a wealthy Libyan businessman close to the Qaddafi family who they said lives in the area.        

Many white Toyota pickup trucks &mdash; the preferred vehicle of the Qaddafi militia &mdash; could be seen cruising the streets full of armed men, and a police wagon with men carrying machine guns was parked at an intersection leading downtown. Nearby gunshots were heard during the interviews.        

Several others said they were afraid to speak. A cafe emptied immediately after two Western journalists walked in. One young man who stayed, Hamza al-Hader, said he worked at the cafe. Contradicting scores of recent interviews with Tajura residents, he repeated the story told by state television. He said the few protests that took place there were led by foreign-born Islamic terrorists wearing long beards &mdash; a line that in some circles appears to have become code language meant to signal one&rsquo;s disbelief in the official propaganda.        

Whether he was sincere or ironic could not be determined. &ldquo;Qaddafi should hit back hard,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I would be a suicide bomber.&rdquo;        

Even the official minders who typically accompany foreign journalists seemed jumpy on Friday. On an official trip earlier in the day, an official minder turned back over his shoulder to warn journalists not to photograph a heavily armed checkpoint in Tajura. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to go to jail,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;so don&rsquo;t film anything.&rdquo;        

Later, a minder was stopped by security forces &mdash; more than 15 armed men sprang out of at least six vehicles &mdash; and questioned for more than 30 minutes, apparently because he allowed foreign journalists too much latitude to roam Tajura freely.        

The Libyan government has been eager to show that the allied airstrikes are killing civilians. State television, for example, has been showing images of insurgent attacks on American military vehicles in Iraq, as part of its extensive effort to draw comparisons between the allied airstrikes on Libya and the war in Iraq.        

But the press office has so far failed to show foreign journalists any convincing evidence of civilian casualties. On Friday, officials escorted foreign journalists to a lightly damaged house that they said had been hit in an airstrike.        

Inside the house, a man who said he worked for the Libyan security forces was directing his three young daughters &mdash; one in tears &mdash; to tell their story to Libyan television cameras. On the lawn outside were fragments of a missile, including some that appeared to have been jammed into a tree trunk by an explosion or a fall. But no one was hurt, and the little damage done to the house appeared to come from bullets rather than a missile or explosion. At least one bullet casing was found at the scene.        

But some in Tajura said &mdash; apparently without official staging &mdash; that they had lost family members who were part of the Qaddafi militias as a result of the Western airstrikes. Tarak Ali Rizk said matter-of-factly that his son Mohamed, 18, was killed in an airstrike on Thursday night.        

He had been a soldier in the militia loyal to Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s son Khamis, Mr. Rizk said, and was killed in a barracks in the Tajura neighborhood. Another family member standing in the same cluster of men said he also had a young relative in the militia, Nurreddin Abdel Majid Rizk, who had been killed.        

Unlike the others interviewed, the men told the stories of their losses under the watchful eyes of an official Libyan government minder and militia officers. But the minder and officers spoke only Arabic, and after a few moments another man in the group interrupted in English.        

&ldquo;We are afraid,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We can never say the truth.&rdquo;        

Asked of what, he said, &ldquo;Of many things. I cannot say.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;My heart is full,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;but I am afraid to say.&rdquo;        
