
CAIRO &mdash; Amid the myriad public interest lawsuits filed against the deposed government of Hosni Mubarak, the volume of which is beginning to rival the flow of the Nile, the attorney Samir Sabry contributed a novel ripple.        

Mr. Sabry, known mainly as the slick lawyer for star belly dancers and infamous tycoons, is suing to force the government to erase the Mubarak name from every public institution across the land of Egypt.        

&ldquo;Egyptians have adopted this habit for centuries &mdash; since the time of the pharaohs, when the image of pharaoh was everywhere,&rdquo; said Mr. Sabry, doing a little walk-like-an-Egyptian maneuver with his hands and head. &ldquo;Corrupt people should not be honored. I do not want to delete 30 years of Egyptian history, but I want to remove that name.&rdquo;        

The name and face have been scraped away piecemeal since Mr. Mubarak was overthrown Feb. 11 after three decades as president. Mr. Sabry&rsquo;s lawsuit, filed in Cairo Expediency Court on March 1, seeks a court order to mandate &ldquo;deMubarakization&rdquo; in one fell swoop.        

The idea draws widespread, but not universal, approval. A brief legal hearing on the issue on Thursday ignited a heated skirmish outside the downtown Cairo courthouse between those seeking to preserve the Mubarak name and those wanting it expunged.        

Given that the once universal billboards bearing Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s portrait have largely come down, the sudden profusion of his picture held aloft by more than 100 supporters seemed alien.        

&ldquo;The people want the president to be honored!&rdquo; they yelled, a variation on a popular chant that started in Tunisia and spread around the region, about the people wanting the government to fall.        

&ldquo;The people want the president put on trial!&rdquo; yelled back an impromptu counterdemonstration that the police kept across the street.        

The Mubarak supporters also chanted that they were not being paid to stand there, which only served to strengthen suspicions that they were, as did the uniformity of their statements. Each spouted the same sentence practically verbatim about how the Tahrir demonstrators were only a fraction of Egypt&rsquo;s 85 million or so people.        

Some Egyptians decry the attention focused on the issue, calling it superficial given the far more serious problems the country faces, ranging from the direction of the revolution to the brewing economic crisis. Sherif Hafez, a political science professor, for example, argued that removing the name was considerably less important than the more profound task of changing the mentality that allowed one man to dominate the country for nearly 30 years.        

Cataloging every public use of the Mubarak name would require an effort not unlike constructing the Pyramids. It was plastered across schools, libraries, hospitals, clinics, bridges, roads, squares, airports, stadiums, ministry buildings, industrial complexes, dormitories, scouting centers and various national prizes. You name it.        

The Ministry of Education reported that 549 schools had been named after either the president, his wife, Suzanne, or their son Gamal. The president was the namesake for 388 schools, compared to 314 for the three previous presidents combined.        

Some children seeking an excuse to avoid school have hit on a corker &mdash; refusing to attend classes in any building bearing the Mubarak name, said one lawyer joining the lawsuit this week, arguing that speed was of the essence.        

Naturally, all sorts of government branches and individuals have taken matters into their own hands. Newspapers report countless changes. The governor of Assiut ordered the name of &ldquo;The Suzanne Mubarak School for Girls&rdquo; changed to &ldquo;The January 25th School for Girls.&rdquo; The president of Zagazig University in the Nile delta ordered the name of the Mubarak University City dormitory complex changed to Tahrir Square. In the port of Damietta, workers protested until the Mubarak Petrochemical Complex was rebranded the Free Industrial Zone.        

Gigi Ibrahim was about to inaugurate a free speech program at the American University in Cairo when the name etched in gold across a heavy beige marble plaque hanging outside the hall stopped her in her tracks: H. E. Suzanne Mubarak Conference Hall.        

So Ms. Ibrahim, 24, having cut her teeth as a political activist at Tahrir Square, immediately applied the lessons learned about direct action, found a screwdriver and took it down with a friend&rsquo;s help. &ldquo;When we saw it we thought, &lsquo;Well this just needs to come down,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; she said, although officially the name holds.        
Amr Emam contributed reporting.
