
This article is by 
Hiroko Tabuchi, 
Keith Bradsher and 
David Jolly.        

TOKYO &mdash; New signs emerged Friday that parts of the crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant were so damaged and contaminated that it would be even harder to bring the plant under control soon.        

At the same time, Japanese officials began encouraging people to evacuate a larger band of territory around the complex.        

Speaking to a national audience at a news conference on Friday night, two weeks after the magnitude 9.0 earthquake and the devastating tsunami that followed it, Prime Minister Naoto Kan dodged a reporter&rsquo;s question about whether the government was ordering a full evacuation, saying officials were simply following the recommendation of the Japan Nuclear Safety Commission.        

&ldquo;The situation still requires caution,&rdquo; Mr. Kan, grave and tired-looking, told the nation. &ldquo;Our measures are aimed at preventing the circumstances from getting worse.&rdquo; The authorities said that they would now assist people who wanted to leave the area from 12 to 19 miles outside the plant, and that they were now encouraging &ldquo;voluntary evacuation&rdquo; from the area.        

Those people had been advised March 15 to remain indoors, while those within a 12-mile radius of the plant had been ordered to evacuate. The United States has recommended that its citizens stay at least 50 miles away.        

&ldquo;The state of the plant is still quite precarious,&rdquo; Mr. Kan said. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re working hard to make sure it doesn&rsquo;t get worse. We have to ensure there&rsquo;s no further deterioration.&rdquo;        

In a new sign of the contamination problem, the Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency said Saturday a sample of seawater taken Friday from a monitoring station at the plant showed the level of iodine 131 at 50 becquerels per cubic centimeter &mdash; 1,250 times the legal limit.        

Drinking a half liter of that water would be equivalent to getting a 1 millisievert dose, the agency said, roughly the amount a person gets in one year from natural sources.        

Hidehiko Nishiyama, deputy-director general at the safety agency, said that he expected the iodine to dilute rapidly, minimizing the effect on wildlife, and pointed out that fishing had been suspended in the area after the quake and tsunami.        

One sign of possible deterioration in the plant itself came at Reactor No. 3. Workers who were trying to connect an electrical cable to a pump in a turbine building next to the reactor were injured when they stepped into water that was found to be significantly more radioactive than normal. On Friday, officials and experts offered conflicting explanations of what had gone wrong &mdash; but all pointed to greater damage to the reactor&rsquo;s systems and more contamination there than officials had indicated earlier.        

Two workers were exposed to radiation and burned when water poured over their boots and down around their feet and ankles, officials said. A third worker was wearing higher boots and did not suffer the same exposure.        

Like the injured workers, many of those risking their lives are subcontractors of Tokyo Electric Power, who are paid a small daily wage for hours of work in dangerous conditions. In some cases they are poorly equipped and trained for their task.        

On Saturday, workers were focused on trying to restore the lighting to Reactor No. 2&rsquo;s central control room, an important step toward restoring the unit&rsquo;s cooling system. They were also preparing to pump fresh water on the No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3 units, after days of spraying with saltwater.        

The National Institute of Radiological Sciences said that the radioactivity of the water that the three injured workers had stepped into was 10,000 times the level normally seen in coolant water at the plant. It said that the amount of radiation the workers were thought to have been exposed to in the water was two to six sieverts.        

Even two sieverts is eight times the new 250-millisievert annual exposure limit set for workers at Daiichi in the days after the disaster; the previous limit was 100. Tokyo Electric officials said that water with an equally high radiation level had been found in the Reactor No. 1 building, The Associated Press reported.        

Skin exposures of two to six sieverts will cause severe burns, according to Dr. David J. Brenner, director of the Center for Radiological Research at Columbia University. But if those doses reach the whole body and not just the skin &ldquo;you&rsquo;re at a very high risk of dying,&rdquo; he said.        
Hiroko Tabuchi and David Jolly reported from Tokyo, and Keith Bradsher from Hong Kong. Takeshi Takizawa contributed reporting from Tokyo, and Denise Grady from New York.
