
MEXICO CITY &mdash; Carlos Pascual, the American ambassador here who resigned last week, had hoped to withstand the fierce storm caused by the release of diplomatic cables revealing his private criticism of Mexico&rsquo;s fight against organized crime.        

By all accounts, he has been engaged and proactive in his two years here &mdash; promoting institutional reforms, meeting with mayors in violent cities and sidestepping what he saw as bureaucratic delays.        

But it is exactly that activist approach that so irked President Felipe Calder&oacute;n, say Mexican and American officials, who note that the dispute signals a divide between the countries over the role of an American ambassador.        

More broadly, Mr. Pascual&rsquo;s resignation raises a vital question about the increased cooperation between the countries in the war against drug trafficking organizations. Is it creating a &ldquo;new era of respect,&rdquo; as President Obama said this month after meeting with Mr. Calder&oacute;n, or a resurgence of distrust?        

The answer, experts say, may be a little bit of each.        

American diplomats are mostly convinced that Mr. Pascual acted appropriately, describing him as an able manager who came to Mexico in 2009 facing challenges and a historic opening. Mr. Calder&oacute;n&rsquo;s 2006 decision to directly battle the drug cartels had produced a rare request for American help, and the response by the United States &mdash; the $1.6 billion M&eacute;rida Initiative &mdash; was just moving into a phase focused on institutional reform and American cooperation when Mr. Pascual arrived.        

He quickly created a framework for tighter bonds, applying some of the ideas he had written about at the Brookings Institution. He set up an array of joint working groups, culminating in a gathering last year in Mexico City that included the heads of nearly every federal law enforcement agency in Mexico and the United States.        

Washington was generally pleased. &ldquo;The ambassador, from what I can tell, was doing a good job,&rdquo; said one United States representative, Henry Cuellar, Democrat of South Texas.        

American and Mexican officials now say hundreds if not thousands of calls pass every day between counterparts in the two countries, while extraditions are also up. The Mexican government sent 96 suspected criminals to the United States last year and 107 in 2009, compared with 15 to 20 per year in the 1990s.        

Along the way, one State Department official said, Mr. Pascual tried to be attentive to Mexican sensitivities about sovereignty. At the embassy here, words like &ldquo;assistance&rdquo; and &ldquo;aid&rdquo; were jettisoned for &ldquo;partnership&rdquo; and &ldquo;co-responsibility.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Pascual was not one to throw up his hands when the Mexican government resisted moves he considered vital. Indeed, the cable that has inspired the most criticism from Mexican officials quoted Mr. Pascual as questioning the Mexican Army&rsquo;s reluctance to act on American intelligence about a drug cartel leader, Arturo Beltr&aacute;n Leyva. The intelligence was later passed to an American-trained unit of the Mexican Marines instead, which used it to conduct one of the biggest raids on a drug lord in years, killing Mr. Beltr&aacute;n Leyva.        

Other American cables suggested that Mexican agencies lacked enough coordination, all of which raised the hackles of Mr. Calder&oacute;n. In his view, according to experts and those who know him, the ambassador was supposed to be a friend, and friends do not talk behind each other&rsquo;s backs.        

&ldquo;This was seen as a betrayal,&rdquo; said Pamela K. Starr, director of the U.S.-Mexico Network at the University of Southern California. Mexican officials, she added, &ldquo;felt disrobed down to their socks.&rdquo;        

Mr. Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton resisted making a change. They rejected Mr. Pascual&rsquo;s first offer to resign in February, American officials said, right after Mr. Calder&oacute;n singled him out by telling the Mexican newspaper El Universal, &ldquo;That man&rsquo;s ignorance translates into a distortion of what is happening in Mexico.&rdquo;        

Then on March 3, the day he was scheduled to meet Mr. Obama and Mr. Pascual at the White House, Mr. Calder&oacute;n told The Washington Post that he was not sure he could still work with the ambassador, noting that confidence was &ldquo;difficult to build&rdquo; and &ldquo;easy to lose.&rdquo;        

Back in Mexico City, Mr. Calder&oacute;n threatened not to attend an important business conference if he had to appear with Mr. Pascual. By that time, American officials said, the ambassador was already on his way to concluding that he had become a distraction, and needed to go.        

&ldquo;He realized that while we might have redefined what diplomacy is, Mexico hasn&rsquo;t,&rdquo; said one State Department official, who was not authorized to speak publicly.        

For many Mexicans, Mr. Pascual had become a symbol of longstanding concerns. The hands-on style made public by the cables looked too much like &ldquo;intervention&rdquo; and &ldquo;meddling&rdquo; &mdash; nasty words in a country still well versed on Henry Lane Wilson, the American ambassador who overtly supported a Mexican coup in 1913 (and whom Mexican leaders accused of using private cables to exaggerate the country&rsquo;s problems).        

Mr. Calder&oacute;n made the issue explicit in his interview with El Universal, when in a conversation about Mr. Pascual he said, &ldquo;I will not accept or tolerate any intervention.&rdquo;        

But while the intensity of Mr. Calder&oacute;n&rsquo;s anger has confounded Mr. Pascual, according to those who know him, such views are not uncommon.        

Several Mexican lawmakers, from different parties, said Mr. Pascual had overstepped his bounds. &ldquo;Pascual&rsquo;s skills are extraordinary, they&rsquo;re excellent, but his actions went too far,&rdquo; said Rosario Green, a Mexican senator and former foreign minister. &ldquo;Mexico needs an ambassador that knows the limits of his job, and that&rsquo;s something both governments should think about.&rdquo;        

The dispute must also be seen in context, experts said. The war that both countries are waging against traffickers seems to be failing. While Mexico has arrested about 20 high-profile kingpins, more than 34,000 people have been killed in drug-related violence since Mr. Calder&oacute;n started his war. Meanwhile, years after the United States began training them, Mexican security forces are still plagued by corruption, with Mexican officials acknowledging that only 2 percent of all crimes go to court. &ldquo;Very few policies are producing visible results,&rdquo; said Vanda Felbab-Brown, a counternarcotics specialist at the Brookings Institution.        

Mr. Calder&oacute;n is particularly sensitive now, Mexican and American experts said, because elections are next year and he has bet his party&rsquo;s future on security. His effort relies on the Americans, but his partners are also a political burden: in the past month, critics have hounded him for being too soft on Mr. Obama.        

That criticism stems largely from recent reports that American law enforcement agents had allowed gunrunners to smuggle hundreds of weapons south of the border as part of an effort to catch kingpins. Then The New York Times reported that Mexico had secretly invited the United States to use drones in Mexican airspace to help locate traffickers and track their movements.        

Mr. Pascual was not necessarily involved in these decisions, but he became associated with them. American officials said he exemplified the United States&rsquo; new brand of diplomacy, in which ambassadors more actively seek to transform the countries where they are based, rather than largely passing messages back and forth.        

His departure, according to both sides, is not likely to end the cooperation that he helped create. &ldquo;The relationship can run on autopilot,&rdquo; said Ms. Starr at the University of Southern California.        

But it does reflect a realization by both countries that as much as the relationship improves, some of the old rules still apply. A comparison by Jeffrey Davidow, a former American ambassador who described the United States as a bear and Mexico as a porcupine, could be particularly apt: the tighter the bear hugs, the more both animals get hurt.        
Damien Cave reported from Mexico City, and Ginger Thompson from Washington.
