
CAIRO &mdash; Military troops opened fire during protests in the southern part of Syria on Friday and killed peaceful demonstrators, according to witnesses and news reports, hurtling the strategically important nation along the same trajectory that has altered the landscape of power across the Arab world.        



Tens of thousands of demonstrators in the southern city of Dara&rsquo;a and in other cities and towns around the nation took to the streets in protest, defying a state that has once again demonstrated its willingness to use lethal force.        

It was the most serious challenge to 40 years of repressive rule by the Assad family since 1982, when the president at the time, Hafez al-Assad, massacred at least 10,000 protesters in Hama, a city in northern Syria.        

Human rights groups said that since protests began seven days ago in the south, 38 people had been killed by government forces &mdash; and it appeared that many more were killed on Friday. Precise details were hard to obtain because the government sealed off the area to reporters and would not let foreign news media into the country.        

&ldquo;Syria&rsquo;s security forces are showing the same cruel disregard for protesters&rsquo; lives as their counterparts in Libya, Tunisia, Egypt, Yemen and Bahrain,&rdquo; said Sarah Leah Whitson, Middle East and North Africa director at Human Rights Watch.        

The new round of protests and bloodshed came one day after the Syrian government tried to appease an increasingly angry popular revolt with talk of improved political freedoms and promises of restraint.        

Instead, it unleashed its forces, firing on peaceful demonstrators in and near Dara&rsquo;a, according to a witness. There were reports of security forces firing on civilians in cities around the country, as well. For the first time since the protests began, crowds called for the downfall of the government and in one instance tore down a billboard-size photo of Syria&rsquo;s president, Bashar al-Assad.        

Ahmed Sayasna, the imam of the Omari mosque in Dara&rsquo;a, said the violence began after crowds set a fire under a statue of former President Hafez al-Assad, the current president&rsquo;s father. Speaking by telephone, Mr. Sayasna said thousands of people gathered near the statue after Friday Prayer when officers from Syria&rsquo;s central security forces lobbed tear gas canisters and opened fire with live ammunition. He said about 20 people were killed, and many more wounded.        

In Sanamayn, a city of 27,000 people about 40 miles north of Dara&rsquo;a, a video posted on YouTube showed at least seven bloodied bodies lying on stretchers, at least three clearly with gunshot wounds. Mr. Sayasna said 10 to 15 people were killed there, while residents told The Associated Press that as many as 20 people had been killed. These figures could not be independently confirmed. In the capital, Damascus, several hundred protesters tried to rally, but were quickly dispersed by security forces as pro-government supporters took to the streets honking car horns and waving photographs of President Assad. In the city&rsquo;s majestic Umayyad mosque, some men rose from prayer shouting &ldquo;God, Syria and freedom only&rdquo; &mdash; a counterpoint to the chants of pro-government supporters. There were also reports of troops firing on demonstrators in the suburbs of Damascus.        

In Latakia, President Assad&rsquo;s hometown, two people died as protesters faced off against pro-government supporters, a witness said. A video posted on YouTube shows the body of a young man with a bullet wound being carried by protesters. There were reports of scattered protests and scores of arrests in several other cities.        

On Thursday, a longtime minister and adviser to the president, Bouthaina Shaaban, appeared to edge close to an apology for the deaths, insisting that the president had ordered security forces not to fire. Ms. Shaaban then laid out what she framed as concessions, saying that the government promised to consider lifting a state of emergency in place for decades and would consider more political freedoms &mdash; offerings that were dismissed out of hand by the public because they had been put forth before, in 2005, and never carried out.        

President Assad &ldquo;doesn&rsquo;t want the bloodshed at all, and I witnessed his directives on not using live bullets whatever the circumstances as he is keen on every citizen,&rdquo; Ms. Shaaban said.        

&ldquo;This doesn&rsquo;t mean that there are no mistakes or practices which were not unsatisfactory and not up to the required level,&rdquo; she said.        

Less than 24 hours later, witnesses reported that live fire was again turned on unarmed protesters.        

&ldquo;This is exactly what has been happening around the Arab world,&rdquo; said Ayman Abdel Nour, a Syrian opposition activist who is living in self-imposed exiled in the United Arab Emirates. &ldquo;Sixty percent of Syrian society is less than 24 years old, and they want to be part of drawing and designing their future.&rdquo;        

Nadim Audi contributed reporting from Cairo, and Robert F. Worth from Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
