
OTTAWA &mdash; Prime Minister Stephen Harper said Saturday that Canadians would vote on May 2, the shortest possible campaign period under the country&rsquo;s laws.        

Mr. Harper, a Conservative, spoke to reporters after visiting Governor General David Johnston to dissolve Parliament and to request an election. On Friday, his government collapsed after opposition parties voted it in contempt of Parliament, a unprecedented event in Canada.        

For months, the Conservatives, who did not control a majority of votes in Parliament, have been in pre-election mode. The party has run of series of attack ads on television aimed at Michael Ignatieff, the leader of the Liberal Party, the largest opposition group.        

After announcing the date of the election, Mr. Harper continued an aggressive tone. He repeatedly said that the Liberal Party&rsquo;s &ldquo;hidden agenda&rdquo; was a plan to form the next government through a formal coalition with the New Democratic Party, which is backed by organized labor, and the Bloc Qu&eacute;b&eacute;cois, a party devoted to Quebec&rsquo;s separation from Canada.        

&ldquo;That is a risk that our country cannot afford,&rdquo; Mr. Harper said.        

Standing in a wintry chill outside of the Parliament buildings, Mr. Ignatieff denied Mr. Harper&rsquo;s claim. After criticizing Mr. Harper as running a secretive and nondemocratic government, Mr. Ignatieff said the prime minister&rsquo;s charge that this election might destabilize Canada&rsquo;s economy showed that Mr. Harper viewed democracy as &ldquo;some sort of pesky obstacle.&rdquo;        

Canada has little history of coalition governments. In 2008, the three main opposition parties tried to form a coalition. But the arrangement collapsed after Mr. Harper took the unusual step of shutting down Parliament.        

And after an election in 2004 did not produce a party with a voting majority in Parliament, Mr. Harper, whose party finished second, unsuccessfully sought an arrangement with the Bloc Qu&eacute;b&eacute;cois and the New Democrats in order to take power.        
