
TOKYO &mdash; In the country that gave the world the word tsunami, the Japanese nuclear establishment largely disregarded the potentially destructive force of the walls of water. The word did not even appear in government guidelines until 2006, decades after plants &mdash; including the Fukushima Daiichi facility that firefighters are still struggling to get under control &mdash; began dotting the Japanese coastline.        

The lack of attention may help explain how, on an island nation surrounded by clashing tectonic plates that commonly produce tsunamis, the protections were so tragically minuscule compared with the nearly 46-foot tsunami that overwhelmed the Fukushima plant on March 11. Offshore breakwaters, designed to guard against typhoons but not tsunamis, succumbed quickly as a first line of defense. The wave grew three times as tall as the bluff on which the plant had been built.        

Japanese government and utility officials have repeatedly said that engineers could never have anticipated the magnitude 9.0 earthquake &mdash; by far the largest in Japanese history &mdash; that caused the sea bottom to shudder and generated the huge tsunami. Even so, seismologists and tsunami experts say that according to readily available data, an earthquake with a magnitude as low as 7.5 &mdash; almost garden variety around the Pacific Rim &mdash; could have created a tsunami large enough to top the bluff at Fukushima.        

After an advisory group issued nonbinding recommendations in 2002, Tokyo Electric Power Company, the plant owner and Japan&rsquo;s biggest utility, raised its maximum projected tsunami at Fukushima Daiichi to between 17.7 and 18.7 feet &mdash; considerably higher than the 13-foot-high bluff. Yet the company appeared to respond only by raising the level of an electric pump near the coast by 8 inches, presumably to protect it from high water, regulators said.        

&ldquo;We can only work on precedent, and there was no precedent,&rdquo; said Tsuneo Futami, a former Tokyo Electric nuclear engineer who was the director of Fukushima Daiichi in the late 1990s. &ldquo;When I headed the plant, the thought of a tsunami never crossed my mind.&rdquo;        

The intensity with which the earthquake shook the ground at Fukushima also exceeded the criteria used in the plant&rsquo;s design, though by a less significant factor than the tsunami, according to data Tokyo Electric has given the Japan Atomic Industrial Forum, a professional group. Based on what is known now, the tsunami set off the nuclear crisis by flooding the backup generators needed to power the reactor cooling system.        

Japan is known for its technical expertise. For decades, though, Japanese officialdom and even parts of its engineering establishment clung to older scientific precepts for protecting nuclear plants, relying heavily on records of earthquakes and tsunamis, and failing to make use of advances in seismology and risk assessment since the 1970s.        

For some experts, the underestimate of the tsunami threat at Fukushima is frustratingly reminiscent of the earthquake &mdash; this time with no tsunami &mdash; in July 2007 that struck Kashiwazaki, a Tokyo Electric nuclear plant on Japan&rsquo;s western coast.. The ground at Kashiwazaki shook as much as two and a half times the maximum intensity envisioned in the plant&rsquo;s design, prompting upgrades at the plant.        

&ldquo;They had years to prepare at that point, after Kashiwazaki, and I am seeing the same thing at Fukushima,&rdquo; said Peter Yanev, an expert in seismic risk assessment based in California, who has studied Fukushima for the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Energy Department.        

There is no doubt that when Fukushima was designed, seismology and its intersection with the structural engineering of nuclear power plants was in its infancy, said Hiroyuki Aoyama, 78, an expert on the quake resistance of nuclear plants who has served on Japanese government panels. Engineers employed a lot of guesswork, adopting a standard that structures inside nuclear plants should have three times the quake resistance of general buildings.        

&ldquo;There was no basis in deciding on three times,&rdquo; said Mr. Aoyama, an emeritus professor of structural engineering at the University of Tokyo. &ldquo;They were shooting from the hip,&rdquo; he added, making a sign of a pistol with his right thumb and index finger. &ldquo;There was a vague target.&rdquo;        

Evolution of Designs        

Norimitsu Onishi reported from Tokyo, and James Glanz from New York. Ken Belson and Hiroko Tabuchi contributed reporting from Tokyo.
