
CAIRO &mdash; Violence continued to plague Syria on Saturday, as government forces killed more demonstrators in Latakia, protesters burned offices of the ruling party in the south and west, and mourners throughout the country buried the dozens of unarmed protesters killed a day earlier.        

President Bashar al-Assad of the ruling Baath Party began the day in what appeared to be a gesture intended to ease the crisis, when he announced the release of as many as 200 political prisoners. But by sunset, Baath Party offices were burning in at least two cities, the military was deployed in Latakia and once again government forces opened fire with live rounds, witnesses said.        

After more than a week of protests and human rights groups confirming that 61 people had been killed by government forces, there appeared to be no clear path forward for protesters, who had erupted in angry demonstrations around the country on Friday, or for the government, which has offered words of compromise at the same time that it has unleashed lethal force.        

&ldquo;People are afraid,&rdquo; said a prominent religious leader from a community at the center of the conflicts, who was not identified to protect him from reprisal. &ldquo;People are afraid that the events might get bigger. They are afraid there might be more protests.&rdquo;        

Exact numbers of the dead are hard to determine, as the official government news service denied the authorities&rsquo; culpability in new reports blaming criminal gangs. By nightfall, government officials were blaming a sectarian clash for the crisis, which was quickly dismissed by protest supporters, who said the goal was freedom for all Syrians and an end to authoritarian rule.        

The protesters, according to the religious leader, want &ldquo;freedom and their rights; they were making demands from the government for things to get better here and for an end to the state of emergency.&rdquo;        

The day broke over a landscape of grief as mourners set out for funerals in the southern towns of Sanamayn and Dara&rsquo;a, in Latakia, in the central city of Homs and in the suburbs of Damascus. In each place, demonstrators had been killed hours earlier, shot by government forces in the most violent government oppression since 1982, when the leadership killed at least 10,000 people in the northern city of Hama.        

But the mourning soon gave way to another surge of demonstrations, and then violence. At least two demonstrators in Latakia were killed after protesters set fire to the local headquarters of the Baath Party. Ammar Qurabi, the chairman of the National Association for Human Rights, said two witnesses reported seeing Syrian Special Forces open fire into a crowd.        

One Latakia resident reached by telephone said 10,000 to 15,000 antigovernment protesters from the city and surrounding villages, some armed with knives, machetes and clubs, had taken to the streets. &ldquo;The demonstrations have been peaceful, &ldquo; the resident said, &ldquo;but after the violence yesterday protesters brought weapons.&rdquo;        

In the southern village of Tafas, near the protest movement&rsquo;s epicenter in Dara&rsquo;a, mourners also set fire to the local Baath headquarters.        

Pro-government demonstrators were also out in Damascus, where about 200 people drove around the city on Saturday evening in a convoy of cars, trucks and minibuses. They carried portraits of President Assad and his father, former President Hafez al-Assad, and chanted, &ldquo;We are national unity&rdquo; and &ldquo;With our soul and with our blood, we will redeem you, Bashar.&rdquo;        

A government spokeswoman, Buthaina Shaaban, denied to BBC Arabic that government forces had opened fire on protesters, blaming instead foreigners and an armed group of villagers. &ldquo;We arrested outsiders in Syria charged with opening fire on the crowd,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;They stole weapons. The authorities did not shoot protesters, but an armed group from Sanamayn&rdquo; did.        

Protests have taken place around Syria since the start of the tumultuous movement for change that has shaken the Arab world with peaceful protest and conflicts approaching civil war. But the political crisis blew wide open about a week ago when demonstrators took to the streets in Dara&rsquo;a after the police arrested a group of young people for scrawling antigovernment graffiti, hauling them away without notifying their parents.        
An employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Damascus, Syria.
