
The world&rsquo;s chief nuclear inspector said Saturday that Japan was &ldquo;still far from the end of the accident&rdquo; that struck its Fukushima nuclear complex and continues to spew radiation into the atmosphere and the sea, and acknowledged that the authorities were still unsure about whether the reactor cores and spent fuel were covered with the water needed to cool them and end the crisis.        

The inspector, Yukiya Amano, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, taking care to say that he was not criticizing Japan&rsquo;s response under extraordinary circumstances, said, &ldquo;More efforts should be done to put an end to the accident.&rdquo;        

More than two weeks after a devastating earthquake and tsunami, he cautioned that the nuclear emergency could still go on for weeks, if not months, given the enormous damage to the plant.        

His concerns were underscored on Sunday when officials in Japan announced higher levels of radiation in pools of water at the facility&rsquo;s stricken reactors. The Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency said that water seeping out of the crippled No. 2 reactor into the adjacent turbine building contained levels of radioactive iodine 134 that were about 10 million times the level normally found in water used inside nuclear power plants. The higher levels further suggested there was a leak from the reactor&rsquo;s fuel rods &mdash; either from damage to the piping or suppression chamber under the rods &mdash; or a breach in the pressure vessel that houses the rods, the agency said.        

Tests also found increased levels of radioactive cesium, a substance with a longer half-life, it said.        

&ldquo;Because these substances originate from nuclear fission, there is a high possibility they originate from the reactor,&rdquo; said Hidehiko Nishiyama, the agency&rsquo;s deputy director-general, at a news conference. He said that it was likely that radiation was leaking from the pipes or the suppression chamber, and not directly from the pressure vessel, because water levels and pressure in the vessel were relatively stable.        

He also said that radioactive iodine in seawater just outside the plant had risen to 1,850 times the usual level on Sunday, up from 1,250 on Saturday.        

&ldquo;Radiation levels are increasing and measures need to be taken,&rdquo; he said, but added that he did not think there was need to worry about high levels of radiation immediately escaping the plant.        

Yukio Edano, the chief cabinet secretary, said he did not think the pressure vessel, which cases the fuel rods, was broken at the No. 2 reactor. He said pressure levels inside the reactor remained higher than atmospheric pressure, suggesting that there was no breach.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think the container is breached, but there is a possibility the water is coming from somewhere inside the reactor,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We want to find out as quickly as possible where the highly radioactive water is leaking from, and take measures to deal with it,&rdquo; Mr. Edano said on a live interview on the public broadcaster, NHK, early Sunday.        

On Saturday, the Japanese government said that it could not predict when the nuclear complex would be brought under control. Mr. Edano insisted that the situation at the damaged plant was not getting worse, but said that &ldquo;this is not the stage for predictions&rdquo; about when the crisis would be over.        

Mr. Amano, a former Japanese diplomat who took over the United Nations nuclear agency in late 2009, said in a telephone interview from Vienna that his biggest concern now centered on spent fuel rods sitting in open cooling pools atop the reactor buildings.        

He said he was still uncertain that the efforts to spray seawater into the pools &mdash; to keep the rods from bursting into flames and releasing large amounts of radioactive material &mdash; had been successful. &nbsp;If workers fill the pools with water but leave the cooling systems unrepaired, he said, &ldquo;The temperature will go up,&rdquo; raising the threat of new radioactive releases.        

He said he was particularly concerned about the pool at Reactor No. 4, which contains the entire core of a reactor that was removed shortly before the disaster struck, and is particularly radioactive. &ldquo;But the need exists for all of them&rdquo; to be cooled, he said.        

He also said he was concerned about radioactivity in the environment.        
William J. Broad reported from New York, and David Jolly from Tokyo. Reporting was contributed by David E. Sanger from Palo Alto, Calif., Hiroko Tabuchi and Chika Ohshima from Tokyo, and Kevin Drew from Hong Kong.
