
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Insurgents kidnapped 40 men in an ambush in the northeastern province of Kunar on Saturday, Afghan officials said. And a suicide bomber killed 13 people and wounded 56 others in the eastern province of Paktika on Sunday, according to initial NATO reports, although the toll was still being assessed.        

The Taliban quickly claimed credit for both episodes. In the kidnapping, they asserted that they had captured 50 police officers. But Gen. Shams-ul-Rahman Zahid, the police chief of Nuristan Province, where the men were from, said the group was made up of &ldquo;youths&rdquo; who wanted to become police officers, but had not yet been accepted.        

They were passing through Kunar after having been turned away from a police training center in the Nurgaram district in Nuristan, where they had tried to enroll but had been told there was no room, the general said.        

&ldquo;We told them, we can&rsquo;t enroll them now because all of our positions are full,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t have vacant spots for them due to the small administrative structure the Nuristan center has. We wrote down their names and their contact information and told them we would contact them if we needed to recruit more police.&rdquo;        

General Zahid said the men were in civilian clothes and were unarmed.        

The group was traveling in four vehicles in the Chapa Dara district in the western part of the province when they were stopped by militants on Saturday, said Gen. Khalilullah Ziayi, Kunar&rsquo;s provincial police chief.        

Zabiullah Mujahid, a Taliban spokesman, insisted in a statement that the captured men had documents, including recent police academy graduation certificates, showing they were police officers. He said that militants had captured police officers in the region and around the country on several occasions and released them after they promised to no longer work for the government.        

&ldquo;But this time,&rdquo; the spokesman added, &ldquo;the military council of the eastern zone will decide their fate.&rdquo;        

Kidnappings are common in many parts of Afghanistan and in Kunar in particular. While militants are often the culprits, using ransoms to help finance the insurgency, criminal gangs are also often responsible. Even by Afghan standards, the number of people kidnapped in this case is unusual.        

General Zahid said the men were being forced to stay in a village in Kunar Province on the border of Nuristan.        

&ldquo;We have started negotiations through tribal elders and other influential local elders to secure their release,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They will be released soon.&rdquo; General Zahid said a council was meeting with the insurgents about freeing the men.        

The kidnapping comes as the United States military has begun pulling back most of its forces from the Pech River Valley in the province, a rugged patch of terrain once thought vital to the campaign against the Taliban and Al Qaeda. American forces say the shift is in line with counterinsurgency doctrine to protect population centers. But the withdrawal from the Pech Valley, which followed the complete Afghan and American withdrawals from isolated outposts in nearby Nuristan Province and the Korangal Valley in Kunar, bears the risk of becoming propaganda coups for the Taliban.        

Some analysts also worry it cedes ground for militant training camps from which attacks can be staged deeper into the country. Insurgents from Al Qaeda, the Haqqani network, the Islamic Party and the Pakistani Taliban are known to operate in the province.        

The Afghan National Army plans to move an entire corps from Kabul to the area over the next few months to fill the void left by the Americans, but questions remain about how well the poorly trained and meagerly equipped national forces will stand up to the insurgents.        

Sympathy for the government and NATO in the province has also been fragmented by high-profile cases of civilian casualties. In two cases this month, NATO conceded killing 11 children in error. In another case in February, Afghan officials say that an American-led military operation killed 65 people, including more than 30 children, in a remote area of the Ghaziabad district near the Pakistan border. NATO officials say most of the victims were militants, but continue to investigate.        

In the attack in Paktika on Sunday, a suicide bomber set off a powerful explosion at about 7 p.m. at a road construction base. Initial reports from NATO&rsquo;s Regional Command East said all the casualties were civilians. The Taliban claimed credit for the bombing, but said the bomber had hit a joint Afghan and coalition base. A NATO spokesman said no military facilities had been hit.        

The base was operated by the Zahir Construction Company and housed dozens of laborers, Mukhles Afghan, a spokesman for the provincial governor&rsquo;s office, said. The company was building a road between Barmal and the provincial capital, Sharana, in the eastern part of the province, he said. American medevac units were assisting with the casualties.        

Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul, and an employee of The New York Times from eastern Afghanistan.
