
WASHINGTON &mdash; Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates acknowledged Sunday that the unrest in Libya did not pose an immediate threat to the United States. Even so, he and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said the Obama administration was justified in taking military action to avert a massacre there that could have altered the course of the popular revolts roiling the Arab world.        

The comments by President Obama&rsquo;s two top national security officials, made on multiple political talk shows on Sunday, offered a striking illustration of the complex calculus that Mr. Obama faced in committing the military to impose a no-fly zone over Libya &mdash; one of the greatest gambles of his presidency.        

It was a rare joint appearance by Mr. Gates and Mrs. Clinton, improbable allies who started out with sharply different views of what to do about Libya but have converged in the belief that the brutality of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi demanded a military response.        

Both officials acknowledged that the operation could drag on for months or even into next year.        

Practically completing each other&rsquo;s sentences, Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Gates projected the kind of unified message prized by the Obama White House. But that unity came only after a fraught internal debate, in which they and other senior officials had to weigh humanitarian values against national interests.        

Their joint appearance laid the groundwork for a speech to the nation by Mr. Obama on Monday night, as the administration tries to answer critics in Congress and elsewhere who say that the president has failed to explain the scope, command structure and objective of the mission.        

And the open-ended nature of the campaign drew fresh criticism from Republicans, including Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, the ranking member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.        

Mr. Gates and Mrs. Clinton said the allied airstrikes had scored early successes, sealing off the skies over Libya and averting a rout of the rebels by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces in the eastern city of Benghazi. Rebels are pushing Qaddafi forces back toward the capital, Tripoli, they said.        

On the key question of whether Libya constituted the kind of vital national interest that would normally justify military intervention, Mr. Gates offered a blunt denial &mdash; one that hinted at the debate among Mr. Obama&rsquo;s advisers about whether to push for a no-fly zone.        

&ldquo;No, I don&rsquo;t think it&rsquo;s a vital interest for the United States, but we clearly have interests there, and it&rsquo;s a part of a region which is a vital interest for the United States,&rdquo; Mr. Gates said on &ldquo;This Week&rdquo; on ABC.        

When Mr. Gates repeated that answer on the NBC program &ldquo;Meet the Press,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton jumped in to clarify that the United States was obliged to act after allies like Britain and France, for whom Libya is a vital national interest, had requested that the international community respond.        

&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s be fair here,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;They didn&rsquo;t attack us, but what they were doing and Qaddafi&rsquo;s history and the potential for the disruption and instability was very much in our interests, as Bob said, and seen by our European friends and our Arab friends as very vital to their interests.&rdquo;        

For all that, Mrs. Clinton emphasized that the administration did not view the Libya intervention as a precedent. Speaking on the CBS program &ldquo;Face the Nation,&rdquo; she ruled out military action in Syria, where security forces killed dozens of protesters on Friday. She noted that lawmakers who visited Syria described President Bashar al-Assad as a reformer, in contrast to Colonel Qaddafi.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a difference between calling out aircraft and indiscriminately strafing and bombing your own cities,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;and police actions that frankly have exceeded the use of force that any of us would want to see.&rdquo;        

Indeed, the administration has watched violent crackdowns in Bahrain, Yemen and other Arab countries without intervening. Only after Colonel Qaddafi launched a ferocious counterstrike against rebel forces did Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Gates stake out their different positions.        

Mrs. Clinton, hearing the growing chorus of calls for a no-fly zone, particularly in the Arab world, argued for a stronger international response. Mr. Gates, worried about the overstretched military getting entangled in another war, warned Congress about the risks and costs of a no-fly zone.        

Mr. Gates said his remarks were not intended to derail the push for a no-fly zone, as many in Washington believed at the time, but to debunk arguments that it would be a surgical operation.        

&ldquo;I said, &lsquo;Let&rsquo;s call a spade a spade,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Gates told reporters last week. &ldquo;It was that a no-fly zone begins with an attack on Libya. I think that was a pretty accurate statement. What I&rsquo;ve tried to do is really just make clear what is involved in this, and that it is a complex undertaking.&rdquo;        

Officials close to Mrs. Clinton said she, too, made a point of telling Arab officials like Amr Moussa, the secretary general of the Arab League, that a no-fly zone would require destroying Libya&rsquo;s air defenses. She developed her views about no-fly zones from the 1990s, when Bill Clinton, who was then the president, worked with European countries to impose one over Kosovo.        

The relationship between Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Gates was cemented during the debate over Afghanistan, when they both argued for about 30,000 additional troops &mdash; the position that Mr. Obama would later adopt.        

It has proved remarkably resilient, officials close to both of them say, weathering strains over the leak of confidential State Department cables from a Pentagon computer system and harsh public criticism of the military&rsquo;s conduct from a former State Department spokesman, Philip J. Crowley.        

Mr. Gates, officials said, was outraged when Mr. Crowley said that the military had mistreated Pfc. Bradley Manning, who is charged with giving cables to the antisecrecy group WikiLeaks. Mrs. Clinton quickly forced Mr. Crowley out, defusing any potential friction.        

She and Mr. Gates will share the burden of selling the Libya policy at home and abroad, though with differences. When Mr. Gates was asked on ABC about NATO taking over command from the United States, he said, &ldquo;Hillary&rsquo;s been more engaged with that diplomacy than I have.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Clinton planned to travel to London on Tuesday to work out other details with Britain, France and other coalition members. Mr. Gates is just back from a trip to Russia, Egypt, Israel and Jordan, during which he encountered criticism by Russian leaders that the operation was killing civilians in Libya.        

Mr. Gates said that the United States had no proof of civilian deaths from the airstrikes, and he made a startling charge. &ldquo;We do have a lot of intelligence reporting about Qaddafi taking the bodies of people he&rsquo;s killed and putting them at the site where we&rsquo;ve attacked,&rdquo; he said.        
