
This article is by 
David Jolly, 
Hiroko Tabuchi and 
Keith Bradsher.        

TOKYO &mdash; Japan&rsquo;s troubled effort to contain the nuclear contamination crisis at its stricken Fukushima Daiichi plant suffered a setback on Sunday when alarmingly high radiation levels were discovered in a flooded area inside the complex, raising new questions about how and when recovery workers could resume their tasks.        

Tokyo Electric Power Company, the operator, said the elevated radiation levels in the water, which had flooded the turbine buildings adjacent to the reactors at the plant, were at least four times the permissible exposure levels for workers at the plant and 100,000 times more than water ordinarily found at a nuclear facility.        

That could mean crews seeking to determine damage and fix the problems at the plant, hit by a magnitude 9.0 earthquake and a tsunami more than two weeks ago, may not be able to approach some of the most troubled parts of the complex until the water can be safely removed.        

Tetsuo Iguchi, a professor in the department of quantum engineering at Nagoya University, said that at the sharply elevated levels of radiation, workers would be able to remain on the site for only about 15 minutes before health considerations required them to leave. That could compromise attempts to bring the crisis under control.        

Alarm over the radiation levels first intensified Thursday when two workers were burned after they stepped into highly radioactive water inside reactor No. 3 of the plant. Late Saturday, a worker trying to measure radiation levels of the water at another reactor, No. 2, saw the reading on his dosimeter jump beyond 1,000 millisieverts per hour, the highest reading on the device. The worker left the scene immediately, said Takeo Iwamoto, a spokesman for Tokyo Electric Power.        

Michiaki Furukawa, a nuclear chemist and a board member of the Citizens&rsquo; Nuclear Information Center, a Tokyo-based watchdog group, said exposure to 1,000 millisieverts of radiation per hour would induce nausea and vomiting, while exposure to triple that amount could be lethal.        

There was no evacuation of the roughly 1,000 workers stationed at Daiichi after the high radiation levels were discovered. Naoki Sunoda, another spokesman for Tokyo Electric Power, said that since the crisis began, 19 workers had been exposed to radiation levels of 100 millisieverts.        

Despite the new problem, Mr. Sunoda said, workers on Monday were still trying to determine a way to approach the turbine building of reactor No. 2 to extract the contaminated water.        

&ldquo;Radiation levels are high, but nothing will be resolved if we stay away,&rdquo; Mr. Sunoda said. &ldquo;Our objective is to restore power to all reactors so cooling functions can be restored.&rdquo;        

The Japanese government&rsquo;s top spokesman, Yukio Edano, said in an afternoon press briefing on Sunday that it looked like the radioactive water had appeared when the No. 2 unit&rsquo;s fuel rods had been exposed to air, but that &ldquo;we don&rsquo;t at this time believe they are melting. We&rsquo;re confident that we are able to keep them cool.&rdquo;        

The higher levels may have suggested a leak from the reactor&rsquo;s fuel rods &mdash; from either the suppression chamber under the rods or various piping &mdash; or even a breach in the pressure vessel that houses the rods, the Japanese nuclear regulator said earlier.        

There was also deep concern early Sunday about initial readings of radioactive iodine 134, which has a half-life of only 53 minutes and would not be present in large quantities unless fission had restarted. That would present the alarming possibility of an out-of-control reactor. Several hours after releasing the initial results, the plant operator said that those readings had been in error, and that retesting had shown negligible amounts of the isotope.        

But the revised readings confirmed the overall high radiation readings at the plant, and utility officials continued to search for the exact source. And they still may need to retest for other radioactive isotopes that had been found in the seawater around the No. 2 reactor, including troubling quantities of cesium, barium, cobalt and lanthanum. The company has not yet been able to determine the source of those leaks, and confirming the isotopes&rsquo; exact levels could take much longer.        

Sunday&rsquo;s developments came after the world&rsquo;s chief nuclear inspector said that Japan was &ldquo;still far from the end of the accident&rdquo; that struck the plant. Yukiya Amano, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, acknowledged that the authorities were still unsure about whether the reactor cores and spent fuel were covered with the water needed to cool them and end the crisis.        

Hiroko Tabuchi and David Jolly reported from Tokyo, and Keith Bradsher from Hong Kong. Reporting was contributed by Ayasa Aizawa, Ken Ijichi and Kantaro Suzuki from Tokyo, and William J. Broad from New York.
