
GENEVA (Reuters) &mdash; The number of people seeking asylum in the West fell by nearly half in the last 10 years, the United Nations refugee agency said on Monday.        

About 359,000 applications for asylum were made in industrialized countries last year, down 5 percent from the previous year and 42 percent lower than the peak in 2001, the agency said in its latest annual report on asylum trends.        

The United States remained the largest recipient of asylum claims, with 55,500 requests &mdash; one out of every six applications in the 44 industrialized countries covered in the report.        

The increase in applications in the United States was caused partly by a rise in the number of Chinese and Mexican asylum seekers, the report said. &ldquo;Almost one third of all claims in the country were lodged by asylum-seekers from China,&rdquo; it said.        

Europe &mdash; where many countries are mired in heated debates over immigration &mdash; accounted for nearly 270,000 claims, a 6 percent drop, primarily because of far fewer requests recorded in Italy, Malta and Greece.        

&ldquo;The relative importance of Europe as a destination region has declined,&rdquo; said the report from the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.        

The high commissioner, Ant&oacute;nio Guterres, said in a statement, &ldquo;We need to study the root causes to see if the decline is because of fewer push factors in areas of origin or tighter migration control.&rdquo;        

The report reflects only new asylum claims, not how many people fleeing violence or abuse were actually granted refugee status under an international treaty.        

Within Europe, the largest decline came in the south, where claims fell by 33 percent last year, according to the agency.        

Since the conclusion of an agreement in 2009 between Italy and Libya to turn back refugee boats, &ldquo;the number of people requesting international protection dropped significantly,&rdquo; it said, noting that applications in Italy had fallen to 8,200 last year from a peak of 30,000 in 2008.        

That was offset to some extent by increases elsewhere in Europe, especially in Germany (up 49 percent), Sweden (up 32 percent), Denmark (up 30 percent), Belgium (up 16 percent) and France (up 13 percent). Among Nordic countries, increases in Denmark and Sweden were offset by substantial declines in Norway and Finland.        

Australia had 8,250 applications, a rise of 33 percent over last year, but they down by more than a third from 2001, it said.        

France retained its position as host to the second-largest number of new asylum applications, with 47,800 last year, largely from Serbian, Russian and Congolese nationals.        

Germany became the third-largest recipient, partly due to a rise in asylum seekers from Serbia and Macedonia.        
