
TOKYO &mdash; Highly contaminated water is escaping a damaged reactor at the crippled nuclear power plant in Japan and could soon leak into the ocean, where some radioactive materials have already been detected.        

The discovery, announced by the country&rsquo;s nuclear regulator on Monday, is a further setback to efforts to contain the crisis.        

In another new finding, Tokyo Electric Power Company, which runs the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power station, said late Monday that it had detected higher levels of plutonium in soil samples taken from within the compound a week ago, raising fears of yet another dangerous element that may be escaping the crippled reactors.        

It was unclear where the plutonium had come from. The reactors could be a source, and tests of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, which ended in 1980, left trace amounts of plutonium around the world. The highest levels in the soil, of plutonium 238, were found about 500 yards from the most heavily damaged reactors, the company said.        

Yukio Edano, the chief cabinet secretary, said early Tuesday that the makeup of the plutonium in the soil suggested that traces could be escaping the reactors. Together with the highly radioactive water, he said, this could be more evidence that fuel rods inside some of the reactors may be damaged. &ldquo;There is a high possibility that there has been a slight melting of the fuel rods,&rdquo; he said.        

A full meltdown of the fuel rods would be catastrophic, releasing great amounts of radiation.        

The trick now, Mr. Edano said, is to keep pumping enough water to ensure that these fuel rods do not overheat, at the same time trying to minimize the overflow of contaminated water.        

Shares of Tokyo Electric were offered at 566 yen, or $6.93, early Tuesday on the Tokyo Stock Exchange after plunging 18 percent on Monday to 696 yen, or $8.52, the lowest in more than 30 years. The newspaper Yomiuri on Tuesday cited anonymous sources as saying the government would temporarily take a majority stake in the company, effectively nationalizing it, to help it pay for the enormous damages from the accident.        

But Mr. Edano denied the report, saying, &ldquo;We&rsquo;re not currently considering that.&rdquo;        

All the reported readings are within the safe range of plutonium levels in sediment and soil given by the United States Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. But Tokyo Electric said the highest reading was more than three times the level found in Japan compared with the average over the last 20 years. American nuclear experts expressed confusion on Monday about the company&rsquo;s latest report that one form of plutonium was found at elevated levels at the Fukushima plant while other forms were not, and suggested it could be a measurement error.        

The contaminated water threatening the ocean had radiation measuring 1,000 millisieverts per hour and was in an overflow tunnel outside the plant&rsquo;s Reactor No. 2. The maximum dose allowed for workers at the plant is 250 millisieverts in a year.        

The tunnel leads from the reactor&rsquo;s turbine building, where contaminated water was discovered on Saturday, to an opening just 180 feet from the sea, said Hidehiko Nishiyama, deputy director general for the Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency.        

The contaminated water level is now about three feet from the exit of the vertical, U-shaped tunnel and rising, he said.        

Contaminated water was also found at tunnels from the No. 1 and No. 3 reactors, though with much lower levels of radiation.        

&ldquo;We are unsure whether there is already an overflow&rdquo; of the water out of the tunnel, Mr. Nishiyama said. He said workers were redoubling efforts to first remove the water from the Reactor No. 2 turbine building. Government officials have said that the water is probably leaking from pipes inside the reactor, from a breach in the reactor&rsquo;s containment vessel or from the inner pressure vessel that houses the fuel.        

The nuclear safety agency also reported that radioactive iodine 131 was detected Sunday at a concentration 1,150 times the maximum allowable level in a seawater sample taken about a mile north of the drainage outlets of reactor units 1 through 4. It also said that the amount of cesium 137 found in water about 1,000 feet from plant was 20 times the normal level, roughly equal to readings taken a week ago.        

Mr. Nishiyama said there were no health concerns because there would be no fishing in the evacuation-designated area within about 12 miles of the plant, the Kyodo news agency reported.        

The disclosure about the escaping contaminated water came as workers pressed their efforts to remove highly radioactive water from inside buildings. The high levels of radioactivity have made it harder to get inside the buildings, slowing the effort to cool the reactors and spent-fuel pools.        

Workers pumped less water into the reactors Monday to minimize the overflow, slowing the cooling, Tokyo Electric said.        

While the source of the plutonium found at the plant was unclear, all three kinds of nuclear fuel at the complex could leak plutonium. Reactor No. 3 is fueled partly by mixed oxide fuel, or mox, which is made from plutonium and uranium. Most reactors&rsquo; fuel is uranium.        

But plutonium is a regular byproduct of a reactor&rsquo;s splitting uranium atoms in two. Some of the speeding subatomic particles of the fission process turn uranium into plutonium.        

So fuel rods that undergo fission get riddled with plutonium, though less than in mox fuel. Thus any of the reactors at Fukushima Daiichi could leak plutonium, as could spent fuel rods in cooling pools.        

Mr. Nishiyama said that while the detected plutonium levels were low, they pointed to the gravity of the crisis at Fukushima Daiichi. Plutonium is a heavy element and not easily dispersed, he said, so higher levels outside the reactor suggested a wider leak.        

&ldquo;This detection from the soil speaks to the importance and seriousness of the situation,&rdquo; he said at a news conference Tuesday morning.        

Alarm over radiation levels grew Thursday when two workers were burned around their feet and ankles after they stepped into highly radioactive water inside the turbine building of Reactor No. 3. A third worker, who was wearing higher boots, did not suffer the same exposure.        

Naoki Sunoda, a spokesman for Tokyo Electric, said that since the crisis began, 19 workers had been exposed to radiation levels of 100 millisieverts. No workers were evacuated after the high radiation levels were discovered, and he said that workers were still trying to determine a way to approach the turbine building of Reactor No. 2 to extract the contaminated water.        
Reporting was contributed by David Jolly, Ken Ijichi and Moshe Komata from Tokyo; Keith Bradsher from Hong Kong; William J. Broad from New York; and Matthew L. Wald from Washington.
