
LECCE, Italy &mdash; Francesca Esposito, 29 and exquisitely educated, helped win millions of euros in false disability and other lawsuits for her employer, a major Italian state agency. But one day last fall she quit, fed up with how surreal and ultimately sad it is to be young in Italy today.        

It galled her that even with her competence and fluency in five languages, it was nearly impossible to land a paying job. Working as an unpaid trainee lawyer was bad enough, she thought, but doing it at Italy&rsquo;s social security administration seemed too much. She not only worked for free on behalf of the nation&rsquo;s elderly, who have generally crowded out the young for jobs, but her efforts there did not even apply to her own pension.        

&ldquo;It was absurd,&rdquo; said Ms. Esposito, a strong-willed woman with a healthy sense of outrage.        

The outrage of the young has erupted, sometimes violently, on the streets of Greece and Italy in recent weeks, as students and more radical anarchists protest not only specific austerity measures in flattened economies but a rising reality in Southern Europe: People like Ms. Esposito feel increasingly shut out of their own futures. Experts warn of volatility in state finances and the broader society as the most highly educated generation in the history of the Mediterranean hits one of its worst job markets.        

Politicians are slowly beginning to take notice. Italy&rsquo;s president, Giorgio Napolitano, devoted his year-end message on Friday to &ldquo;the pervasive malaise among young people,&rdquo; weeks after protests against budget cuts to the university system brought the issue to the fore.        

Giuliano Amato, an economist and former Italian prime minister, was even more blunt. &ldquo;By now, only a few people refuse to understand that youth protests aren&rsquo;t a protest against the university reform, but against a general situation in which the older generations have eaten the future of the younger ones,&rdquo; he recently told Corriere della Sera, Italy&rsquo;s largest newspaper.        

The daughter of a fireman and a high school teacher,  Ms. Esposito was the first in her family to graduate from college and the first to study foreign languages. She has an Italian law degree and a master&rsquo;s  from Germany and was an intern at the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg. It has not helped.        

&ldquo;I have every possible certificate,&rdquo; Ms. Esposito said dryly. &ldquo;I have everything except a death certificate.&rdquo;        

Even before the economic crisis hit, Southern Europe was not an easy place to forge a career. Low growth and a corrosive lack of meritocracy have long posed challenges to finding a job in Italy, Greece, Spain and Portugal. Today, with the added sting of austerity, more people are left fighting over fewer opportunities. It is a zero-sum game that inevitably pits younger workers struggling to enter the labor market against older ones already occupying precious slots.        

As a result, a deep malaise has set in among young people. Some take to the streets in protest; others emigrate to Northern Europe or beyond in an epic brain drain of college graduates. But many more suffer in silence, living in their childhood bedrooms well into adulthood because they cannot afford to move out.        

&ldquo;They call us the lost generation,&rdquo; said Coral Herrera G&oacute;mez, 33, who has a Ph.D. in humanities but still lives with her parents in Madrid because she cannot find steady work. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not young,&rdquo; she added over coffee  recently, &ldquo;but I&rsquo;m not an adult with a job, either.&rdquo;        

There has been a national debate for years in Spain about &ldquo;mileuristas,&rdquo; a nickname for college graduates whose best job prospects may well pay just 1,000 euros a month, or $1,300.        

Ms. Herrera is at the lower end of the spectrum. Fed up with earning 600 euros a month, or $791, under the table as a children&rsquo;s drama teacher, Ms. Herrera said she had decided to move to Costa Rica this month to teach at a university.        

As she spoke in a cafe in Madrid, a television on the wall featured a report on the birthday of a 106-year-old woman who said that eating blood sausage was the secret to her longevity.        

The contrast could not have been stronger. Indeed, experts warn of a looming demographic disaster in Southern Europe, which has among the lowest birth rates in the Western world. With  pensioners living longer and  young people entering the work force later &mdash; and paying less in taxes because their salaries are so low &mdash; it is only a matter of time before state coffers run dry.        

&ldquo;What we have is a Ponzi scheme,&rdquo; said Laurence J. Kotlikoff, an economist at Boston University and an expert in fiscal policy.        
Lucia Magi contributed reporting from Madrid, and Gaia Pianigiani from Rome.
