
ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast (Reuters) &mdash; Alassane Ouattara, the internationally recognized winner of Ivory Coast&rsquo;s presidential election, would form a unity government with members of the party of President Laurent Gbagbo as long as Mr. Gbagbo stepped down first, the country&rsquo;s ambassador to the United Nations said.        

World powers and African states have heaped pressure on Mr. Gbagbo to cede the presidency to Mr. Ouattara after the provisional results of a Nov. 28 election showed Mr. Ouattara as having won by an eight-point margin.        

Mr. Gbagbo &ldquo;has followers, he has competent people in his party,&rdquo; the ambassador, Youssoufou Bamba, said in an interview with the BBC that was released Monday. &ldquo;Those people &mdash; we are prepared to work with them in the framework of a wide composite cabinet.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Bamba said the formation of a unity government was only possible if Mr. Gbagbo stepped down first.        

&ldquo;What I am saying is Mr. Ouattara should be recognized by Mr. Gbagbo that he is the legitimate president,&rdquo; Mr. Bamba said.        

The proposal comes amid mounting pressure on Mr. Gbagbo, who has ruled the country since 2000, to leave power and end a standoff that has killed more than 200 people and threatens to rekindle a civil war.        

The West African regional bloc Ecowas has threatened to remove Mr. Gbagbo by force if he does not leave power, while the United States and the European Union have imposed travel bans on Mr. Gbagbo and members of his inner circle.        

In an effort to add pressure, Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s government on Monday listed 16 Ivorian treasury, banking and cocoa officials it wants sanctioned for backing Mr. Gbagbo.        

Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s access to state accounts at West Africa&rsquo;s central bank has already been frozen, but he still controls taxes, customs and the lucrative oil and cocoa sectors.        

The list of officials included the head of the cocoa regulating body, the head of the local branch of the West African central bank, four treasury officials and local directors of several other banks, including Ecobank C&ocirc;te D&rsquo;Ivoire and Standard Chartered.        

The election was meant to reunite the country after the 2002-3 civil war split it into a rebel north and a Gbagbo-controlled south, but it has instead deepened divisions and raised the specter of a return to open conflict.        
