
DAMASCUS, Syria &mdash; The political crisis in Syria deepened on Monday as the armed forces in the restive southern city of Dara&rsquo;a fired live ammunition in the air to disperse hundreds of pro-democracy demonstrators who had taken to the streets.        

The marchers gathered in the city&rsquo;s main square, chanting &ldquo;Not Sunnis, not Alawis, we all want freedom&rdquo; and &ldquo;God, Syria and freedom only.&rdquo; By late afternoon, hundreds of people had staged a sit-in, uncertain whether the army would try to break them up during the night. More than 60 people have been killed in Syria since March 18, human rights groups say; it was unclear if there were any casualties on Monday.        

&ldquo;They were marching peacefully, asking for their rights, when the army opened fire at them,&rdquo; said one witness who declined to be identified for fear of reprisals. &ldquo;But this is not the end.&rdquo;        

The armed forces had retreated from the city&rsquo;s main arteries over the past few days, giving residents an uneasy sense of being in a standoff. The Associated Press reported that security forces were surrounding the city on Monday afternoon. The army was also still deployed in the northwestern city of Latakia, which had seen several days of violence.        

The unrest in Syria poses a serious challenge to President Bashar al-Assad and his Baath Party. Mr. Assad is expected to announce as early as Tuesday the repeal of the country&rsquo;s emergency law, in place since 1963, which effectively allows security forces to detain citizens without charges. The timing of any repeal and whether it would quell the protests remains unclear, since other laws restrict freedoms and give immunity to the secret police.        

The mixed signals sent by the government &mdash; promises of reforms that would have been unthinkable months ago coupled with heavy-handed repression &mdash; may be indicative of deeper tensions, analysts said. Mr. Assad, 45, a British-educated eye doctor who was often described as a reformer early in his 11-year rule, relies on a largely Alawite state apparatus that has been resistant to reform and whose survival depends on the Assad family.        

&ldquo;There must be a very harsh debate going on&rdquo; around the president, said Elizabeth Picard, a political science professor and expert on Syria who is based in France. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re nearing a zero-sum game. Once you let go a little, you take the risk of losing everything. Some people are going to cling to power.&rdquo;        

The situation in Latakia is symbolic of the challenge facing the government. A traditionally Christian and Sunni coastal area north of Damascus, the town has seen an increase in its population of Alawites, a religious sect, since the 1960s, and resentment between the groups runs deep.        

Latakia itself still has a Sunni and Christian majority, but the villages surrounding it are mostly Alawite and are considered a government stronghold. It is no accident that the offices of SyriaTel, a phone company owned by Mr. Assad&rsquo;s cousin Rami Makhlouf, who is widely perceived by demonstrators as a symbol of governmental corruption, were burned down during protests on Saturday, when 12 people were killed.        

Latakia was calm on Monday, but despite the army&rsquo;s presence in and around the city, a resident who declined to be identified said he witnessed sporadic violence overnight. He described civilians carrying rifles or knives, creating their own makeshift checkpoints. &ldquo;Pro- and anti-government groups&rdquo; clashed, the witness said, &ldquo;and tension was fueled by reports of foreigners bringing instability to the city.&rdquo;        

State news media have largely blamed foreigners and residents of a Palestinian camp near the city for the unrest in Latakia. On Sunday, state radio reported multiple sightings of foreigners in the coastal town, including &ldquo;a group of Lebanese women who said they wanted to rent an apartment but ran away when asked for identification.&rdquo;        
