
AJDABIYA, Libya &mdash; There were four doctors, a medical equipment salesman, a student studying economics, and dozens of others. Some went out to protest, some to fight, and others to tend to the wounded.        

Then they vanished, in places that have become defined by their battles, including Ras Lanuf, Ajdabiya and Benghazi.        

As Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s troops have withdrawn in recent days from territory they had wrested from rebels, relatives of the missing men said they believed that the colonel&rsquo;s loyalists had stolen their sons, brothers and husbands, alive or dead.        

One of the missing, Abdul Bassett Mahmoud, was last seen at 8:30 a.m. on the day the Qaddafi forces invaded Benghazi. His brother-in-law, Rafaa Naji, said that Mr. Mahmoud, no longer able to stomach the shelling nearby, left his house that morning to defend the city.        

&ldquo;He is married and has three children,&rdquo; Mr. Naji said. &ldquo;His wife is still crying.&rdquo;        

The disappearances, from the front lines or the side of a highway, are a chilling coda to Libya&rsquo;s recent battles. The silence after the guns stop is sometimes broken with a strange voice on the phone. When Ahmed Saad disappeared on March 19 after setting out from the town of Gimeenis to take supplies to his family in Benghazi, a relative called Mr. Saad&rsquo;s cellphone number.        

&ldquo;You will find Ahmed in the hell made by Muammar,&rdquo; said a man who answered.        

Mr. Saad&rsquo;s case was one of more than 70 disappearances of civilians, fighters and doctors documented by Human Rights Watch in a report to be released Tuesday. In some cases, the missing men were last seen in the custody of Qaddafi troops; in more than a dozen, Qaddafi loyalists answered the men&rsquo;s cellphones and either said or suggested that the men had been taken, the organization reported.        

The list of documented disappearances compiled by the Red Crescent runs to more than 255, mostly those who vanished during the worst fighting earlier this month, according to Omar Bodabous, a volunteer with the group.        

The phone calls just bring fresh uncertainty about the fate of prisoners held by a government that is notorious for abuse. In most other cases, families and friends have no news at all.        

For 10 days, Hafidh Abdulsalam checked morgues in different cities, looking for his younger brother, Muftah Abdulsalam, 21, who is from the coastal city of Darnah. Muftah was last seen at the eastern gate of Ajdabiya, where he had gone to fight.        

After enemy fire struck the truck that was carrying him and his friends, they scattered, the friends told Hafidh Abdulsalam. He said they told him that Muftah had headed toward the coast a few miles away, and had &ldquo;left his phone in the car.&rdquo;        

On Sunday, two days after Qaddafi loyalists left Ajdabiya, Hafidh Abdulsalam was able to visit the city&rsquo;s hospital. A doctor there had just wheeled a body to the morgue, the charred remains of a man killed when a shell landed on his car. But the man was from Tobruk, not Darnah.        

&ldquo;There hasn&rsquo;t been any news of him,&rdquo; Mr. Abdulsalam said, holding his brother&rsquo;s identification card while a crowd beside him looked at posters of other missing men.        

Eastern Libyan families are not the only ones searching. In Tripoli, in the west, scores of protesters and government opponents are missing.        

The rebels have also been accused of mistreating their detainees: for example, by sweeping up sub-Saharan Africans whom they accuse, often without cause, of being mercenaries.        

In Ajdabiya recently, 30 government loyalists who apparently were killed in the fighting were buried in a mass grave, the manager of the city cemetery said. On Sunday, the site was marked with bulldozer tracks, surgical masks and gloves and a pair of bloody black tennis shoes, perched on a cinder block &mdash; fleeting clues for searching families.        

Foreign governments have intervened with the Qaddafi government when journalists have been captured. But most Libyans are unable to turn to such powerful allies, and are lucky if any information trickles out about missing relatives. A man interviewed by Human Rights Watch related an account from a friend &mdash; a military officer in Surt &mdash; saying that the officer&rsquo;s brother and scores of other people had been detained there.        

In other cases, clues may turn up on television. The family of Fathi el-Murgrabi, who disappeared Feb. 24, said they had seen him on a state television broadcast, where he was forced to confess that he belonged to Al Qaeda and had taken hallucinogenic pills.        

Doctors have searched for four colleagues who were taken, they said, while trying to help.        

Two of them &mdash; a Libyan-American neurosurgeon, Dr. Reda el-Mizaygri, and Dr. Idriss Busheri &mdash; were last seen leaving Ajdabiya on March 16, according to the Human Rights Watch report. A third &mdash; Dr. Suhail Atrash, an anesthetist from Benghazi &mdash; disappeared from an area near the fighting in Ras Lanuf, according to Dr. Gebril Hewadi, the head of the radiology department at Al Jalla Hospital in Benghazi. Dr. Atrash&rsquo;s brother, a medical student, was killed in the fighting, Dr. Hewadi said.        

When loyalist forces reached Benghazi on March 19, Dr. Ali al-Barg, the director of the emergency ward at Al-Hawari Hospital, set out in an ambulance with a nurse and driver to look for the injured and dead.        

A witness saw them the next day, near a mosque in Gimeenis. The ambulance was shot up, the nurse was dead and Dr. Barg was on the ground, his hands and feet bound and his face bruised, according to Nouri Massoud, an ambulance driver.        

&ldquo;He was looking at us, but didn&rsquo;t want to say anything,&rdquo; Mr. Massoud said.        

Twelve other people were similarly bound, he said. One asked for water, and made a desperate plea before government fighters took him away.        

&ldquo;My name is Bira,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;if anyone asks for me.&rdquo;        
