
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The Taliban seized control of a district in eastern Nuristan Province on Tuesday, chasing the governor and the police from the district capital, according to both Afghan officials and a spokesman for the Taliban.        

It was the second Taliban success in recent days in the general area of the strategic Pech Valley, which American troops are in the process of withdrawing from and turning over to Afghan authorities.        

&ldquo;The white flag of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan is flying over the Want district center, while some policemen of the puppet administration flee toward the provincial capital after slight resistance,&rdquo; said the Taliban spokesman, Zabiullah Mujahid, in a statement to news organizations circulated by e-mail. He was referring to the district more commonly known as Waygal.        

The Nuristan Province police commander, Gen. Shams-ul-Rahman Zahid, confirmed that the police had fled their barracks and district government buildings in town of Waygal, the capital of Waygal district, leaving the Taliban in what he said was temporary control of the district. The district governor, Mulavi Zia-ul-Rahman, was also said to have fled.        

&ldquo;Police forces have tactically withdrawn from the district center early this morning about 5 a.m. following harsh fighting and due to lack of ammunition, and to avoid civilian casualties,&rdquo; General Zahid said in a telephone interview.        

&ldquo;We are planning a counterattack to retake the district,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We will reinforce and retake the district soon from the insurgents.&rdquo;        

On Saturday, 40 police recruits had been returning to their homes, also in Waygal district, when they were kidnapped by Taliban insurgents as they crossed through Capa Dara district in the Pech Valley area, which is in Kunar Province close to the Nuristan border.        

While the Taliban are present in a majority of districts in Afghanistan, the capture of administrative centers in the districts is relatively rare. Last year, the Taliban seized control of another mountainous district in northern Nuristan, Barg-e-Matal, and American troops had to be brought in to restore it to Afghan control.        

Waygal district, mountainous and lightly populated with about 50,000 residents, is normally reached by traversing the Pech Valley, and has been under control of only the Afghan National Police. American troops began a two-month withdrawal from their hard-fought positions in the Pech Valley in February, to be replaced by an Afghan National Army corps as part of a counterinsurgency strategy to concentrate coalition troops in population centers.        

Previously, however, the Pech Valley area was regarded as an important infiltration route from Pakistan for the Taliban and their allies from Al Qaeda, and has long been used as a redoubt for guerrilla warfare in Afghanistan. There have been concerns that withdrawing from it risked handing the insurgents propaganda opportunities and new havens.        

&ldquo;There have been no Afghan National Army or NATO forces present in the Waygal district for the past four years,&rdquo; said General Zahid.        

&ldquo;This shows first of all the incompetence and inefficiency of the Afghan government,&rdquo; said Parween Nuristani, a member of the Afghan Parliament from Waygal. &ldquo;Because there are no security forces there, the armed opposition and foreign fighters including Pakistanis, Arabs and Chechens have now overrun the district center.&rdquo;        

Ms. Nuristani said her constituents had been calling her to report that many of the insurgents now in control were speaking foreign languages, suggesting they were members either of Al Qaeda or the Pakistani Taliban.        

Mr. Mujahid said the insurgents surrounded the district seat late Monday night, and by morning had subdued it, capturing 12 policemen and seizing 19 truckloads of equipment and supplies.        

&ldquo;Recently the invaders&rsquo; big General Petraeus talked about improvements in Afghanistan, but our recent successful operation has shown that our mujahedeen can launch a big operation with high morale, and defeat the security forces of an entire district, which shows the falseness of General Petraeus&rsquo;s claims,&rdquo; Mr. Mujahid said, referring to the top United States and NATO commander, General David H. Petraeus.        

&ldquo;The Taliban still retain the ability to initiate attacks in isolated areas with short-term success,&rdquo; said a spokesman for the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force, Lt. Col. John L. Dorrian. &ldquo;However, their momentum has been reversed in key areas of the country, including what had been sanctuaries in Helmand and Kandahar.        

&ldquo;As the size and capability of the Afghan National Security Forces continue to grow, such &lsquo;successes&rsquo; will be short-lived,&rdquo; he added.        
