
BEIJING &mdash; He is a former employee of the Chinese Foreign Ministry who, writing about politics on his widely read blogs, has earned the nickname &ldquo;the Little Peddler of Democracy&rdquo; among some followers.        

He writes spy novels, too, from his home in Australia. One opens with a scene in a Chinese factory where human corpses are preserved.        

Now the writer, Yang Hengjun, 46, could be caught up in the kind of shadowy narrative that drives his fiction. On Tuesday, the Australian government said it was concerned by reports that Mr. Yang had disappeared on Sunday in the southern Chinese city of Guangzhou, where he lives part-time.        

&ldquo;The Australian consul general in Guangzhou is urgently seeking to confirm the man&rsquo;s whereabouts and well-being and provide him with consular assistance if needed,&rdquo; the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said in a statement.        

The first report that Mr. Yang was missing appeared on Tuesday in The Sydney Morning Herald. It said that Mr. Yang, who the paper said &ldquo;is understood to carry an Australian passport,&rdquo; called a colleague from the Guangzhou airport on Sunday to say he was being followed by three men. A professor in Australia, Feng Chongyi, told The Associated Press that Mr. Yang&rsquo;s sister in Guangzhou had since received a phone call in which Mr. Yang indicated that he had been detained by security officers.        

The Chinese government, in the harshest crackdown in years, is holding scores of human rights advocates, political writers, lawyers and dissidents. The roundup began in late February after calls for a revolution modeled on the protests in Tunisia surfaced on the Internet in Chinese. At least 25 people are being held for what Chinese officials call criminal investigation, but many others are being detained for no stated reason.        

On Tuesday, a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, Jiang Yu, said she had never heard of Mr. Yang when she was asked about him at a scheduled news conference in Beijing.        

China recently detained two ethnic Chinese businessmen with Australian passports, Matthew Ng and Stern Hu. Mr. Ng has been charged with embezzlement. Mr. Hu, an executive at Rio Tinto, the Australian mining company, was sentenced last year to 10 years in prison after confessing that he had received bribes from Chinese steel mills.        

Mr. Yang was born in Hubei Province and studied law at the prestigious Fudan University in Shanghai, according to a short biography on one of his blogs. He worked at the Foreign Ministry, then moved to Sydney and began writing spy novels. One popular novel, &ldquo;Fatal Weakness,&rdquo; about espionage and government corruption involving China and the United States, was the first in a trilogy; it has been published on the Internet.        

Mr. Yang writes frequently on personal blogs on at least five major Chinese portals, and some of his essays have been translated into English on his Web site. His writings place him firmly on the liberal end of the political spectrum in China, but his critiques of the government are not uncommon among reform-minded Chinese thinkers.        

In one entry dated March 17 on Netease, a popular Web portal, Mr. Yang wrote that the numerous Chinese television dramas about the Communist revolution skewed history, and &ldquo;our education and propaganda spread hate every moment and every time&rdquo; in order to &ldquo;find legitimacy for itself.&rdquo;        

Mr. Yang&rsquo;s last blog entry on Netease is dated March 27, the day he vanished. The entry criticizes Peking University in Beijing for a new policy that aims to re-educate students who are deemed to have &ldquo;radical&rdquo; thoughts.        

In a 2008 video interview with Danwei.org, a popular English-language blog about China, Mr. Yang said that he liked to keep his blogs on a number of Web sites &ldquo;to get my writing out as widely as possible, to spread some ideas.&rdquo;        

He said the Internet allowed the Chinese to learn about major events quickly and openly. He mentioned how he had been able to write that year about controversial topics like Tibet, the Sichuan earthquake and Western democracy without running up against overbearing censorship.        

&ldquo;Now, when bad things happen, if the government screws up or mishandles something, as soon as it is exposed, it cannot be hidden or covered up,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The only thing they can do is block the information, and that is not very effective.&rdquo;        

Mr. Yang&rsquo;s followers on the Web have begun leaving messages about his disappearance on his blogs. One entry says, &ldquo;The people need intellectuals like you,&rdquo; and another reads, &ldquo;There is no sense of security living in China.&rdquo;        
Li Bibo contributed research.
