
MADRID &mdash; The Spanish government underlined its determination to dismantle the Basque separatist group ETA on Tuesday with the arrest of two people in raids coordinated between the Spanish and French police, a day after a cease-fire offer from ETA.        

Iraitz Guesalaga, arrested by French police in the southern town of Ciboure, is believed by the Spanish authorities to be one of ETA&rsquo;s leading technology experts, responsible for the encryption used by the group to maintain its communications secret. His girlfriend, Itxaso Urtiaga, who was arrested separately by Spanish police in the town of Zarautz, is alleged to have also helped ETA.        

On Monday, ETA called for &ldquo;a permanent and general cease-fire which will be verifiable by the international community,&rdquo; an offer described as positive but insufficient by the Spanish government. Instead, Interior Minister Alfredo P&eacute;rez Rubalcaba insisted that only the group&rsquo;s unconditional surrender could guarantee an end to the violence instigated by ETA that has killed more than 800 people since the late 1960s as part of its campaign to establish an independent Basque homeland in northern Spain and southwestern France.        

The cease-fire announcement failed to mention a surrender of weapons, a key demand from the Spanish government. The government also rejected ETA&rsquo;s proposal to put its cease-fire under foreign monitoring and make it conditional upon the advancement of political negotiations on Basque independence.        

In the coming weeks, the Basque political party Batasuna is expected to make a formal application to be allowed back into the Spanish political arena and to take part in municipal elections in the region in May. Batasuna has been outlawed since 2003 after a ruling from the Supreme Court.        

Although the government is likely to reject such an application, Batasuna could file an appeal in an attempt to demonstrate that it has broken links with ETA, including illegal financing methods.        

ETA called a cease-fire in 2006, and the government of Prime Minister Jos&eacute; Luis Rodr&iacute;guez Zapatero tried to negotiate a lasting peace with some involvement from the governments of Britain, Norway and Switzerland. The cease-fire ended with a deadly car bomb attack at the Madrid airport nine months later, leaving the government resolved to renew its fight against ETA and skeptical of international mediation.        
