
BAGHDAD &mdash; Gunmen wearing police uniforms and suicide vests stormed the provincial council office in the northern Iraqi city of Tikrit on Tuesday and seized hostages in a brazen attack that left dozens of people dead, officials in Tikrit said.        

The assault in Tikrit, the hometown of Saddam Hussein and the capital of Salahuddin Province, was so serious that United States military forces stationed nearby responded &mdash; an unusual intervention for the Americans in Iraq these days &mdash; and some American soldiers suffered minor injuries.        

The assault turned into a hostage standoff that lasted for hours on Tuesday afternoon, until Iraqi security forces retook the building in the early evening using grenades and small arms fire, with American warplanes overhead, according to a witness. The American military did not participate in the retaking of the building but observed from nearby, according to a military spokesman.        

All of the gunmen and all of their hostages, who numbered about 30, were dead, according to officials in Tikrit.        

The attack, the bloodiest in Iraq in months, is likely to increase pressure on Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki&rsquo;s government to win confirmation for new heads of the Interior and Defense Ministries. The delay in those appointments has hampered negotiations over a possible continued role for the American military in Iraq beyond its scheduled exit at the end of the year. The lack of new security ministers also exposes Mr. Maliki to criticism from political opponents, especially after new attacks.        

&ldquo;The security forces in Salahuddin are nothing; they do nothing,&rdquo; said Iskandar Witwit, a member of Parliament&rsquo;s security committee and Iraqiya, the political bloc that won the most seats in last year&rsquo;s election but was unable to form a governing coalition.        

Accounts of the attack&rsquo;s toll varied. State television reported that 67 had been killed and 93 wounded; the Interior Ministry reported 45 killed. Final figures will probably not be known until Wednesday or later. Confirmed among the dead were two Iraqi journalists, one working for a newspaper in Tikrit and one working for Reuters and other news organizations, including Al Arabiya, a pan-Arab satellite television channel. Three provincial council members who had been taken hostage were also killed.        

Officials reported that nearly a dozen insurgents, tossing hand grenades, attacked the building in the early afternoon, just as a provincial council meeting was breaking up for lunch. One attacker apparently detonated a car bomb outside the building while the others entered the building and seized hostages. Some of the insurgents were killed by their suicide vests, and the rest by security forces.        

The family of the slain journalist who did freelance work for Reuters, Sabah al-Bazee, held a funeral for him in the late afternoon. &ldquo;Where did you go?&rdquo; his mother wailed. &ldquo;Why did you leave me alone?&rdquo;        

The victim&rsquo;s brother cried: &ldquo;This is persecution! This is persecution! For how long do we still have to get killed and slaughtered? What was the fault of my brother?&rdquo;        

It was unclear how many American soldiers were wounded. A United States military spokesman said none of them required evacuation. After initially responding to the scene, American forces pulled back, and Iraqi forces took the lead. These days American soldiers rarely engage in combat in Iraq, instead focusing on training and assisting the Iraqi Army and the police.        

Even so, Tuesday&rsquo;s events illustrate that Iraq remains a violent place subject to frequent attacks, even if the overall level of violence has declined sharply.        

When the insurgents first attacked the building on Tuesday, the head of the provincial council in Tikrit and some other council members escaped out a back door.        

&ldquo;We were lucky,&rdquo; said Ali Ajily, a council member, in an interview while hostages were still being held.        
Khalid D. Ali contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an employee of The New York Times from Tikrit, Iraq.
