
MOSCOW &mdash; A day after an unusual air attack on what officials here said was a militant base in Russia&rsquo;s North Caucasus region, President Dmitri A. Medvedev warned separatist fighters in the mostly Muslim region to surrender or &ldquo;be destroyed.&rdquo;        

Speaking on the anniversary of suicide attacks on the Moscow subway that killed 40 people, Mr. Medvedev noted with regret that the Islamist militant groups almost always responsible for such lethal suicide attacks were still active, and he ordered his security services to finish them off.        

&ldquo;We need to do this and bring this work to an end,&rdquo; he said.        

Russia has been battling Islamist separatists in the North Caucasus for nearly two decades, but violence in the region occurs almost daily, and attacks in Moscow and elsewhere are not uncommon.        

Mr. Medvedev said Monday&rsquo;s assault on the suspected terrorist base delivered &ldquo;sufficiently impressive results.&rdquo;        

The operation, carried out in a wooded area of Ingushetia near the border with Chechnya, was remarkable in its scale and firepower. At least 17 suspected militants were killed when Russia&rsquo;s air force bombarded the area, officials said. It was unclear whether fighter jets or helicopters were used. Three members of Russia&rsquo;s security services were also killed.        

Russia has rarely used air power against militants in recent years, said Tatyana Lokshina, who researches the North Caucasus with Human Rights Watch.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a huge operation by Russian standards,&rdquo; Ms. Lokshina said, though she cautioned that the effectiveness of such assaults could be difficult to gauge.        

Officials offered a measured assessment of the operation, saying only that they suspected that several militant commanders had been killed.        

&ldquo;Among the dead militants there should be the leaders of militant groups,&rdquo; Nikolai Sintsov, a spokesman for Russia&rsquo;s National Anti-Terrorist Committee, said Tuesday. &ldquo;At the moment, an investigation is under way to determine the identities of the dead criminals.&rdquo;        

Several Russian news agencies, citing anonymous law enforcement officials, said that Doku Umarov, the self-proclaimed militant leader who has claimed responsibility for a string of attacks, might be among the dead. But there was no official confirmation.        

In any case, the Investigative Committee, Russia&rsquo;s top investigative agency, filed charges against Mr. Umarov on Tuesday for his role in a suicide bombing in January at Moscow&rsquo;s Domodedovo airport that killed at least 35 people.        

Mr. Umarov had previously taken responsibility for that attack, as well as for the subway bombings in Moscow last year, but had never been officially charged with a crime.        

The Investigative Committee also released new details on Tuesday about two brothers arrested recently and charged with accompanying the suicide bomber in the Domodedovo attack.        

Officials announced the arrest of the brothers, Islam and Ilez Yandiyev, on Monday. When detained, they had in their possession a suicide belt and two bombs, the agency said in a statement on its Web site.        

&ldquo;The presence of the explosive devices,&rdquo; the agency said, &ldquo;leads to the conclusion that they were preparing a terrorist attack.&rdquo;        
