
DAKAR, Senegal &mdash; Ivory Coast tipped further toward civil war on Tuesday as forces opposed to the nation&rsquo;s strongman, Laurent Gbagbo, captured strategic towns on two fronts, diplomats in the country&rsquo;s main city, Abidjan, said.        

Cities in both the cocoa-producing west, critical to the West African nation&rsquo;s economy, and near the eastern frontier with Ghana, fell to soldiers loyal to Alassane Ouattara, the former prime minister and banker who was recognized outside Ivory Coast as the legitimate president after defeating Mr. Gbagbo in elections last year. About half a dozen towns have now been seized from Mr. Gbagbo, as pro-Ouattara forces continue a creeping advance from two sides of the country.        

In the south, Mr. Gbagbo continues to command most of the economic capital, Abidjan, as well as the loyalty of much of the country&rsquo;s regular armed forces. He remains entrenched in the presidential palace, refusing to give up power and waging attacks on civilians in pro-Ouattara neighborhoods, despite what international observers and the United Nations say was his decisive defeat at the polls in November.        

But the balance of power may now be moving toward Mr. Ouattara, diplomats in Abidjan suggested Tuesday. The members of a 2002 rebellion, who have controlled the northern half of the country ever since from their capital of Bouak&eacute;, have taken up arms on his behalf. They are now positioned to try to seize Ivory Coast&rsquo;s political capital, Yamoussoukro, where Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s forces were said by diplomats to be massing for a counterattack on Tuesday.        

In fighting on Monday and Tuesday, the strategic western towns of Du&eacute;kou&eacute; and Daloa, a regional capital of about 20,000, were seized by forces loyal to Mr. Ouattara, as was the town of Bondoukou in the east. Then on Tuesday, the Ouattara forces, now known as the Forces R&eacute;publicaines de C&ocirc;te d&rsquo;Ivoire, easily captured Abengourou, about 150 miles to the east of Abidjan. The gains in the west though, in the country&rsquo;s productive cocoa region, were perhaps most strategically significant.        

&ldquo;From Daloa, the city of Yamoussoukro will be caught in a pincer, between Daloa and Bouak&eacute;,&rdquo; a spokesman for Mr. Ouattara, Apollinaire Yapi, said Tuesday from Abidjan, where Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s government remains blockaded in a hotel. &ldquo;This is all about putting pressure on Mr. Gbagbo, who doesn&rsquo;t understand diplomatic language, and who is, on the contrary, slaughtering the people,&rdquo; Mr. Yapi said.        

Amnesty International said up to 10,000 people had sought refuge in the Catholic mission at Du&eacute;kou&eacute; after the fighting there on Monday. As many as a million people have fled the fighting in Ivory Coast, according to the United Nations, which estimates that close to 500 have been killed since the beginning of the electoral standoff in November.        

Spokesmen for Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s forces, regular and irregular, either refused to comment on the military situation Tuesday or could not be reached. Denis Maho Glofiei, an important pro-Gbagbo militia leader in the west, reached by telephone, declined to discuss his forces&rsquo; position on Tuesday.        

Diplomats in Abidjan said Tuesday there were signs that morale was declining on the Gbagbo side. &ldquo;The momentum seems to be with the Republican forces,&rdquo; said one diplomat, who was not authorized to speak publicly. The Gbagbo forces &ldquo;are demoralized,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;His forces have not been holding up to the Republican forces.&rdquo;        

Another diplomat said that a substantial proportion of Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s forces, perhaps as many as 30 percent, had disappeared.        

&ldquo;There are a lot of deserters,&rdquo; the diplomat said. That would explain, he said, the recruitment drive begun among the Young Patriots &mdash; a militia loyal to Mr. Gbagbo &mdash; over the last two weeks. The Gbagbo camp is trying to fill in the gaps, he said.        

Also Tuesday, the United Nations said Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s forces had killed 10 civilians in the pro-Ouattara Abidjan neighborhood of Williamsville on Monday, and that pro-Gbagbo youths had burned alive a Ouattara supporter with a flaming tire in the Riviera neighborhood.        

Another gang had &ldquo;savagely attacked&rdquo; several United Nations employees, the United Nations Abidjan office said, condemning what it called &ldquo;these growing human rights violations and barbaric practices.&rdquo;        
