
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. met with President Hamid Karzai here on Tuesday and promised a lasting American commitment to the country well beyond 2014, when NATO forces are scheduled to turn over security of the nation to Afghan forces.        

&ldquo;The United States, if the Afghan people want it, are prepared and we are not leaving in 2014,&rdquo; the vice president said during an unannounced visit to Kabul, in which he offered aid and military training beyond the planned transition deadline of 2014. &ldquo;Hopefully, we will have totally turned over to the Afghan security forces the ability to maintain the security of the country, but we are not leaving if you don&rsquo;t want us to leave.&rdquo;        

Mr. Biden&rsquo;s  news conference at the presidential palace followed what Mr. Karzai described as a working lunch with him,  Gen. David H. Petraeus, the top coalition commander, and Karl W. Eikenberry, the United States ambassador to Afghanistan. After lunch, Mr. Biden and Mr. Karzai met for more than an hour in a one-on-one meeting.        

Mr. Karzai said the discussion focused on several issues, including the strategic partnership agreement between the nations, security in Afghanistan and the region as well as the process of turning over security responsibilities to Afghan forces.        

&ldquo;We had in-depth discussions, and I&rsquo;m pleased with the results,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai said.        

Mr. Biden said Mr. Karzai and his United States-led NATO allies are &ldquo;finally all on the same page.&rdquo;        

He also tried to reassure the Afghan people that it was not the United States&rsquo; intention to &ldquo;govern or to nation-build.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;As Mr. Karzai points out, this is the responsibility of the Afghan people, and they are fully capable of it,&rdquo; Mr. Biden said.        

The news conference, which was packed with foreign and Afghan news media, lasted about 15 minutes and was short on specifics. Neither man took questions, citing Mr. Biden&rsquo;s schedule.        

In their brief public appearance, Mr. Karzai and Mr. Biden projected cordial feelings toward each other, in contrast to their sometimes frosty history.        

In a visit in 2008, as the two discussed corruption in the Karzai government over a meal of lamb and rice, Mr. Biden, then a senator, infamously tossed his napkin down and announced &ldquo;this dinner is over,&rdquo; after Mr. Karzai reportedly said corruption, if there was any, was not his fault.        

This time, Mr. Biden praised Mr. Karzai for his leadership and courage, especially in the early days after the fall of the Taliban.        

They also reminisced about Mr. Biden&rsquo;s first visit to the country, nine years ago this month. On that occasion, the Taliban had recently been run out of Kabul and Mr. Karzai, then the interim leader, hosted Mr. Biden in a freezing room in the palace with no paid staff as the electricity flickered on and off.        

&ldquo;Today, because of their assistance, we are in a much improved situation,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai said, referring to the United States. &ldquo;We are grateful for their contributions.&rdquo;        

Mr. Biden also visited the Afghan National Army Training Center on Tuesday.        
