
CAIRO &mdash; Egypt&rsquo;s military rulers announced an interim constitution Wednesday and said presidential elections would be held by November, both important steps in their plan for getting out of the daily business of governing the country.        

Maj. General Mamdouh Shaheen, a member of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, said the 18-member council would hand over legislative powers after the parliamentary election in September. Executive powers would be transferred after the presidential election.        

A new president would bring &ldquo;stability and development,&rdquo; he said, using the two military watchwords about what Egypt needs.        

The new constitution replaces the one suspended when President Hosni Mubarak stepped down on Feb. 11. Much of it remains the same, with the addition of about eight amendments approved by voters in a March 19 referendum, including limiting the president to two eight-year terms. The issuance of the new governing principles had been expected since that vote.        

When elected, the two chambers of the new parliament will choose a 100-member assembly of legal experts, academics, politicians and other professionals to draft a new constitution, which Egyptians will have to approve with a referendum, the general said.        

Many of the young liberals who helped bring about Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s overthrow wanted more time for the election, fearing that an early vote would give an overwhelming advantage to well-organized groups like the Muslim Brotherhood and the now deposed National Democratic Party, which once ruled virtually unopposed.        

The interim constitution retains many aspects of the suspended version. For example, it declares Islam as the state religion but bans the formation of parties based on religious grounds.        

In a simultaneous piece of post-revolutionary housekeeping, the interim government dismissed several editors of state-run publications. Employees had been demanding the ouster of the editors because they had been appointed by Mr. Mubarak.        

The fired editors included Osama Saraya, the head of Al-Ahram, a daily newspaper that was the government&rsquo;s semiofficial voice. On the day after the first massive demonstration in Tahrir Square in Cairo, the paper carried front-page banner headlines about protests occurring in Lebanon.        
