
WASHINGTON &mdash; President Obama&rsquo;s top two national security officials signaled on Thursday that the United States was unlikely to arm the Libyan rebels, raising the possibility that the French alone among the Western allies would provide weapons and training for the poorly organized forces fighting Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s government.        

Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates made his views known for the first time on Thursday in a marathon day of testimony to members of Congress. He said the United States should stick to offering communications, surveillance and other support, but suggested that the administration had no problem with other countries sending weapons to help the rebels, who in recent days have been retreating under attack from pro-Qaddafi forces.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, who pushed the president to intervene in Libya, was described by an administration official on Thursday as supremely cautious about arming the rebels &ldquo;because of the unknowns&rdquo; about who they were and whether they might have links to Al Qaeda.        

Earlier Thursday, the secretary general of NATO, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, told reporters in Stockholm that he believed that the United Nations Security Council resolution authorizing the air campaign in Libya did not even permit individual countries to arm the rebels. But there was considerable disagreement within the military alliance, including from the United States, which has taken the position that the resolution does in fact allow arming them.        

In Libya, as the opposition forces began a cautious regrouping after a panicked retreat on Wednesday, an atmosphere of paranoia descended on the capital, Tripoli, after the defection of the foreign minister, Moussa Koussa.        

Fears that the government could be cracking were deepened further when a second top Libyan official, Ali Abdussalam el-Treki, defected Thursday to Egypt.        

In Washington, the unified position of Mr. Gates and Mrs. Clinton appeared to dull a debate within the administration about the merits of the United States&rsquo; supplying weapons to the rebels, a disparate, little-known group. Publicly, Mr. Obama has said only that he is still weighing what to do. France is the only nation that has said it intends to supply arms to the anti-Qaddafi forces.        

&ldquo;What the opposition needs as much as anything right now is some training, some command and control, and some organization,&rdquo; Mr. Gates told members of the House Armed Services Committee in a morning session. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s pretty much a pickup ballgame at this point.&rdquo;        

But, he said, providing training and weapons is &ldquo;not a unique capability for the United States, and as far as I&rsquo;m concerned, somebody else can do that.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gates told Congress that he strongly opposed putting any United States forces in Libya. Asked if there would be American &ldquo;boots on the ground&rdquo; &mdash; uniformed members of the military &mdash; Mr. Gates swiftly replied, &ldquo;Not as long as I&rsquo;m in this job.&rdquo; He refused to address reports that the Central Intelligence Agency had sent clandestine operatives to Libya to gather intelligence for military airstrikes and to contact and vet the rebels.        

Mr. Gates and Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, were summoned to testify in a highly politicized atmosphere on Capitol Hill, where members of both parties charged them with either &ldquo;mission creep&rdquo; in Libya or with not doing enough.        

Many demanded to know how the conflict would end, and others admonished the administration, saying it had gone to war without seeking Congressional authorization.        

Still others said the president had not told the public the truth about the operation. The White House describes it as a humanitarian mission to protect Libyan civilians, but it has involved more than 200 Tomahawk cruise missiles fired at Libya and the bombing and strafing by American and allied planes of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s ground forces.        

&ldquo;These are combat operations,&rdquo; said Representative Mike Coffman, Republican of Colorado, during the morning session. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know why this administration has not been honest with the American people that this is about regime change.&rdquo;        

He concluded, &ldquo;This is just the most muddled definition of an operation probably in U.S. military history.&rdquo;        

Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, was first on the offensive in the afternoon, charging the administration with walking away from the conflict now that the United States has said it will be in a military support role behind NATO.        

What that means, Admiral Mullen told Mr. McCain and the rest of the Senate Armed Services Committee, is that the United States will no longer conduct airstrikes in Libya unless requested by NATO.        

&ldquo;This would be a profound mistake with potentially disastrous consequences,&rdquo; Mr. McCain said. He said that withdrawing the muscle of the American military was out of alignment with Mr. Obama&rsquo;s policy goal of ousting Colonel Qaddafi.        

&ldquo;Hope is not a strategy,&rdquo; Mr. McCain said, &ldquo;and it certainly does not degrade armored units.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gates, stony-faced throughout the day, found himself in the awkward position of having to defend a military action that he had been reluctant to get into in the first place.        

Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting.
