
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Anxiety seized the Qaddafi government on Thursday over the second defection in two days of a senior official close to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, stirring talk of others to follow and a crackdown to stop them.        

As rebels challenging pro-Qaddafi forces struggled to regroup around the oil port of Brega, and the roar of allied warplanes was heard again over the capital, residents reacted in shock at the defection of Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa, a close ally of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s since the early days of the revolution, who once earned the nickname &ldquo;envoy of death&rdquo; for his role in the assassinations of earlier Libyan defectors.        

And then came the defection to Egypt of another senior official, Ali Abdussalam el-Treki, a former foreign minister and a former United Nations ambassador who had worked closely with Colonel Qaddafi for decades.        

Soon rumors swirled of a cascade of high-level defections. The pan-Arab news channel Al Jazeera reported without confirmation that the intelligence chief and the speaker of Parliament had fled to Tunisia. Other rumors, like the exit of the oil minister, were quickly shot down. But taking no chances, Libyan officials posted guards to prevent any other officials from leaving the country, two former officials said.        

The defections and ensuing speculation underscored the increasing tension in the capital as allied air strikes crippled the military machine that Colonel Qaddafi deployed almost exclusively as a bulwark against his own population. Even though the rebels were retreating in the east, allied airstrikes showed no sign of relenting, fuel shortages were worsening, and Qaddafi loyalists were talking increasingly openly about the possibility of the leader&rsquo;s own exit.        

Western leaders hailed Mr. Koussa&rsquo;s departure, in particular, as a turning point. &ldquo;Moussa Koussa&rsquo;s decision shows which way the wind is blowing in Tripoli,&rdquo; said Tommy Vietor, a national security spokesman at the White House.        

Musa Ibrahim, a government spokesman who huddled behind closed doors until well after midnight on Wednesday struggling to confirm Mr. Koussa&rsquo;s departure, said in a news conference on Thursday: &ldquo;This is not like a happy piece of news, is it? But people are saying, &lsquo;So what, if someone wants to step down? That is their decision. The fight continues.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

Asked if Colonel Qaddafi and his sons were still in Libya, Mr. Ibrahim smiled. &ldquo;Rest assured, we are all still here,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We will remain here until the end.&rdquo;        

Aside from Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons, the most important ally remaining at his side &mdash; rivaled in influence only by Mr. Koussa &mdash; is his brother-in-law, Abdullah Senussi, a top security adviser. &ldquo;He is the right hand and the left hand of the regime,&rdquo; said Ali Aujali, who was the Libyan ambassador to the United States until he defected a few weeks ago.        

In a speech in London on Thursday, Foreign Secretary William Hague said Mr. Koussa, who is believed to have helped orchestrate the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, had fled to London &ldquo;of his own free will&rdquo; with no offer of immunity from British or international justice.        

&ldquo;He is voluntarily talking to British officials, including members of the British Embassy in Tripoli now based in London, and our ambassador, Richard Northern.&rdquo;        

The prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, said on March 3 that he would investigate &ldquo;alleged crimes against humanity committed in Libya since 15 February, as peaceful demonstrators were attacked by security forces.&rdquo; He placed Mr. Koussa second after Colonel Qaddafi on a list of &ldquo;some individuals with formal or de facto authority, who commanded and had control over the forces that allegedly committed the crimes.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ibrahim, the Qaddafi government spokesman, said Mr. Koussa had been granted a leave of a few days to receive medical care in Tunisia, a common practice among the Libyan elite. But Mr. Ibrahim said Mr. Koussa had not contacted the Qaddafi government since the day after he crossed the border. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think his sick leave included London,&rdquo; Mr. Ibrahim said.        

The panic in the capital bore no relation to the success of the Qaddafi forces in eastern Libya battling the rebels, who in the end are likely to present a much less immediate threat to Colonel Qaddafi than a breakdown of his military or a more generalized uprising.        
David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Tripoli, and C. J. Chivers from Ajdabiya, Libya. Alan Cowell and Marlise Simons contributed reporting from Paris.
