
PARIS &mdash; Although France has avoided most of the global anti-nuclear backlash prompted by the Fukushima reactor crisis, there is a serious, if quiet, reassessing of the risks here in a country that obtains nearly 80 percent of its electricity from nuclear power.        

Even though there is little talk about shifting away from the industry, comments this week by top French officials made it clear that there would be changes here that were likely to have an effect on the worldwide reckoning with nuclear power, given France&rsquo;s long history with the industry.        

The head of France&rsquo;s Nuclear Safety Authority, Andr&eacute;-Claude Lacoste, made some of that process public on Wednesday when he told members of Parliament that the country would draw the necessary lessons from the Japanese experience and upgrade safety procedures. The most urgent task &mdash; and one that Mr. Lacoste acknowledged had been neglected &mdash; is a re-evaluation of the potential effects of natural disasters on nuclear safety.        

&ldquo;Nobody can guarantee that there will never be a nuclear accident in France,&rdquo; he warned.        

President Nicolas Sarkozy underscored the point on Thursday, when he traveled to Japan and called for new nuclear safety guidelines for all countries in the Group of 20, over which he currently presides.        

&ldquo;Japan is not alone,&rdquo; said Mr. Sarkozy, who was the first foreign leader to visit Japan since the March 11 earthquake and tsunami devastated the coast north of Tokyo and set off the crisis at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station.        

He said global nuclear regulators, who are to gather under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency in June, should meet earlier, in May, to discuss the implications of the Japanese crisis.        

In Mr. Lacoste&rsquo;s testimony, he said that the fact that more than one natural disaster could occur at the same time, as happened in Japan, &ldquo;is a subject that until now we didn&rsquo;t really take into account.&rdquo; He promised to take a fresh look at the risk that tectonic activity could produce on French territory, particularly along the coast.        

Even though France&rsquo;s nuclear reactors were built to withstand five times the impact of the worst earthquake ever registered here, severe flooding and bad weather in recent years have made clear that threats can come from multiple sources, and maybe amplify each other, Mr. Lacoste said.        

&ldquo;Climate change is changing the situation,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Extreme events that so far happened every thousand years along the coast now happen every hundred years.&rdquo;        

Prime Minister Fran&ccedil;ois Fillon last month ordered a safety audit of the country&rsquo;s 58 nuclear power plants. Nuclear experts are also to review a decision to keep a number of plants older than 30 years running and are cooperating with the Interior Ministry to update accident management and evacuation procedures, particularly in heavily populated areas around reactor clusters like those near Dunkerque, in northern France.        

Finally, Mr. Lacoste said, cooling mechanisms will be studied in more detail, not least because of their failure at Fukushima.        

France&rsquo;s early caution in the Japanese crisis drew attention, particularly as it became the first country to advise its citizens to leave Tokyo and provided planes to repatriate those unable or unwilling to travel south, just days after the earthquake struck.        

Many countries eventually followed suit. The recommendation was the result of nuclear experts at the Japanese subsidiary of Areva, the state-controlled French nuclear company, warning the French ambassador about a potential risk of contamination in Tokyo if the wind turned and rain then deposited radioactivity from the damaged reactors in the capital.        

Whatever traces the current crisis might leave, France is unlikely to entirely turn its back on nuclear power, a legacy of Charles de Gaulle that has been broadly embraced by politicians across the political mainstream for decades.        

The nuclear industry in France is highly advanced and provides a major source of export revenue. Three partially state-owned French companies &mdash; Areva, GDF Suez and EDF &mdash; are among the most important players in the sector globally. EDF designs, maintains, operates and decommissions plants.        

In 2008, France produced 439 terawatt hours of nuclear power, representing 16 percent of global production.        
Katrin Bennhold reported from Paris, and David Jolly from Tokyo.
