
ASTANA, Kazakhstan &mdash; On the eve of an election in which Kazakhstan&rsquo;s strongman leader hopes to improve his democratic credentials, a prominent opposition newspaper announced on Thursday that its publisher had suffered a severe beating and that his whereabouts were unknown.        

The paper, Golos Respublika, which has been highly critical of President Nursultan Nazarbayev&rsquo;s government, called a news conference in Almaty, the country&rsquo;s commercial capital, to express concern about its publisher, Danyar O. Moldashev.        

&ldquo;The single thing we know is that he is alive,&rdquo; said Oksana Makushina, a deputy editor of the paper.        

On Saturday, Mr. Moldashev suffered a concussion and a broken arm when he was beaten outside his apartment by assailants who took a camera and documents, Ms. Makushina said. After being released from the hospital, he abruptly left the country, telling his brother that he was going to Ukraine. Instead, he called on Wednesday night to say he was in Belarus, and he has not been reachable since, said his brother, Akhsar.        

A police spokesman would not respond to a request for comment on Thursday, but authorities released a statement saying that Mr. Moldashev had traveled to Kiev on personal business, and that a &ldquo;supplementary investigation did not confirm information about Mr. Moldashev&rsquo;s supposed robbery and abduction.&rdquo;        

The episode was notable because it took place before Sunday&rsquo;s election, just the third since the fall of Communism in which multiple candidates had vied for the presidency.        

Mr. Moldashev&rsquo;s newspaper has long been a thorn in the side of Kazakh authorities, publishing articles about corruption, human-rights violations and official malfeasance. Because of legal threats, Golos Respublika has been unable to use a printing press or sell copies at newsstands, and has resorted to producing the newspaper on photocopiers and hawking it on the streets in major cities.        

While authorities have stopped short of closing the newspaper, top officials or their allies have sued it for libel, and judges have inevitably ruled in the plaintiffs&rsquo; favor, meting out stiff fines. The Committee to Protect Journalists, a New York-based advocacy group, singled out its staff in a report on widespread violations of media freedom in Kazakhstan.        

&ldquo;While independent newspapers have pushed the boundaries, they have paid a high price,&rdquo; the report said. &ldquo;No journalists know this better than the leaders of the Almaty-based weekly Respublika.&rdquo;        
Clifford J. Levy contributed reporting from Moscow.
