
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; A prominent Islamist politician escaped an assassination attempt on Thursday in northwestern Pakistan, the second in two days, as a suicide bomb ripped through his convoy, killing at least 12 people and injuring more than 30, police officials said.        

The politician, Maulana Fazlur Rehman, is the leader of a religious political party, Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam, but has become a target of militants because of his perceived support for the government&rsquo;s pro-American policies. He was on his way to address party workers at a seminary in the restive northwestern Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province, formerly North-West Frontier Province, when a suicide bomber detonated himself near Mr. Rehman&rsquo;s vehicle and its police escort.        

Mr. Rehman and his top political aides were unhurt in the blast, which shattered the windshield of their vehicle; the police truck that was following was ripped apart from the front.        

A day earlier, a suicide bomber on a motorbike blew himself up at a police checkpoint in another part of the province, killing at least 10 people. Mr. Rehman was traveling to speak to party workers nearby when the bomber blew himself up after being stopped by the police.        

There was no immediate claim of responsibility, but the Pakistani Taliban and militant groups linked to Al Qaeda have been conducting suicide bombings against government and military targets in the region for several years. The attacks on Mr. Rehman are another sign of the radical direction of the militants, who have turned against their erstwhile mentors and supporters, whom they blame for betraying the Islamist cause.        

Mr. Rehman is often described as a father of the Taliban, because for more than two decades he has supported groups waging jihad in Afghanistan and has supplied thousands of recruits to the fight through a network of mosques and madrasas run by his party in Pakistan&rsquo;s border areas. He has always maintained a role in government and a close relationship with Pakistan&rsquo;s military, which for years supported various militant groups fighting in Afghanistan and Kashmir.        

Yet since the Pakistani civilian government and the military took up the fight against militants in 2007, Mr. Rehman has struggled to balance his relationship with the government and military and the growing extremism of the militant groups.        

Mr. Rehman has a reputation as a deft, pragmatic politician; he has opposed both United States policies in the region and the tactics used by the local Taliban, who as a result have kept him on their hit list. Mr. Rehman faced criticism recently after WikiLeaks released diplomatic cables disclosing that despite his anti-American public posturing he had sought help from the United States ambassador in Islamabad in 2007 as part of a failed bid to become the country&rsquo;s prime minister.        

The young and brash leadership of the Pakistani Taliban seems to have little patience for Islamist politicians like Mr. Rehman, who are amenable to political compromises and concessions with the country&rsquo;s secular and moderate political parties. Mr. Rehman has said that he wants to enact Islamic law in the country, but also that he believes in democratic elections and that he does not support militancy.        

His political party was part of the government coalition until December, when he parted ways over differences with the governing Pakistan Peoples Party. He has since sat on the opposition benches in Parliament.        

On Thursday, President Asif Ali Zardari strongly condemned the attack on Mr. Rehman. &ldquo;The government and people are determined to defeat terrorism and such gruesome acts cannot deter the resolve of the nation which remains united to defeat terrorists,&rdquo; Mr. Zardari said in a statement.        

The United States Embassy in Islamabad also condemned the bombing. &ldquo;Today&rsquo;s atrocity is the second in as many days believed to have targeted the leader of a political party,&rdquo; the embassy said in a statement. &ldquo;The United States stands with Pakistan for a peaceful and prosperous future, free from the threat of violent extremism.&rdquo;        
