
SANA, Yemen &mdash; The Obama administration wants to help Yemen do more than hunt down Islamic terrorists, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton told this fragile Arab country on Tuesday as she sought to broaden a relationship almost wholly defined by American concerns that Yemen is a staging ground for plots against the United States.        

Mrs. Clinton, the first secretary of state to visit Yemen since James A. Baker III in 1990, undertook a delicate balancing act. She gently prodded the country&rsquo;s longtime autocratic president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, to open up his political system while leaving no doubt that he remained a crucial partner in the fight against Islamic extremism.        

&ldquo;I want to be frank about the fact that there are terrorists operating from Yemeni territory today,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said to an audience of legislators, businesspeople and students here in the capital. &ldquo;Stopping these threats would be a priority for any nation, and it is a priority for us.&rdquo;        

At the same time, Mrs. Clinton said that the United States was ready to help Yemen with problems like its dwindling oil and water supplies. The Yemeni economy, she said, had been sapped by terrorism, which scares away the tourists and investors who could help lift it out of poverty.        

Arriving from Dubai, United Arab Emirates, under a cloak of secrecy, Mrs. Clinton spent barely seven hours in this ramshackle, beguiling capital. But she got a vivid impression of America&rsquo;s tangled relationship with Yemen, to which it sent $130 million in nonmilitary aid in 2010, up from $17 million in 2008, an increase that brings it almost in line with 2010&rsquo;s $170 million in military aid.        

At a town-hall-style meeting, she spoke to average Yemenis, some of them concerned with efforts by Mr. Saleh, 68, a wily former military officer who has ruled this country for three decades, to eliminate term limits. Critics say it would  make him president for life. He has been locked in tense negotiations with opposition parties, which seek a greater role in the Parliament.        

At the meeting, Mrs. Clinton was asked by a member of the Yemeni Parliament who leads an anticorruption committee how the United States could tolerate Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s strongman rule, given that it had helped to make Yemen a haven for terrorist groups. Most notorious is  Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the group behind the attempted bombing of an American jet on Dec. 25, 2009, and the foiled air cargo bombings this past October.        

&ldquo;We support an inclusive government,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton replied. &ldquo;We see that Yemen is going through a transition. And you&rsquo;re right: it could one way or the other. It could go the right way or the wrong way.&rdquo;        

Behind the crenelated walls of the presidential palace, Mrs. Clinton spent nearly three hours with Mr. Saleh. A senior administration official said the two discussed economic and social development, cooperation on counterterrorism, and political tensions. Mrs. Clinton urged him to open a dialogue with the opposition, saying it would make Yemen more stable.        

For his part, Mr. Saleh emphasized Yemen&rsquo;s counterterrorism campaign, which makes use of American training, intelligence and, sometimes, firepower, in the form of cruise missiles, said the official, speaking on condition of anonymity under normal diplomatic ground rules. While he declined to detail Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s comments, he said they were &ldquo;encouraging.&rdquo;        

Surprisingly, the topic of WikiLeaks did not figure heavily, officials said, even though Mr. Saleh was depicted in the confidential diplomatic cables published by that organization as a manipulative negotiator, alternately welcoming and rebuffing American overtures to help track down Qaeda operatives.        

The president stood silently with Mrs. Clinton at the news conference after their meeting. Shortly before, he gave her a silver necklace made by a Yemeni-Jewish craftsman; he placed it around her neck before escorting her from the palace. Mrs. Clinton then set off on an impromptu tour of Sana&rsquo;s walled old city. As her motorcade threaded through serpentine streets, in the shadow of minarets and mud-brick houses, she was cheered by schoolchildren and surveyed by men with decorative daggers in their belts.        

The State Department took unusual precautions scheduling Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s visit, leaving a blank space in her schedule between stops in Dubai and Oman, which borders Yemen. Still, word of her travels was reported by news agencies and blogs in the region, rattling her security staff.        

Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s reception in Sana was generally warm, though at the town-hall-style meeting, she was challenged by a legislator who asked about President Obama&rsquo;s failure to deliver on a pledge to close the military prison at Guant&aacute;namo Bay, Cuba. He noted that Yemen had offered to set up rehabilitation centers to accept Yemeni detainees, a parallel to a Saudi program.        

&ldquo;We would certainly be open to something like that in Yemen as well,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton responded. (The administration has failed to come to terms because of financial demands made by Yemen, officials said.)        

Mrs. Clinton is not likely to rewrite the American relationship with Yemen. But she was a change of pace from other regular visitors: John O. Brennan, President Obama&rsquo;s top counterterrorism adviser, and Gen. David H. Petraeus, commander of the military&rsquo;s central command.        

In a poignant coda to the day, Mrs. Clinton briefly met a former child bride, Nujood Ali, who as a 10-year-old in 2008 had stood outside a courthouse until a lawyer finally agreed to handle her divorce from her 30-year-old husband. Mrs. Clinton said she was an example for all Yemenis who aspire to a better future.        
