
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; Zimbabwe&rsquo;s neighbors, long accused of being soft on its autocratic president, Robert Mugabe, are putting an unusual amount of public pressure on him to halt the political violence, intimidation and arrests that have surged since his party began agitating for elections in recent months.        

After meeting on Zimbabwe&rsquo;s deteriorating political climate, the presidents of South Africa, Zambia and Mozambique issued a statement late Thursday night expressing &ldquo;grave concern&rdquo; about the country&rsquo;s increasingly polarized environment, one that human rights groups have attributed to Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s party, ZANU-PF.        

Zimbabwe had achieved a tenuous political stability in the two years since regional leaders first pressured Mr. Mugabe to enter a power-sharing government with his longtime rival, Morgan Tsvangirai, after a discredited, violent 2008 election.        

But that stability has been shaken in recent months. Journalists, activists and civic workers have faced harassment and jailing. Soldiers and youth militia under the control of Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s party have assaulted Mr. Tsvangirai&rsquo;s supporters, while police officers also answerable to Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s loyalists have arrested leaders in Mr. Tsvangirai&rsquo;s party, the Movement for Democratic Change, on charges the party says are false.        

In recent days, the state media, controlled by Mr. Mugabe, has called for the arrest of Mr. Tsvangirai on grounds that he should be held in contempt of court for saying the judicial system is biased in favor of ZANU-PF.        

In the past, regional leaders have stayed away from such issues, leery of having Mr. Mugabe, a liberation hero to many for his role in ridding Zimbabwe of white-minority rule, accuse them of interfering in a sovereign nation&rsquo;s legal system.        

But South Africa&rsquo;s president, Jacob Zuma, the region&rsquo;s mediator in Zimbabwe&rsquo;s crisis, made it clear in meetings with Mr. Mugabe and Mr. Tsvangirai in Zambia on Thursday that Mr. Tsvangirai was not to be arrested and that acts of violence, harassment and intimidation needed to cease, said Mr. Zuma&rsquo;s adviser, Lindiwe Zulu.        

Ms. Zulu said in an interview on Friday that Mr. Zuma declared, &ldquo;All these things must stop.&rdquo;        

Without mentioning Mr. Mugabe by name, the three southern African leaders also insisted in their statement that Zimbabweans must have a chance to vote on a new constitution, and that rules must be laid out to ensure a free and fair vote, before the country holds an election to pick a president. Mr. Mugabe has been pushing for a quick election this year &mdash; something Ms. Zulu has said in recent interviews would take &ldquo;a miracle&rdquo; given how far behind schedule the country&rsquo;s constitution-making process has fallen.        

Mr. Zuma&rsquo;s bluntness, as described by Ms. Zulu, is a departure from the much criticized quiet diplomacy of South Africa&rsquo;s former president, Thabo Mbeki, who was seen by many analysts as having protected Mr. Mugabe, in power since 1980, through elections widely viewed as corrupt.        

But while Mr. Zuma has talked tougher than Mr. Mbeki, some diplomats in Zimbabwe&rsquo;s capital, Harare, say that he has proved to be distracted by his domestic political problems and has not yet found an effective strategy for halting Zimbabwe&rsquo;s backsliding.        

Nelson Chamisa, the spokesman for the Movement for Democratic Change, said Friday that his party appreciated that this influential panel of the 15-nation Southern African Development Community recognized the severity of Zimbabwe&rsquo;s problems.        

&ldquo;We await practical measures to make sure that the resolutions have an impact,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;In the past, resolutions are put on paper but have not been carried out.&rdquo;        

The spokesman for Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s party, Rugare Gumbo, said Friday morning that he had not yet been briefed on how to respond to the statement by the regional heads of state.        
