
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Vast, dueling protests gripped this dusty, divided city on Friday as tens of thousands of people prayed in the streets for the end of President Ali Abdullah Saleh&rsquo;s rule, while his supporters staged even larger demonstrations of their own warning of the chaos that would come to Yemen if he were driven from power.        

The division could be heard across the city with people in the street shouting at passers-by, &ldquo;Are you with Saleh or are you with those who want the regime to fall?&rdquo;        

Both groups swelled to their largest levels yet in weeks of protests throughout the country. Antigovernment demonstrators called it a &ldquo;Friday of Enough,&rdquo; as Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s supporters &mdash; many of them bused in from outside the capital &mdash; mounted what they called a &ldquo;Friday of Brotherhood&rdquo; to defend his tottering administration. Posters of Mr. Saleh hung on cars, houses and shops.        

The protests pointed to a deepening stalemate between Mr. Saleh, who clings to power, and his opposition, which has grown in strength since March 21, when the country&rsquo;s most powerful military commander, Maj. Gen. Ali Mohsin al-Ahmar, announced his support for antigovernment protesters.        

Mr. Saleh gave a short, defiant and threatening speech on Friday in front of a crowd of tens of thousands of supporters in Sana. &ldquo;I will spend blood for the sake of these people,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I will make costly and precious sacrifices for the sake of the Yemeni masses.&rdquo;        

In places along the antigovernment protest route, which stretched south for more than two miles from Sana University toward the center of the city, General Ahmar&rsquo;s soldiers took up positions on rooftops in an apparent effort to protect the crowds. It was two weeks ago after Friday Prayer that a similarly large protest along the same street came under attack by snipers linked to the government, and more than 50 people were killed.        

But that attack did not succeed in driving protesters from the streets, where they have staged a continuous sit-in since mid-February. The large antigovernment crowds on Friday remained defiant as they prayed together during a sermon that took on strong revolutionary tones.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve had 33 years of hunger,&rdquo; one imam said, challenging Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s rule. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve had 33 years of crises.&rdquo;        

Opposition political parties have inched Mr. Saleh toward the door, first extracting the promise that he would step down by 2013, then that he would depart before the end of this year. But neither timetable has been acceptable to protesters in the street, who are demanding that Mr. Saleh, an ally of the United States against the rising presence of Al Qaeda here, step down immediately.        

Negotiations for Mr. Saleh to establish a transfer of power, which appeared promising last week, have recently faltered amid an outpouring of support that buttressed his resolve.        

&ldquo;We are with the president,&rdquo; said Abdullah Magdy, a biology professor at Sana University who had just attended the pro-government rally. He complained that the antigovernment protests had greatly disrupted life in the capital and that the opposition must &ldquo;listen to the president&rdquo; when he makes concessions in order to reach a political solution.        

Many government supporters came from outside the city for the rally supporting Mr. Saleh.        

In a sign of the mounting tension, the British Foreign Office urged its citizens to &ldquo;leave now.&rdquo; Tanks have taken up positions in the capital and hundreds of security forces have been deployed at checkpoints across the city.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s highly unlikely that the British government will be able to evacuate you or provide consular assistance if you do not leave now,&rdquo; a Foreign Office statement said.        
Laura Kasinof reported from Sana, and J. David Goodman from New York. Robert F. Worth contributed reporting from Washington.
