
TARO, Japan &mdash; So unshakable was this town&rsquo;s faith in its sea wall and its ability to save residents from any tsunami that some rushed toward it after a 9.0-magnitude earthquake struck off the coast of northeast Japan on the afternoon of March 11.        

After all, the sea wall was one of Japan&rsquo;s tallest and longest, called the nation&rsquo;s &ldquo;Great Wall of China&rdquo; by the government and news media. Its inner wall was reinforced by an outer one, and they stretched 1.5 miles across the bay here. The surface was so wide that high school students jogged on it, townspeople strolled on it, and some rode their bicycles on it. A local junior high school song even urged students: &ldquo;Look up at our sea wall. The challenges of tsunamis are endless.&rdquo;        

But within a few minutes on March 11, the tsunami&rsquo;s waves tore through the outer wall before easily surging over the 34-foot-high inner one, sweeping away those who had climbed on its top, and quickly taking away most of the town of Taro.        

&ldquo;For us, the sea wall was a source of pride, an asset, something that we believed in,&rdquo; said Eiko Araya, 58, the principal of Taro No. 3 Elementary School. Like several other survivors, Ms. Araya was walking atop the inner wall late Wednesday afternoon, peering down at the ruins of Taro. &ldquo;We felt protected, I believe. That&rsquo;s why our feeling of loss is even greater now.&rdquo;        

Tsunamis are an integral part of the history of Japan&rsquo;s Sanriku region, which includes this fishing town of about 4,400. People speak of tsunamis as if they were enemies that &ldquo;take away&rdquo; the inhabitants here. Perhaps because the loss of life over the decades has been so great, a local teaching, called tendenko, unsentimentally exhorts people to head for higher ground immediately after an earthquake, without stopping to worry about anybody else.        

Sanriku is also home to some of the world&rsquo;s most elaborate anti-tsunami infrastructure, including concrete sea walls that transform seaside communities into garrisonlike towns with limited views of the ocean. About 50 miles south of here, in the city of Kamaishi, the world&rsquo;s deepest breakwater was completed two years ago after three decades of construction, at a cost of $1.5 billion.        

The recent tsunami damaged, perhaps irreparably, Kamaishi&rsquo;s breakwater, as well as countless sea walls and other facilities designed to shield communities against tsunamis. Researchers are starting to assess whether the sea walls and breakwaters minimized the force of the tsunami even as some experts are already calling for a stop to more coastline engineering, saying money should be spent instead on education and evacuation drills.        

As Japan undertakes the monumental task of rebuilding areas of its northeast, it will also face the hard choice of whether to resurrect the expensive anti-tsunami infrastructure &mdash; much of which was built during Japan&rsquo;s economic ascendancy.        

Osamu Shimozawa, a city official in Kamaishi, said a decision not to rebuild would be tantamount to &ldquo;abandoning rural Japan.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We have to provide a permanent feeling of security so that people will live here,&rdquo; Mr. Shimozawa said.        

Kamaishi&rsquo;s 207-foot deep breakwater &mdash; sections of which now lie broken in the harbor &mdash; blunted the force of the tsunami, according to preliminary investigations by independent civil engineers. In Kamaishi, 648 deaths have been confirmed, while 630 people are still listed as missing.        

&ldquo;The damage was limited, compared to other places,&rdquo; said Shoichi Sasaki, an official at the Ministry of Land&rsquo;s office in Kamaishi.        

It was an opinion shared by most people interviewed in Kamaishi, many of whom had witnessed construction crews erecting the breakwater from 1978 to 2009.        

Toru Yaura and his wife, Junko, both 60, were clearing the debris from the first floor of their home, several blocks from the water.        

&ldquo;Without the breakwater, the impact would probably have been greater,&rdquo; Mr. Yaura said, explaining that the water rose up to his waist on the second floor of his two-story house.        

Kantaro Suzuki contributed reporting.
