
CAIRO &mdash; Thousands of demonstrators filled Tahrir Square on Friday for the largest protest in weeks, demanding that the ruling military council move faster to dismantle lingering aspects of the old regime.        

Disenchantment with the military was the focus of many speeches and chants, and participants milling about were all too ready to grumble about the generals.        

&ldquo;The military council is inexplicably slow in responding to our demands,&rdquo; said Mohammad el-Qassas, a leader of the youth wing of the Muslim Brotherhood and a member of the coalition of those who organized the Jan. 25 revolution. &ldquo;Protests and popular pressure must return, because they are only the real method of realizing the people&rsquo;s demands.&rdquo;        

He reeled off a list of unaccomplished goals, including the arrest of leading members of the old government, serious trials for corrupt businessmen, the removal of university presidents appointed by former President Hosni Mubarak as well as his provincial governors.        

Painted banners, hung between palm trees on the square&rsquo;s south side, enumerated still more. They included the cancellation of a proposed law that would ban demonstrations, faster prosecution of those responsible for killing hundreds of protesters in January and February and trials for the Mubarak family on charges of plundering national wealth.        

&ldquo;Mubarak is still fishing in Sharm, as if nothing happened,&rdquo; groused Hassan Ismail, 60, a housing manager. He was referring to the Red Sea resort of Sharm el Sheik, where Mr. Mubarak and his family now live &mdash; after being barred from leaving the country.        

Some noted that the military had taken steps through a national referendum to bring about legislative elections planned for September and a presidential vote two months later. But to many, those actions seem driven by what the military wants.        

&ldquo;People are still skeptical about how this revolution is moving forward &mdash; they want to remind the army and all forces that the revolution did not end yet,&rdquo; said Shaheer George, a 25-year-old independent activist.        

The chants that erupted on the square included &ldquo;The people want the fall of the field marshal,&rdquo; referring to Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, the leader of the military council and another Mubarak confidant.        

Among the most common complaints is that the military is utterly opaque, issuing edicts from behind closed doors. Despite its attempts to reach out by making announcements via Facebook and text messages, there is no sense of popular consultation.        

The mood was a notable shift from two months ago, when the armed forces were being universally hailed as the country&rsquo;s saviors for refusing to fire on the crowds demanding President Mubarak&rsquo;s departure. A heavy military hand in breaking up demonstrations and credible allegations of torturing arrested protesters have also chipped away at the military&rsquo;s reputation.        

&ldquo;The army needs to be reminded that we are the ones who started this revolution, and that is why they are in power now,&rdquo; said Omniya Bahgat, a 26-year-old demonstrator. &ldquo;We are tired of hearing that our demands will be met later.&rdquo;        

The crowd on Friday appeared to number about 4,000, a far cry from the hundreds of thousands who gathered there to demand Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s ouster. But it was too dense for the cars to penetrate, and the distinctive red berets of the military police were not in sight. People also turned out in droves in Alexandria and other large cities, activists said.        

In part, the smaller crowds are attributable to the fact that the various political organizations no longer share the same simple goals like overthrowing the president, analysts said. Also there is a general debate about whether it is time to abandon the protests in the square as a method of change and wait for a nascent political system to grow stronger.        

&ldquo;Tahrir Square represents the possibility of getting people mobilized &mdash; hundreds of thousands of people,&rdquo; said Diaa Rashwan, a political analyst at the Ahram Center for Strategic and International Studies. &ldquo;That still matters.&rdquo;        
Lara El Gibaly and Liam Stack contributed reporting.
