
ROME &mdash; The Italian Parliament has long been a three-ring circus, but analysts here say that the events of the past few days have plunged the country into its worst institutional crisis in decades.        

Several outbursts have revived the prospect of early elections weeks after Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, facing trial on charges of paying a minor for sex and of abuse of power, managed to grab the steering wheel and put his government back on the road.        

In heated parliamentary debate on Wednesday, the defense minister told the speaker of the lower house to go do something to himself that cannot be printed in this newspaper. When the defense minister and the environment minister left Parliament, protesters hurled coins at them, calling them thieves.        

The next day a member of the center-right governing coalition called an opposition politician who uses a wheelchair a &ldquo;stupid cripple,&rdquo; and the normally calm justice minister threw his electronic voting card out into the opposition, angry that he had been too late to vote.        

&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s face it, our parliamentary democracy has never been so fragile,&rdquo; Michele Ainis, a constitutional law expert, wrote in a front-page editorial in Corriere della Sera, Italy&rsquo;s leading daily newspaper, on Friday.        

On Thursday evening, President Giorgio Napolitano took the rare step of calling political leaders to a meeting where he upbraided them for their &ldquo;intolerable&rdquo; conduct and reminded them that he could dissolve Parliament and call early elections.        

While the Berlusconi government suffers from severe internal divisions &mdash;over issues that include the NATO intervention in Libya and how to handle the tens of thousands of immigrants arriving in Italy from the unrest in North Africa &mdash; Mr. Napolitano has emerged as a well-respected elder statesman trying to hold the country together.        

Last week, President Obama called Mr. Napolitano, who hails from the Atlanticist wing of the Italian Communist Party, to thank him for Italy&rsquo;s involvement in NATO&rsquo;s Libya intervention.        

The Berlusconi government, meanwhile, has had other preoccupations. The brouhaha in Parliament arose Wednesday during a debate on a procedural vote on a justice reform package. Although Italy has been routinely fined by the European Union for the long delays in its justice system, critics see the measure as a law aimed at protecting Mr. Berlusconi from prosecution.        

In the debate, Defense Minister Ignazio La Russa, a former neo-Fascist who in recent years has been known to rough up journalists, directed his pointed words at the speaker of the lower house, Gianfranco Fini.         

While Mr. La Russa stood and shouted, Foreign Minister Franco Frattini, who has been struggling for Italy to be taken seriously on the world stage, sat silently next to him, looking down, and straightened his tie.        

After the governing coalition lost the technical vote on Thursday, several government ministers accused Mr. Fini, another former neo-Fascist who dramatically split with Mr. Berlusconi last summer, of not being impartial and of closing voting before they had arrived.        

The normally calm and collected justice minister, Angelino Alfano, later said that he had thrown his voting card into the opposition because Mr. Fini had closed the vote before he had a chance to hit the button. (In 2009, Parliament installed a new high-tech electronic voting system to prevent what were known as &ldquo;pianists,&rdquo; members who would hit two buttons at once to vote for their absentee colleagues.)        

During the debate, a member of the governing coalition called Ileana Argentin, the disabled member of the opposition, a &ldquo;stupid cripple,&rdquo; after she protested that coalition members had tried to prevent her aide from applauding in her stead, since she was not able to use her hands.        

On Friday, Mr. Berlusconi said he still had the numbers to keep governing Italy. He said he would go to Tunisia on Monday to try to persuade that country to stop allowing thousands of immigrants to travel to Italy.        

Adding another ring to the circus, Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s trial is expected to start next week.        
