
BAGHDAD &mdash; The Iraqi government is investigating a shootout on Monday between an Iraqi fishing boat and a Kuwaiti Coast Guard vessel in the Persian Gulf that left a Kuwaiti serviceman dead and five fishermen briefly in Kuwaiti custody, a spokesman for the Iraqi government said on Tuesday.        

The Iraqi and Kuwaiti authorities offered different accounts of the clash.        

On Monday afternoon, the Ahmed Wahid, a fishing vessel with nine crew members out of the Iraqi port city of Fao,  exchanged fire with a Coast Guard vessel in the waters adjoining the two countries, which provide prime seafood for the markets of southern Iraq. A bullet killed one member of the Coast Guard. The Coast Guard ship sank the fishing boat and arrested five members of the crew.        

In 1990, Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait, and relations have never fully recovered, in part because of the crippling war debts owed by Iraq to Kuwait. In recent years Iraqi fishermen in the Persian Gulf have had skirmishes with security forces from Iran and Kuwait, including one in which an Iraqi fisherman was killed by the Iranian Coast Guard, Iraqi officials said.        

The Kuwaiti government in a statement said that the fishing boat had violated its national waters and that the crew members were smugglers. In the statement the deputy prime minister and foreign minister, Sheik Mohamed Sabah al-Salim Alsubah, said he could not say whether the smuggling involved drugs or weapons for terrorists.        

&ldquo;But I know that the result was criminal and caused the killing of a Kuwaiti,&rdquo; Sheik Mohamed said.        

The mayor of Fao, Waleed al-Sharefi, said that the fishing boat had not entered Kuwaiti waters and that Iraqi river police officers at a security checkpoint had searched the boat before the altercation and assured that the fishermen were unarmed. He added that four of the fishermen were still missing. The fishermen whom the Kuwaiti authorities had detained were now back in Iraq, he said.        

&ldquo;This is a continuing series of attacks,&rdquo; Mr. Sharefi said. &ldquo;No month passes without an attack.&rdquo; He said his office had received many complaints of torture from fishermen who had been stopped by Kuwaiti or Iranian security forces.        

The fishing boat&rsquo;s owner, Mahmod Shabban Mahmod, 65, said that six of his sons were on board  and that two were still missing. And without the boat, his family had no means of earning money. &ldquo;They will die from hunger,&rdquo; Mr. Mahmod said.        
An Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Basra, Iraq.
