
ASTANA, Kazakhstan &mdash; On the eve of a presidential election in this oil-rich Central Asian nation, students and faculty at the Kazakh University of the Arts filed into an auditorium for a meeting that was, according to fliers posted in the hallways, &ldquo;strictly mandatory!!!&rdquo;        

The rector&rsquo;s topic, it became clear, was Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, the country&rsquo;s 70-year-old president. She praised Mr. Nazarbayev&rsquo;s &ldquo;strategic thinking&rdquo; and his &ldquo;deep feeling for art&rdquo; and noted that &ldquo;many people thought the university did not need a pipe organ, but thanks to the president, we got one.&rdquo; By the time the hour was up, Indira Akhmetova, an aspiring film critic with black nail polish and an eyebrow piercing, was feeling gushy.        

&ldquo;I would like him to live to 100,&rdquo; said Ms. Akhmetova, who, at 20, has never known another leader. If that proves impossible, she added, &ldquo;He should stay for 10 years, so that he can prepare someone else.&rdquo;        

And who might that be? &ldquo;Someone just like him,&rdquo; she said.        

During a season of collapsing authoritarian governments, Mr. Nazarbayev stands as testament to the forces protecting the strongmen of the former Soviet states. There is no restless young elite that wants to take over the government. Where Egypt had independent military leaders, Kazakhstan has the K.N.B., successor to the Soviet K.G.B., which is bound closely to the government. Per capita GDP has increased twelvefold since 1994, and post-Soviet turmoil has left behind a craving for stability.        

Those conditions have allowed Mr. Nazarbayev to eliminate his rivals systematically, constructing, in two decades, a system that revolves around a single personality. And as his 71st birthday approaches, this has become a great concern. Institutions here are too weak to ensure continuity, and a glance at neighboring Kyrgyzstan &mdash; which was engulfed by violence last summer &mdash; suggests the dangers posed by a transition in government. Succession has become the electric current that runs through Astana.        

&ldquo;He understands that other than himself, there is no one capable of taking power,&rdquo; said Aleksei V. Vlasov, a Russian political scientist who has advised Kazakh officials. &ldquo;Even if he said, &lsquo;I will not run in the election, take it,&rsquo; there is no one to take it. And this is a problem for him and for the political elite.&rdquo;        

It is almost comical to consider campaigning against Mr. Nazarbayev in Astana, the gleaming city that he ordered built in the 1990s on the blank plane of the northern steppe, its skyline melding folk mysticism with science fiction.        

At its central point, citizens can ascend to a large glass orb and place their hands in a golden cast of the president&rsquo;s handprint, which they believe can grant wishes. A museum features dioramas of pivotal moments in Mr. Nazarbayev&rsquo;s life. In one, he is 6, in a field with his father, who was a shepherd. The boy gazes raptly up at a mountaintop, an episode which a guide explained was &ldquo;probably a sign from God that he was going to be president.&rdquo;        

Mr. Nazarbayev was first secretary of Kazakhstan&rsquo;s Communist Party when the Soviet Union collapsed. Over his tenure, he became increasingly intolerant of political challengers, culminating in a poisonous feud with a son-in-law who was seen by some as a potential successor. The rubber-stamp Parliament eliminated term limits, granted him lifetime immunity from prosecution and, early this year, approved a popular referendum that would waive all presidential elections until 2020.        

The referendum seemed almost a foregone conclusion in February, when Mr. Nazarbayev announced a change of heart: He would renew his mandate by holding elections nearly two years early, a move that required amending the Constitution. The decision was &ldquo;all the more curious&rdquo; because Mr. Nazarbayev seemed to face no real threat of civil unrest, said Sarah Michaels, deputy director of analysis at Oxford Analytica, a global analysis and advisory form.        

&ldquo;It was a really, really rapid reversal of face,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It apparently took place within his inner circle within a couple of days. They saw what was happening in Tunisia and Egypt and became very alarmed. It will certainly be used by the authorities as a way to bear up his popularity.&rdquo;        

Indeed, the authorities in Astana seem to be taking no chances that the president&rsquo;s showing will be anything less than spectacular.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Though 22 people expressed interest in running this year, 18 dropped out or were rejected, many because they could not pass a stringent test in the Kazakh language. The best-known opposition parties called a boycott, saying the early election gave them too little time to prepare. The president&rsquo;s three challengers are little-known figures who have carefully refrained from criticizing him.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t have secret thoughts that I will become president,&rdquo; one of them, Mels Yeleusizov, said in a recent interview. Jambyl Akhmetbekov, a Communist, acknowledged the same thing to international observers, saying, &ldquo;It is enough to occupy a certain position in these elections.&rdquo;        

Anyway, even Mr. Nazarbayev&rsquo;s most committed critics admit that he is popular.        

&ldquo;Our people are patient, and they believe lies,&rdquo; said Serikbai Alibayev, a former legislator from an opposition party, OSDP-Azat. &ldquo;It would be enough if there were one channel, one television channel; if we had access to voters for several months, that would be enough.&rdquo;        

As the campaign entered its last days, Mr. Nazarbayev&rsquo;s face seemed to proliferate on billboards, and students giddily released balloons in his honor.        

More difficult work seemed likely to begin after his re-election, when attention will gravitate back to the question of succession. Mr. Vlasov, a deputy dean of history at Moscow State University, said that the next president could try to preserve the autocratic system, but that without Mr. Nazarbayev the structure would fall apart in five years. Some political insiders are arguing for &ldquo;controlled competition,&rdquo; allowing a second party to get a foothold in Parliament and slowly expand &mdash; if only, he said, to stave off social discontent.        

&ldquo;They have an idea that to sustain stability they need some liberalization,&rdquo; Mr. Vlasov said. &ldquo;Here is the paradox of the times.&rdquo;        
