
ABUJA, Nigeria (Reuters) &mdash; After polls opened in Nigeria on Saturday, parliamentary elections were suddenly postponed for a week because, officials said, many areas had yet to receive voting materials.        

Parliamentary elections, which had been rescheduled to start Monday, will now take place on April 9, while the presidential vote is set for April 16, Attahiru Jega, head of the Independent National Electoral Commission, said Sunday in Abuja, the capital. The following week, voters will choose the governors and legislatures of Nigeria's 36 states, he said.        

The problems were a major blow to hopes of a break with a history here of electoral chaos and fraud. Failed elections could raise questions about how well-entrenched democracy is, more than a decade after the end of military rule.        

In a televised address on Saturday, Mr. Jega said, &ldquo;The decision we have taken is weighty indeed, but it is an important step in further ensuring the credibility of the 2011 elections.&rdquo;        

But the opposition questioned the legitimacy of the postponement.        

&ldquo;Our initial reaction is that we suspect there is a deliberate attempt to sabotage the elections and undermine the electoral commission,&rdquo; said Yinka Odumakin, a spokesman for Muhammadu Buhari, a former military ruler and the main rival to President Goodluck Jonathan in presidential elections. Mr. Buhari said Mr. Jonathan&rsquo;s party &ldquo;is afraid to let people come out and vote.&rdquo;        

The voting materials had not arrived in the capital, Abuja, and other regions, including Rivers, Bayelsa and Akwa Ibom States in the southern oil-producing Niger Delta, Plateau State in the central &ldquo;Middle Belt&rdquo; and Borno in the remote northeast.        

&ldquo;At the moment I have ballot papers, for the House of Representatives but no results sheets,&rdquo; said Maria Owi, resident electoral commissioner in Akwa Ibom. &ldquo;For the Senate, I have results sheets but no ballot papers.&rdquo;        

Mr. Jega placed blame for the delay on a failure to get voter materials shipped in from outside Nigeria on time.The electoral commission has put tougher measures in place to prevent cheating and intimidation, which raised such broad doubts after the last elections in 2007 that foreign observers said they might not have reflected the will of the people.        

Voters had gathered eagerly on Saturday to register at polling places across the country&rsquo;s two most populous cities &mdash; the commercial hub Lagos in the south and Kano in the north &mdash; but elsewhere, tempers were frayed by the delays. Gunshots in the volatile oil-producing Niger Delta also raised worries of violence.        
