
KANDAHAR, Afghanistan &mdash; Violent protests over the burning of a Koran in Florida flared Saturday for a second straight day, with young men rampaging through the streets of this southern capital city, flying Taliban flags and wielding sticks.        

Nine people were killed and 81 wounded in the disturbances, all from bullet wounds, said Abdul Qayoum Pakhla, head of the provincial health department. Kandahar has long been the heartland of the Taliban insurgency but has been relatively quiet in recent months since a surge of additional American troops arrived here.        

The protests here came a day after a mob overran the headquarters of the United Nations in Mazar-i-Sharif, killing 12 people, 7 of them international staff members. The top United Nations official in Afghanistan, Staffan de Mistura, blamed Taliban infiltrators for the killings, saying the victims were deliberately murdered rather than killed by an out-of-control mob. The mob gathered after three mullahs at Friday Prayer urged action in response to the Koran burning by a pastor, Terry Jones, in Florida on March 20.        

In Kandahar, several thousand young men, shouting slogans calling for death to Americans and to the government of President Hamid Karzai, were still rioting after several hours on Saturday, setting tires on fire throughout the city, burning cars and attacking journalists trying to cover the disorder. Shops and businesses were closed, and most people stayed off the street. Many of the protesters were waving the white flag of the Taliban.        

The police said that some of the protesters were armed, and Afghan authorities used live ammunition on occasion to quell the disturbances, which continued all day. Of the 16 arrested, 7 were armed, officials said.        

Kandahar&rsquo;s provincial governor, Tooryalai Wesa, said the police had been patient with the protesters on Saturday, even when some used grenades and other weapons, but might have to take action &ldquo;if it continues for another day.&rdquo;        

Zalmai Ayoubi, spokesman for the governor, said the rioters attacked the Zarghona Ana High School for Girls, burning some classrooms and a school bus. The school is supported by the United States Agency for International Development. The Taliban have opposed education for girls.        

A spokesman for the American military in Kandahar, Lt. Col. Web Wright, said relatively small crowds were involved, with the biggest group, about 100 demonstrators, gathered outside the governor&rsquo;s offices. So far, no coalition military forces have been made the target of protests.        

Although Mazar-i-Sharif has little or no Taliban presence, Kandahar has a significant number of residents who sympathize with the insurgents.        

There were also demonstrations over the Koran burning on Friday and Saturday in Kabul, and on Friday in Herat, in eastern Afghanistan. Both were peaceful and lightly attended.        

Both Afghan and international news media had initially played down or ignored the actions of Mr. Jones, the Florida pastor. On Thursday, however, President Karzai made a speech and issued statements condemning the Koran burning and calling for the arrest of Mr. Jones for his actions. On Friday, that theme was picked up in mosques throughout Afghanistan.        

&ldquo;Karzai brought this issue back to life, and he has to take some responsibility for starting this up,&rdquo; said a prominent Afghan businessman, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of retribution if he was identified as a critic of the president.        

&ldquo;Karzai&rsquo;s speech itself provoked people to take such actions,&rdquo; said Qayum Baabak, a political analyst in Mazar-i-Sharif. &ldquo;Karzai should have called on people to be patient rather than making people more angry.&rdquo;        

Officials in Mazar-i-Sharif also blamed Taliban agitators from other provinces for stirring up violence in the protests there.        

A Taliban spokesman, however, denied that the insurgents had any role in the disturbances in either Mazar-i-Sharif or Kandahar. &ldquo;This was the reaction of the people of Afghanistan,&rdquo; the spokesman, Zabiullah Mujahid, said.        

Mr. de Mistura, returning from a visit to Mazar-i-Sharif, said there was abundant evidence that agitators deliberately killed the United Nations workers.        

The four international staff members took refuge in a bunker inside the compound, as the crowd outside set buildings and vehicles on fire.        

The Taliban agitators were armed with pistols and spoke with accents from other parts of Afghanistan, he said.        

They hunted down the international staff members hiding in the bunker. At first they found only the Russian director of the office, but they let him go when he persuaded them that he was a Muslim by reciting the Koran in Arabic. When they found the others, they killed them.        

President Obama on Saturday described the killings as &ldquo;outrageous, and an affront to human decency and dignity.&rdquo; He also said that &ldquo;the desecration of any holy text, including the Koran, is an act of extreme intolerance and bigotry.&rdquo;        

Also on Saturday, a team of suicide bombers tried to breach the front gate at an American military base in Kabul, Camp Phoenix, said Mohammed Zahir, chief of the criminal investigation division of the Kabul police. One detonated his explosives at the gate of the camp, another managed to get about five yards inside the gate before setting off his device, and the other two were shot and killed by guards before they could enter, he said.        
Enayat Najafizada contributed reporting from Mazar-i-Sharif, Afghanistan.
