
SYDNEY, Australia &mdash; Brisbane, Australia&rsquo;s third-largest city, braced for its worst flooding in 35 years early Wednesday, as flash floods from devastating rains  that have been sweeping vast areas of the country&rsquo;s northeast for weeks raced toward it. Officials urged many of Brisbane&rsquo;s two million residents to flee to higher ground.        

At least 20 lives have been lost, including those of five children killed as the deluge tore through the major inland city of Toowoomba and other parts of the Lockyer Valley, west of Brisbane, late Monday, upending cars and ripping buildings from their foundations.        

More than 90 people were still missing early Wednesday, and the police warned that they had &ldquo;very grave fears&rdquo; for some of them.        

From the Australian capital, Canberra, Prime Minister Julia Gillard pledged military assistance to the flood-stricken state of Queensland, whose capital is Brisbane.        

&ldquo;The circumstances in Queensland continue to be very dire indeed,&rdquo; she  told reporters. &ldquo;The nation does need to brace itself for the fact that the death toll as a result of yesterday&rsquo;s flash flooding is likely to rise.&rdquo;        

Cars jammed the streets in Brisbane&rsquo;s low-lying central business district on Tuesday, filled with residents scrambling to secure their possessions and move to safe areas as the swollen Brisbane River began bursting its banks.        

Officials urged people in more than 30 flood-prone neighborhoods to take shelter with friends or relatives on higher ground. Two centers capable of holding more than 6,000 people were set up for those with nowhere else to go.        

Torrential rain has been falling steadily over much of Queensland since November. Officials at Australia&rsquo;s Bureau of Meteorology have warned that the region&rsquo;s soil has lost its capacity to absorb more water. The Bureau of Meteorology has predicted that lashing rains will continue for the next few days.        

The Brisbane City Council has estimated that about  9,000 homes and at least 2,000 city streets could be flooded by Thursday, when the river is expected to peak at about 20 feet above normal.        

To make matters worse, the region&rsquo;s main reservoir, created to help protect the city from flooding after the last devastating washout in 1974, was overflowing, adding thousands of gallons to the region&rsquo;s swollen river systems, Mayor Campbell Newman said.        

&ldquo;The situation has obviously demonstrably deteriorated,&rdquo; Mr. Newman said at a meeting of disaster management officials in Brisbane on Tuesday. &ldquo;Today is very significant, tomorrow is bad, and Thursday is going to be devastating for the residents and businesses affected.&rdquo;        

The Queensland State premier, Anna Bligh,  said the death toll was likely to rise as emergency crews entered the inundated areas that have been cut off since Monday.        

&ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s going to be a tough and emotional day in the Lockyer Valley, as the search and rescue teams get in there for the first time,&rdquo; Ms. Bligh told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. &ldquo;Families who are still holding out hope, some of them are likely to have their hopes tragically crushed.&rdquo;        

The floods have inundated  hundreds of homes and businesses, and brought the region&rsquo;s lucrative coal and agricultural industries to a virtual standstill.        
