
KANDAHAR, Afghanistan &mdash; Afghan protests over the burning of a Koran in Florida continued Sunday for a third day, with three more people killed here.        

That brought to 24 the number of people killed in Afghanistan since Friday, when a mob overran United Nations offices in the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif, killing seven United Nations international staff members.        

That was followed by two days of disturbances in Kandahar, in southern Afghanistan, with businesses closed and young men rampaging through the streets, flying Taliban flags and chanting anti-American slogans.        

The police fired into crowds Saturday, killing 9 people and wounding 81, all by gunshots, but were more restrained on Sunday, as representatives of the protesters met with government officials in an effort to defuse the violence.        

Still, 40 more people were wounded and 2 more killed Sunday in the confrontations between the police and protesters. Two policemen were killed over the two days here, apparently because some of the protesters were armed and shot back at them.        

In addition, protesters set fire to a traffic policeman&rsquo;s booth, which caused a gas canister inside to explode, killing a person and wounding 14.        

Kandahar&rsquo;s provincial governor, Tooryalai Wesa, expressed condolences to the families of those who were killed, and he also apologized for some police excesses in firing indiscriminately. He announced that four policemen were arrested Sunday for shooting people without justification.        

At the request of community leaders, Mr. Wesa also released 22 people arrested the day before, keeping only those seven who had been caught with weapons.        

There were demonstrations in Kabul and elsewhere around Afghanistan as well, but they were mostly peaceful.        

On Sunday, the continuing violence prompted the top American commander, Gen. David H. Petraeus, and the NATO civilian representative in Afghanistan, Mark Sedwill, to issue a joint statement condemning the Koran burnings.        

&ldquo;In view of the events of recent days, we feel it is important on behalf of ISAF and NATO members in Afghanistan to reiterate our condemnation of any disrespect to the Holy Qur&rsquo;an and the Muslim faith,&rdquo; the statement said, speaking of the International Security Assistance Force. &ldquo;We condemn, in particular, the action of an individual in the United States.&rdquo; The Koran was burned at a Gainesville, Fla., church on March 20 under the supervision of Terry Jones, a nondenominational evangelical pastor.        

&ldquo;We also offer condolences to the families of all those injured and killed in violence which occurred in the wake of the burning of the Holy Qur&rsquo;an.&rdquo;        

One local religious leader who met with the governor in Kandahar, Mullava Habibullah, was critical of the government for not interfering with protests against the Koran burning, but also condemned the international coalition for night raids and detentions.        

&ldquo;People won&rsquo;t stop demonstrations unless the foreign troops stop night raids and arresting and killing people,&rdquo; he said.        
