
BEIJING &mdash; At the elaborately renovated National Museum of China in Tiananmen Square, visitors interested in the recent history of the world&rsquo;s fastest rising power can gaze at the cowboy hat that Deng Xiaoping once wore when he visited the United States, or admire the bullhorn that President Hu Jintao used to exhort people to overcome hardship after the Sichuan earthquake in 2008.        
Sanitizing the Past

But if their interests run to the Cultural Revolution that tore the country apart from 1966 to 1976 and resulted in millions of deaths, they will have to search a back corner of the two-million-square-foot museum, which will complete its opening this month, for a single photograph and three lines of text that are the only reference to that era.        

China spent more than a decade and nearly $400 million to remake the National Museum into a leading showcase of history and culture, a monument to its rising power no less grand &mdash; it is designed to be the world&rsquo;s largest museum under one roof &mdash; and more enduring than the Olympic Games it hosted in 2008.        

But one tradition has remained firmly in place: China will not confront its own history. The museum is less the product of extensive research, discovery or creativity than the most prominent symbol of the Communist Party&rsquo;s efforts to control the narrative of history and suppress alternative points of view, even those that exist within the governing elite. It is also an example of how China finds it difficult to create cultural institutions that prove equal to its economic achievements.        

Interviews with participants describe a tortured reconstruction that dragged on years longer than envisioned, with plans constantly revised to accommodate political twists and turns, many decided personally by top party leaders.        

Officials rejected proposals for a permanent historical exhibition that would have discussed the disasters of early Communist rule &mdash; especially the Great Leap Forward, a political campaign and resulting famine that killed more than 20 million. Some organizers also wanted a candid appraisal of the Cultural Revolution, a decade-long attack on traditional culture and learning, but that effort was squashed.        

Instead, the authorities decided that the exhibition on contemporary China should focus, as did the museum before its extensive makeover, on the party&rsquo;s triumphs.        

Another permanent exhibit, on China&rsquo;s ancient history, also presents an idealized version of the past. It tells the uplifting story of Chinese ethnic groups pulling together to create &ldquo;brilliant achievements.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The party wants to determine historical truth,&rdquo; said Yang Jisheng, a historian whose landmark book on the Great Leap Forward famine was banned in China. &ldquo;It worries that if competing versions are allowed, then its legitimacy will be called into question.&rdquo;        

Many countries do not present their history in terms independent historians consider fully credible. American museums have been under pressure to account more fully for slavery. American Indians won a long battle to open their own museum on the Mall in Washington; other museums celebrate the westward expansion of the United States but give short shrift to the displacement and killing of American Indians.        

Even so, few countries can compete with China in so completely suppressing the shades of gray about their past. One result is that the Chinese public rarely has access, even on the Internet, to versions of history that differ from party propaganda, and popular support for some nationalist causes is sometimes even stronger than the party&rsquo;s own stances. Many Chinese are bewildered, for example, that some Tibetans or Uighurs are dissatisfied with Chinese rule or that Japanese and Taiwanese might have differing views of China&rsquo;s claims on their territory.        

This means that the National Museum, which has been granted unlimited access to treasures and relics of China&rsquo;s long history, has failed to escape the political constraints that for centuries have hobbled the study of Chinese history. Then, as now, rulers used history to shape the present, a leitmotif that has marked almost every era.        

&ldquo;A public museum in China is seldom about the past,&rdquo; said Hung Chang-tai, a professor at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology who has written on the museum. &ldquo;It is about the current image of the party and how the party wants itself to be seen.&rdquo;        

 The Red Line        

The National Museum has its roots in the Communist Party&rsquo;s desire for a legacy. In his memoirs, Wang Yeqiu, who would become the museum&rsquo;s director, recalls joining Communist troops as they entered Beijing in 1949 and making straight for a prison to secure a scaffold used in 1927 to hang one of the party&rsquo;s founding members. The scaffold became the first item in the museum&rsquo;s collection. But its opening in 1959 was marred by a problem that would haunt it to the present &mdash; politics. Prime Minister Zhou Enlai visited the proposed exhibition and said it did not emphasize the &ldquo;red line&rdquo;: the line of thought of Mao, the country&rsquo;s supreme leader.        

Over the next decades, the museum spent more time closed than open. It formally opened in 1961, then closed at the onset of the Cultural Revolution in 1966, reopening in 1979 and then going through a series of closings and openings as leaders strove for an interpretation of the past they could accept. The exhibition on contemporary history closed for good in 2001 as officials began to see the museum as an anachronism that did not promote a modern image to the outside world. That year, Beijing won its bid to host the 2008 Olympics, and officials were worried that the national capital would not be a worthy host. A year earlier, a British research institute  rated Beijing a third-tier city on a par with Warsaw and Bangkok. The report was widely discussed in China, with officials noting that Beijing had no noteworthy museums or galleries.        

Zhang Jing contributed research.
