
DOHA, Qatar &mdash; Friendly to Iran even as it serves as a base for the American military, Qatar has long had one of the most creative foreign policies in this unstable region. But now, by sending its tiny air force to fly missions over Libya and granting other critical aid to the Libyan rebels in their fight for freedom and democracy, this very rich Persian Gulf emirate is playing a more ambitious and potentially more risky role.        

But for an absolute monarchy that was part of an alliance that supported Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s move into Bahrain to crush democracy protests there, it is also somewhat incongruous.        

A week ago, Qatar became the first Arab country to grant political recognition to the Libyan rebels, and its six Mirage fighter jets flying with Western coalition partners are giving the United States and European allies political cover in a region long suspicious of outside intervention.        

Qatari officials say they are discussing ways to market Libyan oil from any ports they might hold in the future, to give the rebels crucial financial support, and they are looking for ways to support them with food and medical supplies. Qatar &mdash; the home base for the Al Jazeera satellite news channel, which is supported by the Qatari government &mdash; is also helping the Libyan opposition create a television station using a French satellite, to offset the state-controlled media.        

Experts who follow Qatar say the current policies are consistent with two long-held objectives: to emerge as a world player despite its tiny size, and to play off its stronger neighbors, particularly Saudi Arabia and Iran, to protect its sovereignty and natural gas wealth.        

&ldquo;They are staking a claim to being a leading voice in defining Arab nationalism for Arabs no matter their location,&rdquo; said Toby Jones, a Rutgers University historian of the modern Middle East. He added that the nation&rsquo;s leadership was seeking &ldquo;to step out of the shadow of more powerful regional neighbors like the Saudis and Iranians.&rdquo;        

Western political and military leaders have praised the Qatari government, saying its intervention in Libya is a turning point for the region. &ldquo;Qatar is essential at this time,&rdquo; G&eacute;rard Longuet, the defense minister of France, was quoted by Agence France-Presse as telling Qatari and French pilots during a recent tour of a military base in Souda on the island of Crete. &ldquo;This is the first time that there is such a level of understanding between Europe and the Arab world.&rdquo;        

For the past decade or so, Qatar has skillfully straddled the competing groups of allies in the region &mdash; Egypt and Saudi Arabia versus Iran and Syria &mdash; achieving a status of neutrality that has allowed it to broker political deals in Lebanon, Sudan and Yemen. At the same time, Al Jazeera has given a voice to dissidents, has rankled autocrats across the region, and has been both blamed and praised as a driving force behind the current &ldquo;Arab Spring.&rdquo;        

Qatar, which sits upon one of the richest natural gas fields in the world, has donated hundreds of millions of dollars to victims of Hurricane Katrina, flooding in Pakistan and civil strife in Darfur. It won a bid to host the 2022 World Cup in recognition of its status as an oasis of stability and a global mediator.        

Historians note that throughout its history, Qatar has come under the sway of a variety of great powers, including the Portuguese, the Ottomans and the British, and the Qataris have sought to find ways to navigate diplomatically to protect themselves from encroachment. Fred Wehrey, a Persian Gulf specialist at the RAND Corporation, said that Qatar&rsquo;s goal was &ldquo;to try to engage great powers outside the region to play them off one another so they can actually have a foreign policy and carve out a space for sovereignty.&rdquo;        

The key to Qatar&rsquo;s power and political strategies, but also its vulnerability, lies in its abundance of natural gas. It has almost 14 percent of total world gas reserves, but most of it comes from a field that it shares with Iran. Regional experts say that Qatar&rsquo;s principal security concern is that Iran may one day try to exert full control over the field.        

&ldquo;Qatar does whatever it takes to protect the field,&rdquo; said Emad Abdelgabar, the business development manager for Africa and the Middle East for the Swiss oil and gas services company SGS. &ldquo;They are playing with the Americans and helping Iran in a very dangerous game.&rdquo;        

Its ambitious moves in the Libya conflict could represent its riskiest foreign venture yet, especially if the Libyan rebellion ends in a stalemate or if Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi manages to hold on to power.        

&ldquo;If this military campaign drags out and the weight of Arab sentiment starts shifting toward an anti-American, anti-coalition sentiment, they could come under criticism for backing the crusaders,&rdquo; Mr. Wehrey said. Other experts warn that Colonel Qaddafi could try to retaliate against Qatar with a terrorist attack. Qatar has a small security force and minimal security at its international airport.        

For Qatari officials, their intervention in Libya is not a break but a logical continuation of an active foreign policy aimed at pushing for regional modernization. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not a change,&rdquo; said Hassan al-Ansari, director of the Gulf Strategic Studies Center at the University of Qatar. &ldquo;We would like to live in a very peaceful, very democratic, free, prosperous region so we can concentrate on what we have in our own hands, to develop our natural resources and human resources.&rdquo;        

But while Qatar calls for democracy outside its borders, democracy here is provisional at best. While there are municipal elections, and women can vote in them, the country has a Parliament building but no Parliament &mdash; or any other political institution, for that matter &mdash; that can challenge the royal family&rsquo;s grip on power. The nation&rsquo;s undisputed leader, Sheik Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, belongs to a family that has dominated Qatar since the 18th century, and he came to power in a coup against his father in 1995.        

And at the same time Qatar is sending warplanes over Libya, it has sent troops to nearby Bahrain as part of the Saudi-led Gulf alliance force seeking to reinforce a minority Sunni-dominated government resisting a rebellious Shiite majority.        

Qatari authorities say the Bahrain operation is an obligation to a local alliance, and they continue to cloak their foreign initiatives in the most progressive light.        

&ldquo;We believe in democracy, we believe in freedom, we believe in dialogue, and we believe in that for the entire region,&rdquo; said Sheik Jabor bin Yusef bin Jassim al-Thani, a member of the Qatari royal family and former chief of staff in the offices of the prime minister and foreign minister. &ldquo;I am sure the people of the Middle East and other countries will see us as a model, and they can follow us if they think it is useful.&rdquo;        
