
SEMEY, Kazakhstan &mdash; This spring&rsquo;s hasty campaign season in Kazakhstan has sometimes felt like a pep rally for Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, the steelworker-turned-Communist-Party-boss who has ruled the country since 1989. That impression was heightened on Sunday when one of the president&rsquo;s three challengers acknowledged that he, too, had voted for Mr. Nazarbayev.        

&ldquo;I am sure that the current president will be the victor, so I am giving him my vote as well,&rdquo; the challenger, Mels Yeleusizov, an environmental activist, told the Interfax news service as he emerged from a polling station in the city of Almaty. He said his family was voting for Mr. Nazarbayev as well.        

The president, who called snap elections two years ahead of schedule, won by 94.8 percent, according to an exit poll by the Association of Sociologists and Political Scientists of Kazakhstan. Meanwhile, early results from the Central Election Committee suggested that turnout was an extraordinarily high 89.9 percent, despite opposition leaders who denounced the election as a farce and encouraged voters to stay home.        

Mr. Nazarbayev, 70, is credited with making oil-rich Kazakhstan into Central Asia&rsquo;s island of stability, but he has drawn criticism from the West for stifling dissent. In February, seeking to shore up his reputation as an international statesman, Mr. Nazarbayev abruptly rejected the idea of a referendum that would have granted him the presidency until 2020. The election provided an even playing field, he told reporters on Sunday.        

&ldquo;All candidates had equal opportunities to visit regions and had access to mass media,&rdquo; Mr. Nazarbayev said on Sunday, as he emerged from the country&rsquo;s National Academic Library, a grandiose new structure that is shaped like a M&ouml;bius strip. &ldquo;They expressed their ideas and unveiled their messages to the people of Kazakhstan. There are some valuable thoughts that we have to keep in mind. We are open to our society.&rdquo;        

In Semey, a university city near the border with Siberia, students showed up in large numbers in a snowstorm on Sunday morning, and poll workers said there were already lines when they opened the doors at 7 a.m.        

Tolebay K. Rakhypbekov, rector of the Semey State Medical University, said political competition would come to Kazakhstan &mdash; but only gradually.        

&ldquo;There is none now,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But what competition can there be against our president? We all love him.&rdquo;        

Lyudmila A. Lyapunova, 60, said voters were there because they risked losing their jobs or university spots if they did not show up. As a retiree, she said, she could afford to openly denounce the process, and planned to cross out every name on the ballot: an improvised version of &ldquo;against all,&rdquo; a traditional option that was omitted from this year&rsquo;s poll.        

But virtually all voters said they were casting ballots for the president. Ada G. Komanova, 76, raved over the services provided to the elderly through the Nazarbayev Fund: a health clinic, concerts, a senior center &ldquo;so cozy, it&rsquo;s like a fairy tale.&rdquo;        

Kanat, a construction worker who would not give his last name, said he had voted for Mr. Nazarbayev, even though he thought the president and his family had enriched themselves fabulously over the last two decades.        

&ldquo;They already have everything they need,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They can afford to think about the public.&rdquo;        
