
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Two American soldiers were shot to death by an Afghan police officer on Monday in northern Afghanistan, Afghan officials said. It was at least the third time this year that Afghan security personnel had turned on coalition soldiers.        

The shooting came after three days of anti-American protests, which claimed at least 24 lives, set off by the burning of a Koran at a church in Florida. It is not known if that had any connection to Monday&rsquo;s episode, but the attacker was identified as an Afghan border policeman, named only Samarudin, 23, a resident of Mazar-i-Sharif, where the violence began last Friday, and where seven United Nations staff members were killed in rioting.        

Scattered protests over the Koran burning continued Monday, but they were largely peaceful.        

The two American victims were involved in training the Afghan border police at a base in Maimana city, the capital of Faryab Province, according to Abdul Sattar Bariz, the deputy governor of the province.        

&ldquo;It was an individual act, which could have various reasons or motives, but it does not mean at all that the security situation is bad in the province,&rdquo; said the governor of Faryab Province, Abdul Haq Shafaq. He said the American trainers had good relations with the border police battalion. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s early to say if the shooting had links with the Holy Koran burning or not.&rdquo;        

The International Security Assistance Force would say in a statement released Monday only that two ISAF service members had been killed in a shooting and that it was investigating the events.        

The attack took place while the deputy commander of the Afghan border police there, Col. Najamuddin, who like many Afghans uses only one name, was in a meeting with American trainers, the colonel said. Mr. Samarudin, on guard duty outside, shot and killed two of the American soldiers providing security for the meeting, and then fled, leaving his weapon behind, Colonel Najamuddin said. The colonel said a search was under way to find Mr. Samarudin.        

Once relatively peaceful, Faryab Province has had a spike in insurgent activity since last year, as Taliban infiltrators have flowed into the area.        

There has been a string of such attacks by members of Afghan security forces. On Saturday, a policeman in Samkani District of Paktia Province opened fire on American soldiers and Afghan police officers who had their backs turned while filling fortifications with dirt. Two Afghan police officers died, including the attacker, and two American soldiers were wounded, said Saddat Khan, the district governor.        

On Feb. 18, a man wearing an Afghan National Army uniform opened fire on German soldiers in Pul-i-Kumri, Baghlan Province, killing two of them and wounding eight others, according to the police commander, Gen. Daoud Daoud. And on Jan. 22, the Taliban claimed that an Afghan soldier turned his weapon on French troops at Sarobi, in Kabul Province, killing three. Afghan authorities said that the claim was untrue, and that the soldier was a deserter who did not succeed in killing anyone.        

In nearly all such cases, Taliban spokesmen have claimed the attacker was an infiltrator. In some of those cases, however, it was later proved that personal motives were involved.        
Enayat Najafizada contributed reporting from Mazar-i-Sharif, Afghanistan, and Sangar Rahimi from Kabul.
