
JERUSALEM &mdash; On the eve of a White House meeting between President Obama and President Shimon Peres of Israel, officials here took steps on Monday to advance controversial new housing in the West Bank and a disputed area of Jerusalem.        

The steps, by two separate agencies, are the latest in a succession of awkwardly timed housing announcements. International players are seeking ways to resume Israeli-Palestinian peace talks, which stalled last September when a partial Israeli moratorium on new building in the settlements expired.        

Washington has given up its efforts to persuade Israel to commit to an additional settlement freeze; the Palestinians refuse to negotiate with Israel as long as settlement building continues.        

On Monday, a municipal planning committee in Jerusalem gave preliminary approval for nearly 1,000 new housing units in the residential district of Gilo, in the south of the city. And the Israeli Ministry of Defense said it had completed zoning plans for several Jewish settlements in the West Bank, retroactively legalizing construction that was already under way.        

Aides traveling with Mr. Peres, who was in Washington on Monday, refused to comment on the building plans.        

Elie Isaacson, an adviser to Mayor Nir Barkat of Jerusalem, said there was no connection between the Gilo action and the timing of Mr. Peres&rsquo;s visit.        

&ldquo;There are no secrets whatsoever,&rdquo; Mr. Isaacson said. &ldquo;The plan is merely going from one bureaucratic stage to the next bureaucratic stage. The building policy in Jerusalem has been the same for 40 years.&rdquo;        

He added that the area of privately owned land was zoned for construction 10 years ago, and that it would take at least five years for the new housing to receive final approval and for the contractors to break ground. And he said the municipality was also considering hundreds of requests by Palestinians for building in Jerusalem, though Palestinian projects tend to be on a smaller scale.        

Mr. Peres is expected to talk to Mr. Obama about security cooperation between Israel and the United States; the recent upheavals in the Middle East and the potential for democratization in the region; and possible ways of restarting the peace talks. One issue that may come up is whether Mr. Obama will go to Israel this year to make a major speech, and if so whether he will put forth an American peace plan. Administration officials say Mr. Obama has indicated that he would like to address Israelis about a range of issues, including the turmoil unfolding in the Middle East. But timing remains an issue, one administration official said Monday.        

The role of president in Israel is mainly a ceremonial one, but Mr. Peres, who is regarded internationally as an elder statesman, has played a more active role than most of his predecessors. Relations between Mr. Obama and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu were chilly from the start, and in a departure from diplomatic norms, Mr. Peres met with Mr. Obama in 2009 before Mr. Netanyahu did, to try to smooth the way.        

The issue of settlement construction has severely strained Israeli-American relations since Mr. Obama took office.        

Gilo is in a part of the city that Israel annexed after capturing it from Jordan in the 1967 war. Most Israelis consider it an integral neighborhood of Jerusalem, but to the Palestinians and much of the world, it is a settlement built in occupied territory in violation of international law. Israel&rsquo;s claim to sovereignty in the area of Jerusalem beyond the 1967 lines is not recognized internationally, and the Palestinians claim it as part of their future state.        

In February, 14 of the 15 members of the United Nations Security Council backed a resolution demanding a halt in what it termed illegal construction in Israeli settlements. Only a veto by the United States blocked the resolution.        

Peace Now, an Israeli advocacy group that opposes any Israeli building beyond the 1967 lines, said the Defense Ministry had approved development plans for four West Bank settlements. But it is not clear whether the plans relate to areas that are already built up or for additional sites.        

Tensions over building in Jerusalem peaked in March 2010, when Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. was on a visit here meant to underscore American support for Israel. The Israeli Interior Ministry announced 1,600 new housing units for Jews in Ramat Shlomo, in East Jerusalem, infuriating the Obama administration. Mr. Netanyahu said at the time that he had been surprised by the move; the interior minister, Eli Yishai, leader of the right-wing Shas Party, insisted that the timing was coincidental.        

After that episode, the prime minister&rsquo;s office said it would track the advancement of building plans more carefully to avoid new surprises.        

But in November, Israel published plans for more than 1,000 housing units in other disputed areas of Jerusalem. That announcement came days before Mr. Netanyahu met with Mr. Biden and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton in the United States, drawing criticism from Mr. Obama.        

Mr. Netanyahu&rsquo;s office announced three weeks ago that hundreds of new units had been approved for West Bank settlements in areas Israel intends to keep under any deal with the Palestinians. The news came shortly after five members of one family, including three children, were killed in the Itamar settlement.        
Helene Cooper contributed reporting from Washington.
