
LONDON &mdash; Scotland Yard said Tuesday that two journalists had been arrested, questioned and released on bail in the renewed inquiry into a five-year-old case involving illegal hacking of celebrity voice mail by The News of the World, the gossip-driven tabloid owned by Rupert Murdoch that is one of Britain&rsquo;s most widely circulated newspapers.        

The two were &ldquo;arrested on suspicion of unlawfully intercepting mobile phone voice-mail messages,&rdquo; according to a police statement, which did not name the reporters because they had not been charged. A person familiar with the investigation, who spoke on the condition of anonymity as he was not authorized to discuss the matter, identified them as Ian Edmondson, who was fired as the tabloid&rsquo;s news editor this year; and Neville Thurlbeck, the paper&rsquo;s chief reporter. Scotland Yard investigators searched the paper&rsquo;s newsroom while the two were being questioned, he said.        

The moves marked a potentially decisive turning point in an investigation that has been under way, often fitfully, since 2006, when a Scotland Yard inquiry into complaints by three members of Britain&rsquo;s royal household, including Prince William and Prince Harry, uncovered a pattern of illegal hacking into the princes&rsquo; cellphone messages. Only two men have been jailed in the case, both in 2007: Clive Goodman, formerly the tabloid&rsquo;s royalty reporter; and Glenn Mulcaire, a private investigator.        

A list recovered from Mr. Mulcaire&rsquo;s home appeared to be a phone book of potential hacking targets, including figures from politics, entertainment and sports, but the police alerted only a handful.        

Criticism of the inquiry, led by Assistant Commissioner John Yates, was sharp. Last year, the Crown Prosecution Service, the agency responsible for reviewing police evidence and laying criminal charges, concluded that there was insufficient evidence for any new prosecutions. But in January, Scotland Yard entrusted the case to a new team, and the inquiry&rsquo;s momentum grew.        

Two weeks ago, a high court judge, Geoffrey Vos, ordered the disclosure of hundreds of thousands of the paper&rsquo;s e-mails to litigants in a growing list of lawsuits filed by individuals on the Mulcaire list. They include Sienna Miller, the actress; John Prescott, a former deputy prime minister under Labour; and several figures in professional soccer.        

Last month, executives of News Group, the Murdoch-controlled holding company that owns The News of the World, acknowledged that the tabloid&rsquo;s computers had retained an archive of millions of e-mails that it had previously claimed to have been lost in transit to storage in India. Executives have said they will search the archive for any material relevant to the phone-hacking inquiry, and pass them on to the police.        

Some critics suggested that Scotland Yard&rsquo;s failure to press its inquiry harder had its roots in a long history of covert cooperation in exchanging tips between the police and some of Britain&rsquo;s freewheeling newspapers, an idea strongly rejected by Scotland Yard.        

Some critics suggested that the political influence of the Murdoch empire &mdash; which owns The Sun, The Times and The Sunday Times, as well as its 39 percent shareholding in the BSkyB satellite broadcasting conglomerate &mdash; compounded the reluctance. The Labour Party enjoyed strong editorial backing for more than a decade from The Sun, Britain&rsquo;s most widely circulated daily; its switch to the Conservative Party was considered a significant factor in Labour&rsquo;s election losses last May.        

The political ramifications of the scandal widened when David Cameron, as opposition leader before the election, hired Andy Coulson as the Conservatives&rsquo; communications director. Mr. Coulson had resigned as editor of The News of the World amid the uproar that followed the prosecutions of Mr. Goodman and Mr. Mulcaire, but denied any knowledge of the phone-hacking.        

An investigative report in The New York Times Magazine in September quoted several people who worked under Mr. Coulson as saying that phone-hacking was rife and conducted at the behest of senior editors.        

When Mr. Cameron became prime minister last spring, Mr. Coulson followed him to 10 Downing Street, only to resign in January, saying that the scandal had become a distraction. &ldquo;When the spokesman needs a spokesman, it&rsquo;s time to move on,&rdquo; Mr. Coulson said.        

With the new arrest, the spotlight seemed certain to focus anew on Mr. Coulson and other current and former news executives at The News of the World. A statement by the paper said it was cooperating &ldquo;fully&rdquo; with the inquiry.        
