
MEDELL&Iacute;N, Colombia &mdash; Ecuador&rsquo;s government said Tuesday that it was expelling the United States ambassador, Heather M. Hodges, over comments made public in a diplomatic cable released by WikiLeaks in which Ms. Hodges referred to high-level police corruption in Ecuador and possible knowledge of it by the president.        

The expulsion of Ms. Hodges by President Rafael Correa&rsquo;s government made her the latest diplomatic casualty of WikiLeaks revelations in Latin America. Carlos Pascual, the former American envoy to Mexico who resigned last month, was not technically expelled but was forced out as a result of exposure by WikiLeaks.        

Ms. Hodges recommended in a cable dated July 10, 2009 &mdash; and published Monday by the Spanish newspaper El Pais &mdash; that the United States revoke a visa for Jaime Aquilino Hurtado, the national police commander who served from April 2008 to June 2009.        

In the cable, she discussed multiple reports of illegal activities by Mr. Aquilino Hurtado, including his possible involvement in schemes to extort bribes from a taxi union, steal public funds and ease trafficking of undocumented Chinese immigrants.        

In a particularly sensitive part of the cable, Ms. Hodges noted that &ldquo;some Embassy officials believe that President Correa must have been aware of them when he made the appointment&rdquo; of Mr. Aquilino Hurtado.        

&ldquo;These observers believe that Correa may have wanted to have an ENP chief whom he could easily manipulate,&rdquo; said Ms. Hodges, using the initials for the Ecuadorean National Police.        

In a statement on Tuesday, Ecuador&rsquo;s government said: &ldquo;This affirmation, in addition to being unacceptable, is malicious and imprudent.&rdquo;        

The expulsion of Ms. Hodges raised new doubts about American diplomacy in Latin America. Washington has had relatively warm ties with Mr. Correa, especially compared with its tense relationships with Bolivia and Venezuela, two leftist allies of Ecuador that have also expelled their American envoys.        

Still, Ecuador&rsquo;s foreign minister, Ricardo Pati&ntilde;o, made an effort to ease some of the tension over the expulsion on Tuesday. &ldquo;This is the direct responsibility of one person, the ambassador in our country,&rdquo; Mr Pati&ntilde;o told reporters in Quito. &ldquo;It is not a subject that has to do with the government of the United States.&rdquo;        

Charles Luoma-Overstreet, a State Department spokesman in Washington, said the Obama administration regretted Ecuador&rsquo;s decision. As to how it will respond to the expulsion, Mr. Luoma-Overstreet said &ldquo;the department will examine its options.&rdquo;        
Irene Caselli contributed reporting from Quito, Ecuador.
