
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Security forces and armed men in civilian clothes clashed with antigovernment demonstrators in the city of Taiz on Tuesday, opening fire on crowds calling for President Ali Abdullah Saleh to step down, witnesses said. It was the third straight day of violence in Taiz, where more than 10 protesters were killed by gunfire on Monday.        

Boshra al-Maqtari, one of the protest leaders, said that at least 20 people were wounded by gunfire on Tuesday, but that there had been no deaths.        

The clashes began in roughly the same area of the city where the protesters were killed on Monday, the deadliest day so far in six weeks of demonstrations demanding the immediate ouster of Mr. Saleh. As protesters marched down a central street on Tuesday, they encountered the security forces and plainclothes government supporters, and witnesses said military helicopters flew over the demonstration as the violence broke out. Clouds of tear gas rose over the street.        

&ldquo;The thugs and the security forces fired on us with live gunfire,&rdquo; said Mahmud al-Shaobi, 33, a protester who spoke by telephone and said he was there when the violence began. &ldquo;Many people were shot.&rdquo;        

Gunfire also erupted in Sana, the capital, near the headquarters of Maj. Gen. Ali Mohsin al-Ahmar, a top military leader who broke with Mr. Saleh last month to support the antigovernment demonstrators.        

Witnesses described an exchange of fire between General Ahmar&rsquo;s soldiers and armed government supporters, some of whom fired from their cars. The official Saba news agency said that the gunfire came only from General Ahmar&rsquo;s soldiers and that they opened fire on a peaceful march of pro-government tribesmen, killing three and wounding at least 15.        

But a spokesman for the general said in a statement that his soldiers moved to prevent the Saleh supporters from breaking into the general&rsquo;s headquarters; the statement did not mention any gunfire by soldiers.        

Witnesses said that a group of about 400 protesters, who had peeled away from the main antigovernment protest and marched toward the headquarters, became caught up in the fighting. Doctors at a nearby hospital said that at least two people died from bullet wounds, one a protester and one a Saleh supporter.        

The United States has grown increasingly wary of the escalating violence in Yemen, a country that has been an ally against Al Qaeda in the region. The Obama administration inched closer on Tuesday to a break with President Saleh, its longtime ally. In a statement Tuesday night, the White House press secretary, Jay Carney, said the United States &ldquo;strongly condemns the use of violence by Yemeni government forces against demonstrators&rdquo; in Yemeni cities in the past several days. Mr. Carney &ldquo;reminded&rdquo; Mr. Saleh &ldquo;of his responsibility to ensure the safety and security of Yemenis who are exercising their universal right to engage in political expression.&rdquo;        

Significantly, the statement called for &ldquo;meaningful political change&rdquo; to take place soon, in wording which administration officials now say reflects a growing belief within the administration that Mr. Saleh needs to go. The administration has not yet publicly called for Mr. Saleh to leave.        

On Monday, a State Department spokesman, Mark Toner, called the violence in Yemen &ldquo;appalling.&rdquo;        

The clashes on Tuesday came as the provincial governor of Taiz, south of the capital, said that he would form a committee to investigate the &ldquo;unfortunate events&rdquo; of the previous day. Witnesses said that security forces and government supporters opened fire on Monday from rooftops and the street, directing their fire at tens of thousands of protesters. But the government has suggested that the deaths occurred during an exchange of gunfire between the plainclothes government supporters and armed protesters.        

&ldquo;We express our deep regret for the deviation from peaceful protests,&rdquo; the governor, Hamoud al-Soufi, said. He accused the protesters of attacking the presidential palace and other government buildings on Monday.        

On Tuesday, the Gulf Cooperation Council, a six-nation regional coalition, invited the government and opposition parties in Yemen to hold talks in Riyadh, the capital of neighboring Saudi Arabia, on ending the crisis in Yemen, according to the Saba news agency. Mr. Saleh welcomed the invitation; his political opposition did not immediately respond.        

In the western port city of Al Hudaydah on Monday, two protesters were killed by gunfire from armed men in plain clothes during a march on the presidential palace there. Doctors said that another person died on Tuesday of bullet wounds suffered during that clash.&nbsp;        
Laura Kasinof reported from Sana, and J. David Goodman from New York.
