
JERUSALEM &mdash; Richard Goldstone, the South African jurist who led a United Nations report accusing Israel of possible war crimes in Gaza and recently recanted some of its harshest conclusions, has agreed to visit Israel in July, Israel&rsquo;s interior minister, Eli Yishai, said Tuesday.        

Mr. Goldstone, who is Jewish and has longstanding ties to Israel, had been shunned here since his report was issued in September 2009 saying that Israel had deliberately singled out civilians and civilian infrastructure in its three-week invasion of Gaza in December 2008 and January 2009.        

But since the weekend, when The Washington Post published an essay he wrote saying that he would have written a different report if he had known then what he knew now, many here are praising Mr. Goldstone&rsquo;s courage and wondering how to use his comments to Israel&rsquo;s advantage.        

Mr. Yishai said on Army Radio that after sending Mr. Goldstone a letter hailing him, he called him Monday night, thanked him and invited him to come to see Israel&rsquo;s southern communities, which live under threat of Hamas rocket fire from Gaza.        

&ldquo;I will be happy to come,&rdquo; Mr. Yishai quoted Mr. Goldstone as saying. &ldquo;I always have love for the state of Israel.&rdquo;        

Mr. Goldstone said in a short statement released on Tuesday night that Mr. Yishai had &ldquo;informed me that he and the government of Israel were appreciative of the article I wrote.&rdquo; He said Mr. Yishai had invited him to Israel &ldquo;to see conditions there with my own eyes. I said I would like to do so.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I ended the conversation by expressing my love for Israel,&rdquo; Mr. Goldstone said.        

Mr. Goldstone&rsquo;s essay in The Washington Post did not condemn or retract most of the report, which runs to more than 500 pages and accuses Israel of misusing weapons like white phosphorus, improperly attacking hospitals and United Nations buildings and taking aim at the infrastructure of civilian life, like food production and water installations.        

A spokesman for the United Nations has said that Mr. Goldstone&rsquo;s essay will have no impact on the report&rsquo;s status, which has been officially accepted and sent to the General Assembly with a request that it also be sent to the International Criminal Court.        

The Goldstone report accused both Israel and Hamas of war crimes and urged both to investigate numerous allegations. The Israeli Army has opened hundreds of investigations, although few have been completed; Hamas has not started any.        

Mr. Goldstone said in his essay that Israel&rsquo;s investigations were serious and that they showed him that what seemed at the time to be purposeful singling out of civilians as a matter of policy was not.        

Other members of the panel led by Mr. Goldstone appeared surprised by his essay. Hina Jilani, a Pakistani jurist, told The Middle East Monitor in an interview that the document &ldquo;is and remains an important report&rdquo; and said she saw no reason to invalidate it. But reached by The New York Times later, she said she was still assessing Mr. Goldstone&rsquo;s essay. &ldquo;I would like to know the facts first, and only then I can give a considered opinion,&rdquo; she said.        

A second member, Desmond Travers of Ireland, was quoted by The Associated Press as saying he was surprised by what Mr. Goldstone wrote and had not seen the Israeli military investigations, but added, &ldquo;The tenor of the report, in its entirety, in my opinion, stands.&rdquo;        

The third member, Christine Chinkin of London, has not made a public comment. An Israeli law professor who knows her sent her an e-mail asking her view but has not received a response.        

The role played by Mr. Yishai, who is the head of Shas, a right-wing religious party, is noteworthy, given Mr. Goldstone&rsquo;s more secular and liberal outlook. Mr. Yishai said he sent Mr. Goldstone a letter two weeks ago after a family of West Bank settlers were knifed to death, rockets were coming into Israel and a bomb went off in Jerusalem.        

&ldquo;I told him that his report gave fuel to the continuing attacks on Israel,&rdquo; he told Army Radio.        

The letter called on Mr. Goldstone to stand up and condemn the work of what Mr. Yishai called terrorist groups.        
Salman Masood contributed reporting from Islamabad, Pakistan.
