
BERLIN &mdash; Chancellor Angela Merkel&rsquo;s center-right government received a much-needed boost Tuesday after the Free Democrats, her coalition partners, quickly ended an internal leadership feud and chose a popular young physician to revive the party&rsquo;s standing in time for the next federal elections, in 2013.        

Philipp R&ouml;sler, the health minister, will replace Guido Westerwelle, who resigned last Sunday following a string of humiliating defeats in regional elections. Mr. Westerwelle, 49, who also gave up the post as vice chancellor, will remain as Germany&rsquo;s foreign minister. Other personnel changes will be made at the party&rsquo;s congress next month.        

One of Mr. R&ouml;sler&rsquo;s immediate tasks is to end policy differences between Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s conservatives and his party. These differences, involving tax, energy and health issues, have created immense tensions ever since the coalition was established in 2009.        

Mr. R&ouml;sler, 38, is the youngest leader in the history of the Free Democrats, a party that during the 1950s was associated with strong nationalist views. He also represents a younger, socially mobile generation of politicians who have no connection with the politicians who shaped Germany&rsquo;s politics after World War II and during the final stages of the Cold War.        

These include the former conservative Chancellor Helmut Kohl and the veteran Free Democrat Hans-Dietrich Genscher, who served as foreign minister from 1974 to 1992. He is Mr. Westerwelle&rsquo;s foreign policy mentor.        

Mr. R&ouml;sler was born in Vietnam and was adopted as a young child by a German family. He grew up in the western state of Lower Saxony, where he studied medicine.        

He joined the Free Democrats in Lower Saxony, rapidly rising through the ranks to become economics minister. He was called to Berlin in 2009 after Mr. Westerwelle brought the Free Democrats back to power after 11 years in opposition.        

As health minister, Mr. R&ouml;sler said recently, his efforts to reform the health system to better deal with an aging population and the high costs of medical care forced him to develop a tough skin and fine-tune his diplomatic skills.        

The Christian Social Union, the sister party to Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s Christian Democratic Union Party, was particularly critical of Mr. R&ouml;sler&rsquo;s policies, offering little coalition solidarity. &ldquo;I learned a lot,&rdquo; Mr. R&ouml;sler said recently in a long interview with Deutschlandfunk, or German Radio.        

Taking over the leadership of the Free Democrats will be daunting, analysts said.        

The party is no longer distinctive despite what Christian Lindner, its general secretary, said this week when he insisted that no other party in Germany was committed to a market economy, less state interference and more democracy.        

Yet a younger generation of conservative supporters who voted for Mrs. Merkel in 2005 did so because she wanted less state interference as well as a more modern Christian Democratic Party that, for example, made it easier for young mothers to return to work, and because she supported measures dealing with climate change.        

The Green party has captured the center ground, and more importantly a large part of the support base of the Free Democrats: the small and medium-sized family companies known as the Mittelstand.        

The Greens are also negotiating with the Social Democrats over policies it will introduce in the prosperous western state of Baden-W&uuml;rttenberg after removing the conservatives from power last month after they had held sway for 58 years.        

With little time left to revamp a party that has lost credibility among voters and damaged her coalition, Mrs. Merkel had no choice, analysts said, but to put out feelers to potential coalition partners, even the Greens.        

        

A state dinner for Merkel         

President Barack Obama will hold a state dinner for Mrs. Merkel in Washington on June 7, the White House said on Monday, The Associated Press reported from Washington. &ldquo;The president and the chancellor will discuss the broad array of issues on which the United States and Germany cooperate closely,&rdquo; the White House said in a statement.        
