
NEW DELHI &mdash; Muhammad Yunus, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate and Bangladeshi microfinance pioneer who popularized the notion of giving tiny loans to the poor, lost his legal battle on Tuesday to hold on to his job as managing director of the bank he created more than 30 years ago.        

Last month, Bangladesh&rsquo;s central bank ordered that Mr. Yunus be dismissed from his post at Grameen Bank, the institution he founded and with which he shared the peace prize in 2006. A lower court rejected his challenge to the order, and on Tuesday, the country&rsquo;s highest court rejected his appeal.        

&ldquo;They passed a one-word order: dismissed,&rdquo; said Sara Hossein, one of Mr. Yunus&rsquo;s lawyers. She said Mr. Yunus&rsquo;s lawyers would ask the court to review its decision, which was made with uncommon speed.        

The court did not address a petition from the bank&rsquo;s board to be able to retain Mr. Yunus, but its ruling upholding his dismissal would appear to render it moot. The ruling is the most recent development in a lengthy and increasingly acrimonious battle over the control of Grameen Bank between the government and Mr. Yunus, an economist who is celebrated around the world for bringing banking services to the poor, but who has fallen out of favor with the leaders of his country.        

The push to remove Mr. Yunus started last year after a Norwegian documentary accused him and Grameen, which has 8.3 million borrowers, of improperly transferring to an affiliate $100 million that had been donated by Norway. The money was retransferred after Norwegian officials complained. In a statement last year, Norway cleared Grameen and Mr. Yunus of wrongdoing.        

But the case opened the bank to unprecedented scrutiny. Sheikh Hasina Wazed, the prime minister of Bangladesh, said Mr. Yunus and other microfinance firms were &ldquo;sucking blood from the poor in the name of poverty alleviation.&rdquo; The government stepped up its supervision of the bank, arguing that it was poorly governed.        

Mrs. Hasina and Mr. Yunus, who has been critical of politicians, were once close, but their relationship soured when Mr. Yunus briefly floated a political party in 2007.        

Ela Bhatt, who leads the Self-Employed Women&rsquo;s Association in India, a nonprofit organization that also operates a cooperative bank, said the ruling was a blow to antipoverty organizations that work to empower poor women.        
Vikas Bajaj contributed reporting from Mumbai, India.
