
YICHENG, China &mdash; Under China&rsquo;s family-planning regulations, most couples are barred from having more than one baby. Wang Hong and her husband, Zhang Jingfeng, are among those who were granted a second chance &mdash; and decided against it.        



Instead, they have marshaled their resources behind their gregarious 9-year-old son, devoting two-fifths of their yearly income of 20,000 renminbi, or about $3,000, to send him to private school.        

&ldquo;I have to create good circumstances for him,&rdquo; said Ms. Wang, 33, whose sparsely furnished home is heated by a wood stove. &ldquo;If I had another child, what would our living circumstances be like?&rdquo;        

Ms. Wang&rsquo;s reasoning underscores an argument voiced with growing insistency by demographers who want China to abandon its one-child restrictions: like the couple in Yicheng, they argue, most Chinese want only one child anyway.        

Perhaps more important, economists contend that China&rsquo;s low birthrate, once an economic advantage, is now destined to clip the nation&rsquo;s economic growth.        

China&rsquo;s rise has depended partly on a huge spurt in the number of workers as a percentage of the population. This surge has created a cheap, productive labor force for its factories, mines and construction crews.        

Now the size of the work force is leveling off. Demographers say it will begin to shrink within just five years, albeit slowly at first.        

Meanwhile, the ranks of the elderly are swelling so fast that by 2040, projections show that the median age of Chinese will be higher than that of Americans, but Chinese will enjoy just one-third of the per capita income, adjusted for the cost of living. Experts say that will make China the first major country to grow old before it is fully economically developed.        

&ldquo;There are tremendous demographic crises pending, unprecedented in Chinese demography,&rdquo; Wang Feng, who heads the Tsinghua Center for Public Policy in Beijing, a branch of the Washington-based Brookings Institution, said in an interview.        

&ldquo;Very few people are arguing for this policy anymore,&rdquo; he said.        

But as calls for a relaxation of the policy intensify, and official hints of looser restrictions increase, so do concerns that the one-child culture is now so ingrained among Chinese that the authorities may not be able to encourage more births even if they try.        

A growing body of research suggests that much of the decline in Chinese fertility over the past three decades is not a result of the one-child policy and its various permutations, but of the typical drop in birthrates that occurs as societies modernize.        

For example, in Yicheng, the county in rural Shanxi Province where Ms. Wang lives, couples have been exempt from the one-child policy for a quarter of a century. Under a state experiment that was deliberately kept secret until a few years ago, couples were allowed to have two children if they married three years later than the minimum age for the rest of the country. Initially they were also required to wait six years between the first and second births.        

Nonetheless, the county&rsquo;s population grew roughly on par with the rest of the nation. &ldquo;People don&rsquo;t think they have the money for two children,&rdquo; said Shi Aixiang, a preschool director in Yicheng.        

The trend appears to be the same in Jiangsu, a coastal province north of Shanghai. Researchers interviewed nearly 4,400 women who were eligible to have two children. Fewer than one-third of the mothers with one child said they either wanted or might want a second, according to a 2009 study published by the journal Asian Population Studies.        

In Shanghai, so many eligible couples have decided against a second child that in 2009, population workers started making home visits to try to change their minds. Cai Yong, a demographer at the University of North Carolina, said that Shanghai&rsquo;s and Beijing&rsquo;s fertility rates were both estimated at 0.7 per woman &mdash; fewer than one child per couple, and half what many demographers estimate is the national childbearing rate.        

All this suggests that there may not be much China can do to manipulate the number of births. But it appears that as the reality of a shrinking work force draws closer, so does a loosening of government restrictions.        

Prime Minister Wen Jiabao told the national legislature last month that China would &ldquo;progressively improve the basic state policy on family planning.&rdquo; It was the second time since October that China&rsquo;s leadership had hinted at a policy adjustment.        

Xiyun Yang contributed reporting from Yicheng and Beijing.
