
ROME &mdash; A highly anticipated trial in which Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi faces accusations of paying an underage girl for sex and other improprieties opened amid media fanfare in Milan on Wednesday but was immediately adjourned till the end of May.        

Mr. Berlusconi, who had pledged to attend every hearing, stayed in Rome for a meeting on the Libya crisis. Also absent was the young Moroccan-born woman central to the case: Karima el-Mahroug, 18, who goes by the nom d&rsquo;art Ruby Rubacuori, or Ruby Heart-Stealer.        

Mr. Berlusconi denies having sex with the young woman or abusing his influence to have her released from police custody when she was detained for theft last year, when she was 17. The age of consent in Italy is 14, but it is illegal to pay someone under 18 for sex.        

He has vowed to fight the charges both in court and in the national media that he has long dominated. While the center-left opposition has repeatedly called on him to resign, his center-right governing coalition has stood by him. Indeed, the fact that Mr. Berlusconi has managed to hold on to power in spite of a long list of legal troubles over the years, including charges of corruption, tax evasion and the bribing of judges, underscores a peculiar disconnect in Italian politics.        

And the latest accusations, along with efforts by Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s coalition to reform Italy&rsquo;s troubled justice system, have taken up much of the oxygen in the national debate even as Italy&rsquo;s involvement in the NATO intervention in Libya deepened and scores of immigrants fleeing North Africa continued to arrive in Italy.        

The trial began on the second anniversary of a devastating earthquake that struck the central Italian city of L&rsquo;Aquila, killing nearly 300 people, and as Italy contends with a stagnant economy.        

Both Mr. Berlusconi and Ms. Mahroug have denied having had sex, although the prime minister has acknowledged that he gave her about $9,500 the first time she attended a party at his villa outside Milan last spring.        

The prime minister has said he called the police to help release her after the petty theft arrest because he had been told that she was the niece of Hosni Mubarak, then the president of Egypt.        

Ms. Mahroug said on Italian television in January that she had invented &ldquo;a parallel life,&rdquo; telling people she was Egyptian when she was really Moroccan.        

Prosecutors identify her as the injured party in the case, but Ms. Mahroug has not asked judges to become a civil complainant in the trial, which would have allowed her to seek monetary damages. She feels injured, according to her lawyer, Paola Boccardi, but by the press, not Mr. Berlusconi.        

&ldquo;For her, the damage was from the media, because she has been identified around the world as a prostitute,&rdquo; the Ansa news agency quoted Ms. Boccardi as saying.        

Details of phone conversations between Ms. Mahroug, Mr. Berlusconi and a varied cast of characters &mdash; including a television agent and a former dental hygienist turned regional politician &mdash; have emerged in juicy wiretaps that have been published in the Italian press in recent weeks.        

Since first coming to the public attention last fall, when details of prosecutors&rsquo; investigation first emerged, the Ms. Mahroug has become an international tabloid darling. Last month, she attended Vienna&rsquo;s famed annual Opera Ball as the guest of a Viennese construction magnate.        

Lawyers for Mr. Berlusconi have asked George Clooney and various Italian starlets to testify at the trial in Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s defense, because Ms. Mahroug said she had once seen Mr. Clooney at a party at the prime minister&rsquo;s house. The court has not yet ruled on which witnesses could be called.        

When prosecutors indicted Mr. Berlusconi in February, after a law weakening the prime minister&rsquo;s immunity, it appeared that he might lose his grip on his fractious coalition, forcing early elections. But he has kept a slim majority through sheer force of personality, intense backroom deal-making and the absence of coherent center-left opposition.        
