
PARIS &mdash; Angry charges by Libyan rebels that NATO has failed to come to their aid point up a question that has haunted the Western air campaign from the start: how to avoid a stalemate and defeat the Libyan leader without putting foreign troops on the ground.        

NATO officials and the French foreign minister, Alain Jupp&eacute;, rejected the opposition criticism on Wednesday, saying that bad weather and evolving tactics by forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi were limiting the air war, which is supposed to be protecting Libyan civilians and driving the colonel&rsquo;s troops to retreat to their barracks. In recent days, Qaddafi forces have stepped up their shelling of Misurata, in the west, and pushed rebels back from some eastern oil towns.        

The rebels, of course, are a largely untrained, disorganized fighting force. But the nature of the battle has also changed since a United Nations resolution authorized &ldquo;all necessary measures&rdquo; to protect civilians.        

In the early stages of the air campaign, allied warplanes blistered Qaddafi tanks, artillery and transport trucks in the desert outside the rebel capital, Benghazi. But American intelligence reports from Libya say that the Qaddafi forces are now hiding their troops and weaponry among urban populations and traveling in pickup trucks and S.U.V.&rsquo;s rather than military vehicles, making them extremely difficult targets.        

&ldquo;The military capabilities available to Qaddafi remain quite substantial,&rdquo; said a senior Pentagon official who watches Libya. &ldquo;What this shows is that you cannot guarantee tipping the balance of ground operations only with bombs and missiles from the air.&rdquo;        

NATO officials, who just took over responsibility for the air campaign from the United States, deny that their bureaucracy is somehow limiting the campaign. &ldquo;No country is vetoing this target or that one; it&rsquo;s not like Kosovo,&rdquo; where in 1999 some countries objected to certain bombing targets, said a senior NATO official, asking anonymity in accordance with diplomatic practice.        

&ldquo;The military command is doing what it wants to do,&rdquo; he said.        

NATO officials said on Wednesday that NATO was flying more missions every day, and that defending Misurata was a priority. Carmen Romero, a NATO spokeswoman, said that the alliance flew 137 missions on Monday and 186 on Tuesday, and planned 198 on Wednesday. &ldquo;We have a clear mandate, and we will do everything to protect the citizens of Misurata.&rdquo;        

A rebel spokesman in Misurata said Wednesday that NATO had delivered two airstrikes that pushed the Qaddafi forces away from the port, opening it for vital supply ships. &ldquo;We have renewed momentum, and our friends are helping us big time,&rdquo; said Mohamed, a rebel spokesman whose name was withheld for the protection of his family.        

&ldquo;NATO is not the problem,&rdquo; the senior NATO official said. &ldquo;The Qaddafi forces have learned and have adapted. They&rsquo;re using human shields, so it&rsquo;s difficult to attack them from the air.&rdquo; While many Western officials have accused the Qaddafi forces of using human shields, they have yet to produce explicit evidence. But they generally mean that the troops take shelter, with their armor, in civilian areas.        

The harder question is how NATO will respond to the changed tactics of the Qaddafi forces, which now seem to have achieved a stalemate against the combination of Western air power and the ragtag opposition army.        

First, there is a question of whether without the participation of the United States, the rest of the coalition &mdash; France, Britain, Italy, Spain, Norway, Qatar and a few others &mdash; have the right mix of weapons or enough of them. In particular, the United States uses a jet called the A-10, or Warthog &mdash; which flies lower and slower than&nbsp;other airplanes but has cannon that can destroy armored vehicles &mdash; as well as the AC-130, both of which are effective in more built-up areas. The Europeans have nothing similar.        

The United States has had C.I.A. agents on the ground with the rebels in eastern Libya for some time, and there are unconfirmed reports that they may be helping to train the rebel army&rsquo;s raw recruits. Even so, forming a real army that can oust Colonel Qaddafi may take many months, and the coalition is unlikely to be that patient.        

That is one reason that allied governments, including the United States and Britain, are urging defections from the Qaddafi circle and hoping that he will be removed from inside. No official, of course, is willing to talk about any covert mission to remove the colonel, except to say that &ldquo;regime change&rdquo; is not authorized by the United Nations.        

And that is why Britain, Turkey and the United States are all exploring the possibilities of a negotiated solution to the conflict, provided Colonel Qaddafi and his sons relinquish power.        
Thom Shanker contributed reporting from Washington, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Tripoli, Libya.
