
RIYADH, Saudi Arabia &mdash; After a rebuff last month from King Abdullah, Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates met privately with him for an hour and a half on Wednesday in an attempt to thaw ice-cold relations between Saudi Arabia and the United States.        

Mr. Gates described the one-on-one session with the Saudi ruler to reporters as an &ldquo;extremely cordial, warm meeting,&rdquo; but his comments lasted barely a minute before he was whisked away by aides. Mr. Gates did say that he declined to raise with the king one of the most contentious issues separating the two countries: the Saudi decision to ignore President Obama last month and send in troops to crush an uprising in neighboring Bahrain.        

No one from the American side was in the meeting, and King Abdullah was accompanied only by the Saudi ambassador to the United States, Adel al-Jubeir, who served as the interpreter. Mr. Gates&rsquo;s aides had said they expected the meeting to be long and tense, but Mr. Gates, a former director of the C.I.A., had not briefed them on any particulars as of Wednesday night in Riyadh.        

Relations between the United States and Saudi Arabia are in their worst state since the American-led invasion of Iraq in 2003, but the Obama administration is trying to quietly manage the rupture. To that end, Mr. Gates and his aides spoke publicly before and after the meeting of the countries&rsquo; common ground: the fear of an ascendant Iran and the United States&rsquo; recent $60 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia.        

&ldquo;I think the relationship is in a good place,&rdquo; Mr. Gates told reporters. &ldquo;We talked about developments all over the region. Obviously we talked about Iran.&rdquo;        

The United States and Saudi Arabia say they are concerned that Iran&rsquo;s Shiite rulers will take advantage of the revolts sweeping the Middle East to foment Shiite movements against Sunni rulers, as the Saudi royal family fears may happen in Bahrain. &ldquo;We already have evidence that the Iranians are trying to exploit the situation in Bahrain,&rdquo; Mr. Gates said, repeating earlier assertions without providing details. &ldquo;And we also have evidence that they are talking about what they can do to try and create problems elsewhere as well.&rdquo;        

The $60 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia, which includes new F-15 fighter jets as well as a wide array of missiles, is in large part intended as a defense against the threat of missiles from Iran.        

Despite the arms sale, the countries remain at odds over not only Saudi troops in Bahrain but also Mr. Obama&rsquo;s support of the protests in Egypt rather than its president, Hosni Mubarak.        

After Mr. Mubarak was out of office, the Saudis canceled visits to Riyadh by Mr. Gates and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, saying the king was not well. But Pentagon and State Department officials were left wondering if he was more upset than ill. A later call from Mr. Obama to the king asking that Saudi troops not enter Bahrain did not go well. An Arab official later said that King Abdullah&rsquo;s willingness to listen to the Obama administration had &ldquo;evaporated&rdquo; since Mr. Mubarak was ousted.        

The two countries disagree fundamentally on Bahrain. The Saudis say they believe that a Shiite uprising next door might encourage a similar revolt in Saudi Arabia, which the Obama administration does not dispute. But the United States wants Saudi Arabia and Bahrain to adopt political reforms that might lead to a larger voice for Shiites under Sunni rule.        

Mr. Gates left Riyadh on Wednesday for Baghdad, where he was set to meet with Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq and some of the 47,000 American troops still in the country.        
