
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya sent another strikingly personal letter to President Obama on Wednesday, urging him to stop NATO&rsquo;s airstrikes but drawing a swift rejection in response.        

&ldquo;You will always remain our son whatever happened,&rdquo; Colonel Qaddafi wrote. &ldquo;We Endeavour and hope that you will gain victory in the new election campaigne. You are a man who has enough courage to annul a wrong and mistaken action,&rdquo; he added, in idiosyncratic spelling and capitalization.        

Mr. Obama, who since his inauguration has received at least three letters full of fatherly affection from the Libyan leader, did not respond. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton fired back to Colonel Qaddafi: &ldquo;There needs to be a cease-fire; his forces need to withdraw from the cities that they have forcibly taken at great violence and human cost. There needs to be a decision made about his departure from power.&rdquo;        

The letter from Colonel Qaddafi arrived as his government traded accusations with the rebels over who was responsible for attacks that hampered or cut off oil production at the Misla and Sarir fields of southeastern Libya. In the rebel stronghold of Benghazi, a rebel spokesman blamed Qaddafi loyalists for the three days of attacks. The spokesman, Abdul Hafidh Ghoga, said the rebels were producing 100,000 barrels a day before the attacks.        

Mr. Ghoga said rebels would still be able to ship oil, through an agreement with Qatar, from an estimated one million barrels held in reserve. But he added, &ldquo;I think that we will not depend on oil revenues in the coming stage because our production has been affected in this crisis.&rdquo;        

His remarks appeared to contradict statements just a day before by the leader of the rebel army, Abdul Fattah Younes, who had called the attacks insignificant.        

In Tripoli, the Libyan capital, Khalid Kaim, a deputy foreign minister, said British warplanes had struck the oil fields, killing three guards and other employees. &ldquo;It is an aggression against the oil infrastructure of Libya,&rdquo; Mr. Kaim said, calling the Qatari operations at the port in Tobruk a &ldquo;piracy operation.&rdquo; Neither account could be confirmed.        

Mr. Ghoga said members of the rebels&rsquo; Transitional National Council had met with an American envoy, Chris Stevens, who was seeking information about the nature of the council members and other leaders in eastern Libya. &ldquo;We understand the American government&rsquo;s position,&rdquo; Mr. Ghoga said. &ldquo;They would like to find out more about us. We are exerting all efforts to secure formal recognition.&rdquo;        

In eastern Libya, the battle for the oil town of Brega remained unresolved. After pulling back many of their forces on Tuesday, the rebels moved forward once more. There were no apparent rebel casualties on Wednesday, but their small column remained strung along the coastal highway north and east of the town. NATO aircraft were heard overhead intermittently during the day, and rebels said they heard at least two airstrikes.        

In Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s letter, addressed to &ldquo;Mr. Our dear son, Excellency, Baraka Hussein Abu Oumama,&rdquo; the Libyan leader reiterated his characterization of the rebels as &ldquo;Al Qaeda gangs.&rdquo; He recalled Mr. Obama&rsquo;s repeated statements &ldquo;that America is not responsible for the security of other peoples.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;That America helps only. This is the right logic,&rdquo; Colonel Qaddafi wrote, adding, &ldquo;As you know too well democracy and building of civil society cannot be achieved by means of missiles and aircraft, or by backing armed members of Al Qaeda in Benghazi.&rdquo; Journalists in rebel-held territory have found little evidence of activity by Al Qaeda or other radical Islamists.        
David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Tripoli, and Kareem Fahim from Benghazi, Libya. C. J. Chivers contributed reporting from the area near Brega, Libya.
