
ACCRA, Ghana &mdash; Surrounded, outnumbered and under repeated attacks, the Ivory Coast strongman Laurent Gbagbo has held out against all odds, refusing to budge from the presidential residence in a last stand that has both befuddled and infuriated the international powers that are demanding his surrender.        

&ldquo;This stubbornness is absurd,&rdquo; France&rsquo;s foreign minister, Alain Jupp&eacute;, told French radio on Wednesday, after negotiations failed. &ldquo;Gbagbo no longer has any options. Everyone has dropped him.&rdquo;        

But in his seemingly futile resistance, Mr. Gbagbo is doing what he knows best, playing for time and living up to his nickname: &ldquo;the boulanger,&rdquo; or the baker, who confounds his opponents by rolling them in flour and putting them in a nearly inescapable bind.        

Every day that he remains in the presidential residence in Abidjan &mdash; guarded by about 200 loyal fighters, protected in a luxurious basement redoubt that, according to one visitor, includes a grand ministerial meeting room and a well-stocked library &mdash; Mr. Gbagbo makes the country increasingly ungovernable for his rival, Alassane Ouattara, whose troops have been at the gates trying to drag Mr. Gbagbo out.        

Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s victory in the presidential election last year has been recognized by the African Union, the United Nations and other international bodies. But if and when Mr. Ouattara comes to power, it will not have been solely through the ballot box. It will have come through the use of force that could undermine his legitimacy at home and abroad.        

After French and United Nations airstrikes to destroy heavy weapons at Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s residence, offices and military bases this week, the many Ivorians who share his anti-Western and xenophobic fervor will be even more likely to see Mr. Ouattara as a foreign implant, foisted on them by outside forces.        

Mr. Ouattara has also relied on an assortment of rebels to storm across the country, again at a price. Fighters allied with him have been accused of killing hundreds of people in western Ivory Coast. Now they are suspected of going door to door in Abidjan&rsquo;s Angr&eacute; neighborhood, searching for members of Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s ethnic group in an ominous cycle of vengeance and retribution, said Richard Banegas, an Ivory Coast expert at the Sorbonne.        

If proved true, such abuses could severely weaken Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s position internationally, where he has been championed as the country&rsquo;s legitimate president.        

In other words, Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s protracted defiance, despite its hopeless appearance, has created a nightmare for his opponent, analysts said.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s the goal that he&rsquo;s seeking, to make the country absolutely ungovernable,&rdquo; Mr. Banegas said. &ldquo;He will not have won, but neither will his opponent.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ouattara seemed to acknowledge the predicament in a televised address on Thursday, expressing sadness for the victims of violence and urging his forces &ldquo;to be exemplary and abstain&rdquo; from looting or abusing civilians.        

&ldquo;All those involved in such acts will be punished,&rdquo; he said. He pledged to blockade Mr. Gbagbo in his residence, protect the besieged civilians of Abidjan and quickly restore a sense of normalcy to the battered city.        

Mr. Gbagbo certainly did not sound like a defeated man in the pugnacious interviews he gave by telephone to French broadcasters this week. While admitting that he was &ldquo;tired,&rdquo; he at times sounded almost upbeat.        

&ldquo;Contrary to many others who went and dropped off their children, their brothers, their sisters outside of Ivory Coast, I&rsquo;m here with my whole family,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Us, we are not fleeing.&rdquo;        

Pressed by one interviewer about recognizing Mr. Ouattara as president, he sounded strident as he replied: &ldquo;But he did not win the elections, sir, good friend. How do you want me to say that?&rdquo;        

Mr. Gbagbo lives well off the main road in the leafy district of Cocody, in a sprawling house designed by the country&rsquo;s founder, F&eacute;lix Houphouet-Boigny, who jailed Mr. Gbagbo during his days in the opposition. Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s officials say Mr. Gbagbo is huddled there, in a bunker underground, clustered with a few close relatives and influential advisers.        

Guy Labertit, who has known Mr. Gbagbo for almost 30 years and once coordinated Africa policy for the French Socialist Party, scoffed at that picture.        

Scott Sayare contributed reporting from Paris.
