
LONDON &mdash; A flurry of excitement broke out in the pages of The Daily Mail the other day when Carole and Pippa Middleton, the mother and sister of Prince William&rsquo;s future bride, Kate, entered a store in broad daylight.        

&ldquo;Pippa arrived in her BMW Z4 just minutes ahead of Carole on Thursday afternoon and made no attempt at subterfuge,&rdquo; the paper reported. A witness added that Pippa was &ldquo;carrying what appeared to be a shoe bag.&rdquo;        

No one knows what happened inside the store &mdash; the London boutique of the dress designer Alice Temperley &mdash; although the two women apparently spent three hours there. Speculation mounted that Pippa was perhaps having a fitting for her maid-of-honor dress. Or even better, that Ms. Temperley was being outed as the designer of the wedding gown itself. (Unlikely.)        

Good luck trying to find out. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s nothing I can comment on,&rdquo; a spokesman for the designer told The Daily Mail. At Clarence House, the home of Prince William, a spokeswoman said: &ldquo;We&rsquo;re not saying anything at all about the wedding dress.&rdquo;        

And so it goes in these final weeks before the wedding, on April 29, when everyone wants to find out but no one wants to tell.        

Sarah Haywood, a wedding planner and the author of &ldquo;The Wedding Bible,&rdquo; said that even in normal weddings, it is hard to keep so many things veiled in mystery.        

Of the royal wedding, she said, &ldquo;What I&rsquo;m most impressed by is that I generally know what&rsquo;s going on in the British bridal industry, and even I don&rsquo;t know.&rdquo;        

That has not stopped the rumors and the innuendo. Nor has it stopped manufacturers of wedding-related paraphernalia &mdash; the traditional, the crazy and the ugly &mdash; from doing their best to capitalize on one of the few bright spots in a sea of economic grimness here.        

Among the items for sale are Kate-and-William teacups, spoons, dishcloths, beer, costume party face masks, life-size cardboard cutouts, candle extinguishers, stamps, comic books, coins, vases, photo frames, toilet paper, golf caps and teddy bears (just $398, complete with gown and tiara). There are garden gnomes, dress-the-royal-couple paper dolls, &ldquo;Crown Jewels&rdquo; condoms, and a kit wherein you can knit your own tiny bride and groom.        

The explosion of such items has to do in part with the royal family&rsquo;s decision, in the face of the sluggish economy, to allow a temporary relaxation of the rules governing the use of royal symbols and imagery, said Kirsten Gilbert, a copyright attorney. &ldquo;Ordinarily you wouldn&rsquo;t be able to use the royal emblems or the names of Prince William and his coat of arms,&rdquo; Ms. Gilbert said in an interview.        

Of the wedding itself, it is wrong to say that the public is wholly ignorant of every detail, thanks to the canniness of the royal family&rsquo;s press operation. &ldquo;They&rsquo;ve been very smart in releasing little bits of information at a time,&rdquo; Mrs. Haywood said.        

We know, for instance, that the couple plan to serve two cakes at their reception: a traditional, dried-and-candied-fruit-laden fruit cake, almost certainly covered with a thick, tough layer of marzipan; and a cake whose main ingredient is something akin to chocolate graham crackers. We know, because he said so, that Prince William is feeling a little nervous.        

We know that the groom will wear an as-yet unrevealed military uniform during the service, and that he will not wear a wedding ring. We know that the Middleton family is contributing an unspecified amount of money toward the whole thing. We know that at the post-wedding reception for 650 guests at Buckingham Palace, hosted by Queen Elizabeth, some sort of food will be served. As Patrick Harrison, press secretary to Prince Charles, observed at a recent news briefing, &ldquo;There will be some things that we can&rsquo;t share with you at the moment.&rdquo;        

Right he was. The dress, for instance, will remain a state secret until Miss Middleton arrives at Westminster Abbey.        

What title, if any, will Miss Middleton and Prince William take when they get married? That is a secret, too. So too is what kind of car will transport Miss Middleton and her father to the ceremony; what wedding vows the couple will use; who exactly will be among the guests; who will wear what jewels; and where the couple will spend their honeymoon.        

For now, anyone pining for romance and unhappy about having to wait so long might find solace in her (or his) very own &ldquo;Princess Ring&rdquo; ($80), a replica of Miss Middleton&rsquo;s engagement ring that is, according to its manufacturer, a &ldquo;physical manifestation of absolute love.&rdquo;        

Those for whom it is a physical manifestation of something else entirely, meanwhile, can purchase a special commemorative airsickness bag printed with pictures of the couple. &ldquo;Keep this handy on April 29th,&rdquo; the bags say.        
Christine Haughney contributed reporting from New York.
