
Forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi have detained four foreign journalists in Libya, the GlobalPost news organization said Thursday, among them one of its contributing reporters, James Foley.        

Peter Bouckaert, the director of emergencies for Human Rights Watch, which told GlobalPost of the journalists&rsquo; capture, said they were taken on Tuesday while reporting on the outskirts of Brega, an oil town in eastern Libya. Their whereabouts on Thursday were unknown.        

&ldquo;Requests have been made to the Libyan foreign media office for the release of James Foley and the other journalists detained by government forces,&rdquo; Philip S. Balboni, the president of GlobalPost, said in a statement. &ldquo;We appeal to the Libyan authorities for the immediate and safe release of these journalists.&rdquo;        

GlobalPost, an online news publication, said that the three other journalists were Clare Morgana Gillis, an American freelancer who has reported for The Atlantic, and two photographers, Manu Brabo of Spain and Anton Hammerl of South Africa.        

The latest capture of foreign journalists in Libya comes three weeks after four journalists for The New York Times were taken by forces loyal to Colonel Qaddafi while covering the conflict. They are Anthony Shadid, the paper&rsquo;s Beirut bureau chief; Stephen Farrell, a reporter and videographer; and Tyler Hicks and Lynsey Addario, both photographers.        

While in custody, they experienced days of brutality. The four were released into Turkish custody after six days.        

Mr. Bouckaert and C. J. Chivers, a reporter for The New York Times who is in Libya covering the conflict, were the first to learn the details of the journalists&rsquo; detention this week. The group was a few miles from Brega on Tuesday afternoon, witnesses told Mr. Chivers. It was &ldquo;a lonely stretch of road in a no-man&rsquo;s land between the forces,&rdquo; Mr. Chivers said. According to the witnesses, the area came under fire, stopping the journalists in their tracks. Suddenly two pickup trucks carrying Qaddafi loyalists appeared and took the four but released their driver.        

It took some time to figure out who had been detained, Mr. Chivers said.        

Mr. Bouckaert informed GlobalPost of the episode early Thursday morning.        

&ldquo;One of the challenges faced by many freelance journalists is they don&rsquo;t work with the same support network as journalists working with some of the bigger publications,&rdquo; Mr. Bouckaert said. &ldquo;Nobody notices they&rsquo;re missing, and the response doesn&rsquo;t happen as quickly.&rdquo;        

GlobalPost said that it had been in contact with Mr. Foley&rsquo;s family and that it was working with the State Department, Human Rights Watch and the Committee to Protect Journalists to secure the journalists&rsquo; release.        
