
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; President Asif Ali Zardari has appointed a party loyalist to replace the assassinated governor of Punjab, a move that analysts said was likely to inflame tensions with his political opposition.        

The new governor, Sardar Muhammad Latif Khan Khosa, a lawyer by profession and a former senator, is considered a close associate and confidant of Mr. Zardari and his late wife, the former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.        

He replaces Salman Taseer, who was shot 26 times on Jan. 4 by Malik Mumtaz Hussain Qadri, a member of his elite police guard, who was apparently incensed by the governor&rsquo;s campaign against Pakistan&rsquo;s blasphemy laws. The assassin has since been celebrated by large crowds in a challenge to the government of Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s secular-leaning Pakistan Peoples Party.        

The post of the governor is largely ceremonial, but Mr. Taseer had infused new life into the office with his flamboyant personality and bold public stances on rights issues, especially the blasphemy law. He was also politically aggressive, and traded barbs regularly with the leader of the opposition, Nawaz Sharif, whose political base is in Punjab.        

Mr. Khosa is relatively low-key compared with his predecessor, but political analysts say the appointment of a party loyalist like him would lead to further political tension with Mr. Sharif, the leader of the Pakistan Muslim League-N. Mr. Sharifs&rsquo;s younger brother, Shahbaz Sharif, is the chief minister of Punjab.        

&ldquo;The appointment unnecessarily muddies waters that were already terribly muddy,&rdquo; said Cyril Almeida, a columnist for Dawn, the country&rsquo;s leading English daily newspaper.        

Mr. Khosa is no stranger to controversies. He was appointed attorney general in 2008 but was removed by Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani in 2009 after allegations of corruption. He was reappointed as an adviser to the prime minister in 2010, but resigned when differences with Mr. Gilani persisted.        

Ms. Bhutto stayed at Mr. Khosa&rsquo;s residence during her visit to Lahore in 2007, when former President Pervez Musharraf imposed emergency rule in the country and put Ms. Bhutto under house arrest.        

Mr. Khosa has been active in the politics of the bar. He was one of the leaders of the lawyers&rsquo; movement in 2007. During one of the initial protests of the movement, images of Mr. Khosa beaten by police officers, his head bleeding profusely, were captured live on television and made the front pages of newspapers.        

Close family friends say that Mr. Zardari wanted to appoint Mr. Khosa earlier as well, but that Mr. Musharraf insisted on having Mr. Taseer as the governor in 2008.        
