
PARIS &mdash; Three prominent Kenyans appeared Thursday before the International Criminal Court in The Hague on charges that they were responsible for the violence that followed Kenya&rsquo;s disputed elections in 2007. Three other Kenyans are to face similar accusations on Friday.        

The six defendants are the first members of the country&rsquo;s political elite to be charged with orchestrating the protests and ethnic fighting that killed more than 1,000 people and drove tens of thousands from their homes.        

The Nairobi government has tried repeatedly to block the action by the international prosecutor, first by asking the court to defer the case, and in recent days by filing a motion to challenge the court&rsquo;s jurisdiction. Kenyan officials have said they want to conduct their own investigations and hold trials at home, hoping to pre-empt any action by the international court.        

But the prosecutor, Louis Moreno-Ocampo said he would press on with his case because the Kenyan government, despite its promises, had not begun any meaningful investigations, selected the appropriate legal staff or set up a tribunal.        

Kenyan human rights groups have accused the government of playing for time. They said that the country had long failed to bring people in high places to justice, and that those responsible for political violence and killings linked to earlier elections had escaped punishment.        

Each of the six people who received summonses to appear in The Hague face charges of crimes against humanity and have said they were not guilty. The prosecutor says that the three defendants in court on Thursday &mdash; William Ruto and Henry Kosgey, both former government ministers, and Joshua Sang, a radio talk show host, were involved in a well-prepared plan to attack supporters of the governing party.        

Mr. Ruto, one of Kenya&rsquo;s most divisive political figures, told the court that the accusations &ldquo;made here sound like they can only be possible in a movie,&rdquo; which prompted the judge, Ekatrina Trendofila, to order him to sit down and listen to her.        

She also warned the defendants against making incendiary speeches that could revive the violence in Kenya.        

Three judges will now decide if the prosecutor has presented sufficient evidence to begin a trial. One of the judges has himself questioned the court&rsquo;s jurisdiction. He has written that the issue is not whether crimes had occurred, but whether the International Criminal Court is the right forum for prosecution.        

The three Kenyans due to appear on Friday are Uhuru Kenyatta, the deputy prime minister and finance minister; Francis Muthaura, secretary to the cabinet; and Hussein Ali, who was the chief of police during the violence. They are charged with organizing attacks on people protesting the elections, which were widely viewed as rigged, and were determined to keep the governing party in power, the prosecution says.        
