
ZUEITINA, Libya &mdash; The commander of the rebel army said it was &ldquo;likely&rdquo; that NATO warplanes conducted an airstrike against a convoy of rebel tanks early Thursday, killing at least four people in the second case of friendly fire in less than a week.        

The commander, Gen. Abdul Fattah Younes, said the tanks &mdash; deployed by the rebels on Thursday to the front lines for the first time &mdash; came under &ldquo;a fierce attack&rdquo; around 10:30 a.m. &ldquo;It is likely it is NATO by mistake,&rdquo; he said, adding that the rebels had notified NATO well in advance that the tanks were headed to the battlefield.        

General Younes said he was still waiting for an apology from NATO. &ldquo;It is not possible to make a mistake with 20 tanks advancing on a large patch of desert land,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We hope that such a mistake will not be repeated.&rdquo;        

He did not say how many tanks were destroyed, but a tank driver in the convoy said eight were damaged or destroyed.        

A NATO official in Brussels said that the organization was looking into the rebels&rsquo; account but did not have enough information to comment as yet.        

Later in the day, artillery or rocket fire near the strategic city of Ajdabiya sent hundreds of cars fleeing the city in a panic north toward the relative safety of Benghazi. Doctors in Ajdabiya and Benghazi said the dead included a doctor who was in an ambulance near the scene of the air attack.        

In the meantime, a second high-level Libyan official was reported to have defected. The government of Malta confirmed that a former Libyan energy minister, Omar Fathi bin Shatwan, had fled the embattled, rebel-held city of Misurata on a small fishing boat on Friday. He had been held incommunicado by the Maltese authorities until now.        

Mr. Shatwan said that many more high-level officials would like to leave, but that they were afraid for their safety and the safety of their families. &ldquo;Those whose families are outside Libya will flee if they get a chance,&rdquo; he told The Associated Press. &ldquo;But many can&rsquo;t leave, and all the families of ministers are under siege.&rdquo;        

If the convoy was struck by a NATO aircraft, it would serve to underscore the lack of coordination between the Western alliance and the Libyan rebels during a war in which both sides drive similar vehicles as the front lines shift rapidly.        

The strike, against 17 rebel tanks making their debut on the battlefield, was a particularly untimely setback for a campaign that had lost momentum in the past week and has withered before the pro-Qaddafi forces&rsquo; overwhelming advantage in equipment and heavy weapons. On Thursday, General Younes said that trainers from Qatar were teaching rebel fighters how to use antitank weapons.        

The rebels have been hinting for several days that they would soon unveil a surprise at the front. Survivors of the attack said their convoy included equipment confiscated from Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s military that in recent weeks had been refurbished and made road-worthy. They said it was being brought forward for a fresh attack against the oil town of Brega, which fell to the loyalists this week.        

The convoy included T-55 and T-72 tanks, according to General Younes, who said that the rebels gave NATO frequent updates throughout the day on Thursday about the position of the convoy, which included buses and armored vehicles.        

Shortly before the attack, about 30 miles southwest of Ajdabiya, the convoy stopped on the side of the road, said Alsounese Fazan, who was driving a jeep with the convoy. Mr. Fazan, who was being treated for minor injuries at Al Jalaa hospital in Benghazi, said the rebels heard the sound of what they thought were NATO aircraft in the morning.        

&ldquo;We shouted &lsquo;God is great!&rsquo; and after that we heard nothing,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And then they bombed us.&rdquo; He said that he saw four separate explosions, one of which was about 100 yards away.        

Another wounded fighter, Amin Jaman, 32, said that all of the vehicles in the convoy were flying the bright, tricolor Libyan rebel flag. He said that he was standing on top of a stationary tank and never heard the sound of an airplane when the first ordnance exploded nearby.        

This would be the second time in less than a week that NATO warplanes struck a rebel target. On Saturday, Western warplanes killed 13 rebels in the same region of eastern Libya, where the rebels have been fighting a seesaw battle for weeks with the better equipped and trained forces of Colonel Qaddafi.        
C .J. Chivers reported from Zueitina, and Kareem Fahim from Benghazi, Libya. David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from Tripoli, Libya.
