
MEXICO CITY &mdash; The discovery of 59 bodies buried in mass graves in northern Mexico led officials on Thursday to acknowledge that criminal gangs had begun to inflict a new form of terror: stopping buses and removing passengers, some never to be seen again.        

Reports of these abductions began to emerge two weeks ago from a long-distance bus company and from terrified passengers who had witnessed people being taken off a bus, Morelos Canseco Gomez, an official in the Tamaulipas State Interior Ministry, said in a radio interview.        

Mr. Canseco said it appeared to be a new kind of crime, one in which criminals &ldquo;stop the bus, select passengers, take them hostage.&rdquo; He added that it was a &ldquo;criminal modus operandi that has not been detected on this scale here in Tamaulipas.&rdquo;        

The gangs have been working along the highway between the cities of San Luis Potosi and Reynosa, which is on the border across from McAllen, Texas.        

Mr. Canseco said it was unclear why gangs were removing people from buses. They may have been trying to forcibly recruit passengers as foot soldiers, or they may have intended to hold them for ransom, he said. It may also be that the missing men were heading to the United States and that the gangs took them off the bus to extort payment to get them across the border.        

Security forces rescued five people being held by a gang, all whom had been kidnapped from a bus, Mr. Canseco said. They helped lead the security forces to the mass graves.        

The bodies have not yet been identified, and so it has not been confirmed that they were those of other kidnapped bus passengers. Soldiers have arrested 14 people in connection with the mass graves, said Alejandro Poir&eacute;, the security spokesman for the federal government. &ldquo;There are lines of investigation and information generated from the arrests to lead to the full identification of the entire criminal cell responsible for these acts,&rdquo; he said.        

The federal government will reinforce security along the highway, he said.The graves were found in the municipality of San Fernando, where 72 migrants from Central and South America were killed last August.        
