
JERUSALEM &mdash; A 16-year-old Israeli boy was critically wounded on Thursday when an antitank missile fired out of Gaza struck a school bus in southern Israel, according to military officials, setting off a new round of hostilities along the Israel-Gaza border.        



This was the first time that an antitank missile had hit a civilian target in southern Israel, sharply raising the stakes for residents of the area. It also prompted one of the most intensive Israeli retaliatory bombardments of Gaza in the past two years, killing five.        

The military wing of Hamas, the Islamic militant group that controls Gaza, claimed responsibility for the attack on the bus, saying it had specifically aimed at the target as a response to Israel&rsquo;s killing of three Hamas commanders last Saturday. Israel said the three had been planning to kidnap Israelis.        

&ldquo;This is an initial response to the occupation&rsquo;s crimes,&rdquo; Hamas said in a statement on Thursday, referring to Israel, &ldquo;the latest of which was the assassination of the three holy fighters.&rdquo;        

In the hours after the strike on the bus, Gaza militants fired 45 rockets and mortars at southern Israel, hitting one house but causing no more injuries.        

The Israeli military immediately returned fire at the areas from which the rockets and mortars were launched, with artillery and tank shells. It also carried out a number of airstrikes against a Hamas training site, an abandoned house and other facilities that the military described as &ldquo;terror-activity sites&rdquo; in the Palestinian enclave. The military said it had also hit two squads involved in firing rockets at Israel.        

Three Palestinian civilians, ages 18, 23 and 25, and one Hamas militant were killed in the Israeli bombing of Rafah in southern Gaza. Another Palestinian man, 50, was killed when a tank shell hit his house east of Gaza City, according to a spokesman for the Hamas government medical services.        

Hamas later announced a cease-fire for all of its factions in the Gaza Strip, the newspaper Haaretz reported.        

Violence along the Israel-Gaza border has ebbed and flowed in the past few weeks. Last month was marked by 10 days of heavy rocket and mortar fire from Gaza against southern Israel, repeated Israeli airstrikes in Gaza and fears of escalation into all-out confrontation.        

Still, neither side appeared keen to allow the violence to spiral out of control. In late March, Hamas met with the smaller Gaza groups that carried out much of the rocket fire and persuaded them to reinstate an unofficial cease-fire with Israel. The cease-fire has largely held since Israel ended its three-week offensive in Gaza in January 2009.        

Israel seemed to want to restore deterrence on Thursday, but also to contain the situation.        

Israel&rsquo;s defense minister, Ehud Barak, emphasized that the Israeli actions were meant as a response to the attack on the bus.        

&ldquo;They will continue as long as necessary to make it clear that such things cannot happen again,&rdquo; he told soldiers of the Gaza division, according to a statement from his office.        

Short-range, inaccurate rockets and mortar shells frequently fall in Israeli territory along the border with Gaza, occasionally hitting houses but more often landing on open ground.        

But Israeli security officials said that the Kornet antitank missile fired on Thursday was an advanced and accurate weapon deliberately aimed at the bus. The missile, which is laser guided, has a range of about three miles, and in this case, according to initial findings, it hit its target from a distance of nearly two miles, the officials said.        

Lt. Col. Avital Leibovich, a spokeswoman for the Israeli military, said it would be impossible to mistake the large, yellow school bus for a military vehicle.        

Mr. Barak described the missile strike as a terrorist attack.        

In another first on Thursday, Israel&rsquo;s Iron Dome antirocket missile defense system successfully intercepted a longer-range, Katyusha-type rocket that was fired out of Gaza at the Israeli coastal city of Ashkelon, 10 miles north of Gaza, according to the Israeli military.        

The first mobile battery of the system was deployed near the southern city of Beersheba in late March, and a second battery was placed near Ashkelon a few days ago as part of an evaluation.        

Thursday&rsquo;s interception, which destroyed the incoming rocket midair, was the first time that the system was put to the test in battlefield conditions.        

But Israeli officials have emphasized that the Iron Dome system is still in an experimental stage and cannot provide full protection for residents of the south.        

The school bus was carrying only the driver and the youth when it was hit at a junction near Saad, an Israeli communal farm near the border. The driver was slightly wounded. More than 30 other children who were on the bus had been dropped off at their homes shortly before the attack.        

There was a gaping hole in the back of the bus, which was badly damaged, its windows blown out. Roads in the area were closed, and area residents were told to take cover and enter bomb shelters.        
Fares Akram contributed reporting from Gaza, and Rina Castelnuovo from Nahal Oz, Israel.
