
BRISBANE, Australia &mdash; Worsening what has become one of Australia&rsquo;s most devastating natural disasters, more than 30,000 homes and businesses were inundated in the country&rsquo;s northeast on Thursday as raging floodwaters converged on Brisbane, Australia&rsquo;s third-largest city, and the surrounding townships.        

Officials said the vast flood zone could remain under water for days.        

Eastern-moving flash floods that  killed at least 14 people in the last week slammed into Brisbane, a city of two million people, and other densely populated coastal areas of the state of Queensland on Wednesday.        

Homes and businesses were totally or partially submerged when two major river systems burst their banks, sending a slow-moving brown tide through dozens of neighborhoods. The torrent closed highways and bridges, cutting the city in two, and ripped yachts and sections of docks from their moorings.        

In Ipswich, a city of 150,000 people about 20 miles west of Brisbane, officials estimated that 3,000 homes and businesses were flooded when the Bremer River overflowed.  Aerial images showed murky water lapping at the awnings of businesses along the main street. Colorful rooftops and the tips of palm trees dotted the water like lily pads.        

State officials said the swollen Brisbane River, which snakes through Brisbane, the Queensland state capital, peaked at about 14.6 feet early Thursday, about 4 feet lower than the worst-case situation that had been predicted.        

&ldquo;We have all woken with a sense of relief this morning, though I must stress that authorities are still on high alert,&rdquo; the state premier, Anna Bligh, told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation on Thursday. &ldquo;We still have thousands who are waking to the total devastation of their homes, their businesses, in some cases both.&rdquo;        

Thousands of people sought refuge with friends and family. Others fled to dozens of evacuation centers set up to handle the displaced.        

The floodwaters were not expected to subside until the weekend. Many people could be homeless for months, the premier warned.        

&ldquo;We are facing a reconstruction effort of postwar proportions,&rdquo; Ms. Bligh said. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re going to have to draw on the best of ourselves to have all the patience needed to manage this effort.&rdquo;        

Tens of thousands of people evacuated their homes this week as the floodwaters approached. Officials said the evacuations were mostly orderly, although there were some isolated reports of looting. Some residents ignored police warnings and used kayaks and motorboats to rescue stranded neighbors and ferry their belongings to higher ground.        

&ldquo;You can&rsquo;t underestimate the water,&rdquo; Eric Bray, who abandoned his home when the flooding reached his riverside neighborhood in a Brisbane suburb, told the ABC. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s got no brain, it don&rsquo;t say nothing, it just don&rsquo;t care where it&rsquo;s going. All you can do is just get away before it starts coming.&rdquo;        

Volunteers set up a playground in the corner of one emergency shelter to help distract children as their parents sat glued to television and radio reports.        

Meanwhile, search and rescue crews continued to sift through areas of the devastated Lockyer Valley, where most of the casualties occurred. The police have repeatedly revised the number of those missing in the chaos of the past two days; by Thursday, they put it at 70.        

&ldquo;Families who are still holding out hope, some of them are likely to have their hopes tragically crushed,&rdquo; Ms. Bligh said.        

After enduring a decade of one of the worst droughts in Australian history, Queensland has been hit by driving rains since November. The floods have killed at least 22 people, and property damage is in the billions of dollars.        

One board member of the Reserve Bank of Australia, the  central bank, warned Wednesday that the disaster could shave up to 1 percent off Australia&rsquo;s gross domestic product.        

The floods have virtually paralyzed Queensland&rsquo;s lucrative coal and agricultural industries. The state produces roughly one-third of the world&rsquo;s supply of coking coal, used in steel production. Industry analysts say global prices of coking coal and thermal coal, used to supply power plants, will rise because of the flooding.        
Aubrey Belford reported from Brisbane and Meraiah Foley from Sydney.
