
KANDAHAR, Afghanistan &mdash; Taliban insurgents carried out a deadly two-stage attack in this southern capital on Thursday, using an ambulance packed with explosives to bomb a police and military training center that had just been assaulted by heavily armed insurgents wearing suicide vests.        

Police officers and NATO and Afghan soldiers cordoned off the area after the initial attack, but they allowed the ambulance to enter the center, which also houses the administrative offices of the city police department, thinking it had arrived to pick up casualties, said Khan Mohammed Mujahid, the Kandahar provincial police chief. Seconds later, the ambulance exploded.        

The combined attacks killed six people &mdash; four members of the Afghan intelligence service, one police officer and one member of the Afghan National Army. Twelve police officers were wounded in the explosion.        

Qari Youssef Ahmadi, a Taliban spokesman for southern Afghanistan, said his group had carried out the attack, the third violent episode in a week in Kandahar, the capital of an important southern province where NATO forces have claimed progress in tamping down the insurgency.        

It was at least the second time this year that a Kandahar police building had been attacked, and it was another in a series of bombings in the province that have been directed at the police. On Feb. 12, a complex attack involving several Taliban suicide bombers as well as a car bomb struck the city&rsquo;s police headquarters, killing at least 19 people, most of them police officers. During that attack, an ambulance was one of several vehicles rigged as a bomb.        

The province had been praised by NATO officers and Gen. David H. Petraeus, the top American commander in Afghanistan, for security improvements earlier in the year. Since February, however, there have been attacks and assassinations, and over the weekend riots broke out that left 13 dead after a demonstration protesting the burning of a Koran at a church in Florida.        

In a visit to Kandahar on Thursday, General Petraeus attributed the violence over the weekend to &ldquo;infiltrators&rdquo; who had &ldquo;hijacked&rdquo; Afghans&rsquo; legitimate outrage over the burning of the Koran.        

Although there are signs that the Taliban are trying to return to southern Afghanistan, General Petraeus said that they had not been able to because of the addition of Afghan and NATO troops, but he warned that he expected many more attempts by insurgents to attack Afghans in the coming year.        

However, many Afghans in Kandahar believe that too little has changed in the province. Frustrated that people associated with corruption remain in senior positions in government, many see the foreign forces who back them as the real culprits, especially when things turn violent. &ldquo;The foreign forces are backing those who are bringing violence; the foreign forces are supporting those who are involved in corruption,&rdquo; said Hajji Abdul Majid, a tribal elder in the city of Kandahar. &ldquo;The foreign forces are raiding and killing innocent people. There is nothing left for the people of Kandahar except to revolt, to have a national uprising and change the system.&rdquo;        

Elsewhere, NATO and Afghan forces in Faryab Province killed the Afghan border police officer believed to be responsible for killing two American soldiers in the province on Monday. The soldiers were trainers working with the Afghan border police battalion there. In Ghazni Province, which lies southwest of Kabul, a roadside bomb killed five civilians traveling in a car. And in eastern Afghanistan, a soldier was killed in an insurgent attack, according to a NATO statement.        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul, Afghanistan.
