
GAZA &mdash; Israeli air forces and artillery struck Gaza repeatedly on Friday, killing four militants and five civilians, according to Palestinian officials. The attacks were in retaliation for a Hamas missile strike on an Israeli school bus on Thursday that critically wounded a 16-year-old boy.        

The bus had been full of children before the attack. Hamas said it fired at the clearly marked yellow school bus to retaliate for Israel&rsquo;s killing three militants last Saturday. About 45 rockets and mortar rounds were later fired into Israel on Thursday, and 20 more were fired on Friday.        

Tensions with Gaza have been rising for weeks, and the Israeli artillery and aerial raids over the last two days have been the deadliest bombardment since Israel&rsquo;s three-week invasion more than two years ago.        

On Friday, an Israeli missile hit a group of militants who were preparing to fire rockets from the northern Gaza Strip, killing one of them immediately and wounding another gunman critically. He died later in the hospital, the armed wing of Hamas said in a statement.        

Shortly afterward, Israeli artillery struck in the northeast of Gaza City, killing civilians, including a boy, Palestinian officials said.        

The Israeli military would say only that it had struck at &ldquo;two groups of Hamas terrorists.&rdquo; When asked about the civilians, a spokesman said that the military had fired back at the source of the fire, which was from within a civilian area.        

Of the 14 Palestinians killed since Thursday, 9 were civilians, according to Palestinian medical authorities. Those authorities said dozens were also wounded.        

&ldquo;This situation will be contained,&rdquo; Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel said while visiting Prague. &ldquo;We will not shy away from taking all necessary action, offensive and defensive, to protect our country and its citizens.&rdquo; He had earlier described the attack on the school bus as crossing a red line, adding, &ldquo;Whoever tries to harm and murder children will pay with their life.&rdquo;        

The Israeli education minister, Gideon Saar, told reporters in a conference call on Friday that he had sent a letter to education ministers around the world asking them to condemn &ldquo;the cold-blooded targeting of a school bus with missiles.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;They target children, and we target terrorists,&rdquo; he said when asked about the killing of civilians in Gaza. &ldquo;We do our utmost to minimize such casualties.&rdquo;        

The government of Hamas called upon the Arab League in a brief statement to convene &ldquo;and discuss the Israeli escalation to find the suitable mechanisms to stop the aggression.&rdquo;        

Israel had also hit Hamas smuggling tunnels and caused damage to some electricity lines, leading to a few blackouts. In southern Israel, several towns closed their schools out of concern for safety. Friday was the last day of school before the annual Passover holiday.        

Despite the intensity of the Israeli raids, life in Gaza City felt surprisingly normal on Friday. Families were seen swimming along the beach on the hot spring day and processions of weddings were making their way through the streets.        

But in southern Gaza, where most of Thursday&rsquo;s victims lived, funeral ceremonies were held after Friday&rsquo;s noon prayers and dozens of people participated, shouting, &ldquo;Revenge! Revenge!&rdquo;        

Violence has been rising along the Israel-Gaza border for weeks. There were 10 days of rocket and mortar fire against Israel last month, continuing Israeli airstrikes in Gaza and concern that either side could escalate the tensions into another all-out confrontation.        

Still, neither side has seemed eager to want the violence to spiral out of control. Hamas has called on smaller Gaza groups that carried out much of the rocket fire to stop. In late March it reinstated an unofficial cease-fire with Israel. The cease-fire had largely held since Israel ended its three-week offensive in Gaza in January 2009.        

Defense Minister Ehud Barak had emphasized Thursday that the Israeli actions were meant as a response to the attack on the bus rather than the start of an offensive.        

&ldquo;They will continue as long as necessary to make it clear that such things cannot happen again,&rdquo; he told soldiers of the Gaza division, according to a statement from his office.        

While short-range rockets and mortar shells fall just inside Israeli territory along the border with Gaza, the laser-guided antitank missile that hit the bus on Thursday was an advanced and accurate weapon, Israeli officials said.        
Fares Akram reported from Gaza, and Ethan Bronner from Tel Aviv.
