
NEW DELHI &mdash; A remotely detonated bomb killed a moderate Muslim cleric in Srinagar, Kashmir, on Friday, as he was entering a mosque to lead afternoon prayer, setting off widespread protests across India-administered Kashmir and prompting the police to issue a security alert.        

The cleric, Maulana Showkat Ahmad Shah, 56, was a critic of violent protests who argued that the common practice of throwing stones at the military was un-Islamic. He was the local leader of Jamiat-e-Ahle-Hadith, a religious group that promotes Wahhabism, a branch of Sunni Islam.        

No individual or group had claimed responsibility for the blast as of Friday evening. Omar Abdullah, the chief minister of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, said the government was looking at &ldquo;all aspects to determine who is responsible.&rdquo;        

Kashmir&rsquo;s inspector general of the police, Shiv Murari Sahai, said a preliminary investigation showed that the bomb, a homemade device that was tied to a bicycle, was set off as Maulana Shah walked toward the mosque. He routinely entered by a side door where the bicycle was left.        

A local resident, identified as Mukhtar Ahmed Mir, was injured, the police and witnesses said.        

Kashmiri political, religious and social groups condemned the killing, calling it a conspiracy to divide Kashmiri society.        

Maulana Shah is the second Jamiat chief to be assassinated in the past two decades. Prof. Muhammad Ramzan, his predecessor, was killed in 1991. Saleem Javed, an imam at the mosque where Maulana Shah was going to pray, was also murdered a few years ago. Maulana Shah had survived two assassination attempts.        

Kashmir, a predominantly Muslim area divided between India and Pakistan but claimed by both, has suffered sporadic upheavals almost since the two countries were created in 1947. A Pakistan-sponsored insurgency has been largely wiped out, but it has been replaced by a popular revolt over India&rsquo;s heavy military presence.        

More than 100 people were killed during protests last year. Until Friday, the region had been relatively peaceful this year.        
Heather Timmons reported from New Delhi, and Yusuf Jameel from Srinagar, Kashmir.
