
ROME &mdash; Italy and France agreed on Friday to carry out joint sea and air patrols to prevent Tunisian migrants from arriving in Italy, a move that appeared to ease tensions between them over how to contend with thousands of North African migrants who have landed in Italy since January.        

After a meeting in Milan on Friday, Interior Minister Roberto Maroni and his French counterpart, Claude Gu&eacute;ant, said the two countries would work together to patrol the coasts and enforce an accord between Italy and Tunisia, a former French colony, on the return of migrants.        

&ldquo;We agreed on the need to develop a joint action between Italy and France on certain issues,&rdquo; Mr. Maroni said. He added that both countries would &ldquo;take initiatives to block the departure of illegal migrants from Tunisia.&rdquo;        

Since unrest began in Tunisia in December, leading to the overthrow of the president in January, more than 20,000 migrants have arrived on the tiny Italian island of Lampedusa. But when the island became overwhelmed, Italy began moving them to makeshift tent camps on the mainland. Many have easily escaped and crossed the border into France.        

Tensions between Italy and France have been brewing since France sent back to Italy about 1,700 of 2,400 Tunisians who had crossed the border, figures cited by Mr. Gu&eacute;ant this week.        

The issue has underscored strains in the European Union over the application of the Schengen agreement, which loosens border controls among the union&rsquo;s 27 member nations, except Britain and Ireland. It also comes at a time when the domestic politics of both Italy and France are being shaped by parties with strong anti-immigrant agendas: the National Front in France and Italy&rsquo;s Northern League, of which Mr. Maroni is a member.        

This week Mr. Maroni said that France should be thrown out of the Schengen agreement if it would not honor the six-month residence permits that Italy said it would grant to qualified Tunisians. Mr. Gu&eacute;ant had said France had no such obligation.        

In what appeared to be a concession, Mr. Gu&eacute;ant said Friday that France would allow migrants who held valid documents from member states into the country, but he added that the Tunisians must have &ldquo;economic resources.&rdquo;        

The legal status of someone who enters one European Union country without documents and then crosses into a second union country appears to fall into a gray area.        
Maïa de la Baume contributed reporting from Paris, and Gaia Pianigiani from Rome.
