
MOSUL, Iraq &mdash; Some American troops could stay in Iraq for years, well beyond the scheduled withdrawal of all United States forces at the end of 2011, Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates said Friday.        

In remarks to American soldiers in Mosul, north of Baghdad, Mr. Gates said that the United States and Iraq would have to negotiate the terms of any American presence in the country beyond this year. But he held out the possibility that it could happen, or at least that he had been thinking of several situations that might keep American forces in Iraq, perhaps indefinitely.        

&ldquo;That would be part of any negotiation, whether it be for a finite period of time, whether it would be negotiated that there be a further ramp-down over a period of two or three years, or whether we would have a continuing advise-and-assist role as we have in a number of countries,&rdquo; Mr. Gates said.        

A debate continues in Washington and Baghdad about where the American and Iraqi relationship will head after eight years of war. Some in the diplomatic and military ranks of both countries argue that the troops should stay.        

Mr. Gates also urged Iraqi officials to show restraint in the wake of violence at a camp for Iranian dissidents. The details of the episode involving the People&rsquo;s Mujahedeen remained murky on Friday, with the group saying that about 30 of its members had been killed by Iraqi forces, the United States saying there had been a loss of life and Iraqis saying that at most one Iranian had been killed after the Iranians instigated the violence.        

It was not possible to immediately confirm any of the reports.        

Keeping troops in Iraq beyond 2011 would have political ramifications in both Washington and Baghdad. President Obama promised to pull all American forces out of Iraq when he ran for office in 2008, and Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq is facing pressure from politicians loyal to the anti-American cleric Moktada al-Sadr to get all American troops out by the deadline.        

Still, Mr. Gates&rsquo;s message on a three-day trip here is that the Iraqis need American troops beyond 2011, but politics in both countries require the Iraqis to ask first. Mr. Gates tried to drive that point home after a meeting on Friday with Massoud Barzani, the president of the semiautonomous Iraqi region of Kurdistan, and other Kurdish leaders.        

&ldquo;We had a very good discussion about it, and I have the impression that there is interest, and I&rsquo;m hopeful that Iraqi leaders will consult and let us know one way or the other,&rdquo; Mr. Gates said. Then he added, &ldquo;If they want us to have some presence, even if it&rsquo;s very modest after the end of December, they&rsquo;re going to have to come to a conclusion and make a request pretty quick.&rdquo;        

Violence is down in Iraq, particularly against American forces, but it flares daily across the country with bombings and other attacks. Also, ethnic tensions persist in the north. American commanders say Iraq cannot yet defend its skies, gather adequate intelligence, handle logistics or properly use many of the sophisticated American weapons that they are about to acquire.        

There are currently about 47,000 American troops in Iraq.        

From Iraq, Mr. Gates headed to Abu Dhabi for more meetings. The violence at the People&rsquo;s Mujahedeen&rsquo;s Camp Ashraf, a 14-square mile settlement in northern Iraq near the border with Iran, began Thursday or Friday.        

According to the dissidents, Iraqi security forces opened fire on residents late Thursday and early Friday, killing 31 and wounding 300.        

But an Iraqi government spokesman said that security forces were attacked early Friday by camp residents hurling stones; he said that the army did not open fire.        

&ldquo;Our reaction to them was very normal and does not violate the law,&rdquo; said Ali al-Dabbagh, the spokesman, who reiterated the government&rsquo;s stance that Iraq would like to find a legal way to remove the refugees from the country. A local police official, however, said one camp member was killed; the official said that 12 members of the group were wounded and that 13 Iraqi Army soldiers were hurt.        

In a sharply worded statement on Friday evening, the State Department said the United States government was deeply troubled by reports of deaths and injuries at the camp. &ldquo;Although we do not know what exactly transpired early this morning at Ashraf, this crisis and the loss of life was initiated by the Government of Iraq and the Iraqi military,&rdquo; the statement said.        

Amnesty International was more measured in its response, saying that the Iraqis had used &ldquo;excessive force&rdquo; but also saying that it could not independently verify some of the reports from the camp.        

The Iranian group, which is proficient with munitions, has sworn to overthrow the government in Tehran and was given sanctuary by Saddam Hussein. The United States has protected the group, which supplied American officials with information about Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program. Even so, the group remains on the United States terrorist list.        
Elisabeth Bumiller reported from Mosul, and Tim Arango from Baghdad. Duraid Adnan contributed reporting from Baghdad and an Iraqi employee for The New York Times contributed reporting from Diyala Province.
