
BERLIN &mdash; After breaking ranks with its allies by refusing last month to support the United Nations Security Council resolution authorizing military action in Libya, Germany is now prepared to let its troops take part if the United Nations asks the European Union to help provide humanitarian aid to Libyan civilians.        

The policy shift, announced by Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle on Thursday night, reflects disarray in Germany&rsquo;s strategy but an awareness that its standing among its allies was damaged when Mr. Westerwelle told the country&rsquo;s ambassador to the United Nations to abstain from the vote.        

Germany later withdrew ships from NATO command in the Mediterranean because Mr. Westerwelle did not want the country&rsquo;s forces caught up in the fighting.        

The decisions were viewed with immense disappointment by the United States and other NATO allies and criticized by leading conservative lawmakers belonging to Chancellor Angela Merkel&rsquo;s Christian Democratic Union party.        

And while German opposition parties supported Mr. Westerwelle&rsquo;s decision not to involve any troops in the Libyan military operation, there were also many dissenting voices among their ranks.        

Some lawmakers said that Germany&rsquo;s decision to abstain on the resolution was shortsighted and had damaged trans-Atlantic relations and cost Germany influence and status just when it had joined the Security Council for a two-year term.        

Analysts said the decision to take part in a European Union humanitarian mission was clearly an effort to mend fences.        

&ldquo;Germany felt the sting of isolation after the U.N. and NATO decision,&rdquo; said Henning Riecke, a security expert at the German Council on Foreign Relations in Berlin. &ldquo;By supporting the E.U.&rsquo;s humanitarian mission, it could allow Germany back into the fold and have some influence, at least on the European level.&rdquo;        

The Foreign Ministry on Friday played down the notion of any change in policy. &ldquo;We always said we would provide humanitarian support,&rdquo; said a ministry official who discussed the situation on condition of anonymity.        

European Union members agreed last week to back a military mission in support of humanitarian aid efforts in Libya. The mission, if requested by the United Nations, would involve the protection and evacuation of refugees and aid agencies.        

The force would be composed of the union&rsquo;s so-called battle groups, which have rarely been used. The operational headquarters would be in Rome, and the commander would be an Italian admiral, Claudio Gaudiosi.        

Germany has 990 troops in one of the union&rsquo;s two battle groups.        
