
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. met for talks here on Wednesday with top civilian and military leaders, looking to reinforce a strategic partnership with Pakistan and to reassure a skeptical nation of American intentions.        

It was Mr. Biden&rsquo;s first trip to Pakistan as vice president, intended to signal both the United States&rsquo; unbroken commitment after the sudden death in December of Richard C. Holbrooke, the special envoy to the region, and its high-level concern.        

As American officials have for months, Mr. Biden was likely to use the occasion to push the Pakistani military for operations in North Waziristan, where insurgents run a virtual ministate, training militants and organizing attacks against NATO forces in Afghanistan.        

Pakistani officials say they want to undertake the offensive when they choose, but for American officials, looking to lock in tentative gains in Afghanistan, time is of the essence.        

Largely successful American operations this fall in southern Afghanistan pushed many Taliban across the border to Baluchistan Province in Pakistan. American officials will now be seeking Pakistani cooperation in preventing the Taliban from returning to Afghanistan to fight in the spring.        

But Mr. Biden&rsquo;s public remarks indicated that he also wanted to continue to shift relations to a broader, longer-term agenda, including economic assistance, and to move the two countries away from what he described as a &ldquo;transactional&rdquo; relationship.        

Flanked by Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani, Mr. Biden sought to dispel what he described as misconceptions about the United States in Pakistan, including that it was anti-Islam. He dismissed notions that the United States wanted to dismantle or weaken Pakistan and that it favored India, Pakistan&rsquo;s archrival. He emphasized that the United States would not abandon the country, as many Pakistanis feel it did in the past.        

He underscored the threat of extremism and rebuffed criticism that the United States was violating Pakistani sovereignty, saying it was instead groups like Al Qaeda that had done so. Pakistan and the United States have forged a partnership against extreme ideologies, he said.        

&ldquo;Our relationship, in my view and the view of President Obama, is absolutely vital, absolutely vital, to the interest of the United States, and I believe you believe it is vital to the Pakistani interest as well,&rdquo; Mr. Biden said in remarks to reporters broadcast live on state-run television.        

&ldquo;There are those who accuse the United States of violating your sovereignty,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;I respectfully suggest that it is the extremists who violate Pakistan&rsquo;s sovereignty and corrupt its good name.&rdquo;        

He said the United States would work with Pakistani leaders &ldquo;to restore and strengthen sovereignty in those areas of the country where extremists had violated it.&rdquo;        

The only productive way forward for the United States and Pakistan, he said, is &ldquo;a long-term, enduring partnership.&rdquo;        

The White House&rsquo;s strategic review of policy in December made particular mention of the need for Pakistan to do more to eliminate havens for  extremist groups. American strikes by drones, which have provoked popular outcries in Pakistan over its sovereignty, have  degraded Al Qaeda, but progress remains uneven, the review said. &ldquo;Furthermore,&rdquo; it stated, &ldquo;the denial of extremist safe havens cannot be achieved with military means alone, but must continue to be advanced by effective development strategies.&rdquo;        

The competing forces squeezing Pakistan were on full display on Wednesday. Eighteen people were killed when a suicide bomber in a district adjacent to North Waziristan rammed a vehicle packed with explosives into a mosque during evening prayers, according to a security official.        

Meanwhile, an American drone fired two missiles into a compound in Mirali, in North Waziristan, killing five people believed to be militants, a local official said. Given the success of the drone strikes in North Waziristan, Mr. Biden may also push to expand their use.        

The vice president took no questions, saying he was late for a meeting with the country&rsquo;s army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani. Lt. Gen. Ahmed Shuja Pasha, the director general of the Inter-Services Intelligence directorate, was expected to attend.        

Earlier in the day, Mr. Biden met with President Asif Ali Zardari. &ldquo;The atmosphere of the meeting was good,&rdquo; said Farahnaz Ispahani, media adviser to Mr. Zardari, who was present then.        

Mr. Biden said he had made a telephone call to express condolences to Aamna Taseer, the wife of the Punjab governor, Salman Taseer, who was assassinated by a religious extremist on Jan. 4.  &ldquo;Societies that tolerate such actions end up being consumed by those actions,&rdquo; he warned.        

Mr. Zardari, in turn, expressed hopes for an early recovery for Representative Gabrielle Giffords of Arizona, who remained in critical condition after being shot in Tucson on Saturday.        

After a week in which economic reforms all but collapsed as the prime minister sought to hold together his coalition government, Mr. Biden and Mr. Zardari also discussed the economy.  However, Ms. Ispahani said Mr. Biden announced no concrete aid package before he left for Baghdad, where he touched down early Thursday.        
