
ICHINOSEKI, Japan (AP) &mdash; Shoppers emptied store shelves, traffic snarled after stoplights lost power and drivers waited in long lines to buy gasoline in a new wave of anxiety on Friday, a day after a magnitude-7.1 aftershock struck northeastern Japan.        

Nearly half a million homes were without electricity after the latest tremor, which dealt another setback for those struggling to recover from the earthquake and tsunami that wiped out hundreds of miles of the northeastern coast last month and killed at least 12,800 people, with nearly 15,000 more listed as missing.        

&ldquo;I feel helpless; I am back to square one,&rdquo; said Ryoichi Kubo, 52, who had just reopened his gas station in hard-hit Iwate Prefecture after the power failure and prolonged fuel shortage that followed the March 11 earthquake and tsunami. On Friday, he was again without electricity, his four gas pumps shut down.        

At least three people died in Thursday&rsquo;s aftershock, the worst since the day of the magnitude-9.0 quake. The tremor largely spared the nation&rsquo;s nuclear power plants, and there was no sign of any new problems at the crippled Fukushima Daiichi plant, which has been emitting radiation since it was swamped by the tsunami.        

Power remained out on Friday across much of northern Japan, including areas far inland, and homes were without gas and water. Gasoline was again scarce.        

Convenience stores sold out of basics like water and snack foods, and supermarkets switched back to rationing purchases.        

In Ichinoseki, 240 miles northeast of Tokyo, lines formed outside the Marue supermarket when it opened at 9 a.m. With power out, each customer was escorted through the aisles by an employee with a flashlight and a pad, where the price of each item was jotted down.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m so tired; I just want to buy some chocolate,&rdquo; said Yuka Sato, 27, who patiently waited in line with her neighbors.        

Most local businesses were closed. A restaurant owner, Suzuki Koya, 47, bought a small gas stove and made a free meal for local residents in a big boiling pot. &ldquo;I saw the meat at the supermarket and I thought we should do a hot pot,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s good to keep warm in times like these.&rdquo;        

About 450,000 households were still without electricity on Friday evening, said Souta Nozu, a spokesman for Tohoku Electric Power Company, which serves northern Japan. The power failure affected homes in northwest Japan that were spared in the first quake. With power lines damaged throughout the area, it was not clear when normal operations would resume.        

Several nuclear plants briefly switched to diesel generators when the aftershock hit, but they were reconnected to the grid by Friday afternoon. One plant north of Sendai briefly lost the ability to cool its spent-fuel pools but quickly got it back. Several diesel generators had problems, though they did not cause any disruptions to important cooling systems.        

At a plant in Onagawa, some radioactive water splashed out of the pools but did not leave a containment building, Tohoku Electric said. An official said such splashing was not unusual.        

There was some good news on Friday: automakers announced that they were beginning to bounce back after halting operations because of part shortages caused by the tsunami. Toyota said it would resume production at half capacity at all its Japanese plants on April 18. Nissan said it would start up domestic production at half capacity on April 11.        

But other developments were grim. Those known to have been killed by the aftershock were a 79-year-old man who died of shock, a woman in her 60s who lost power to her oxygen tank and an 85-year-old man whose cause of death was not specified.        

On Friday, police officers pulled four bodies in a single hour from one small area in the city of Minamisoma.        

For tens of thousands of people living in shelters because they lost their homes in the earthquake and tsunami or were evacuated from the area near the Fukushima Daiichi plant &mdash; or both &mdash; the aftershock was a frightening reminder of what they had been through.        

Matsuko Ito, 64, said she screamed when the violent shaking woke her up around 11:30 p.m. She said she was not sure she could take much more. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s enough,&rdquo; she said while smoking a cigarette outside the shelter where she has been living in the small northeastern city of Natori. &ldquo;Something has changed. The world feels strange now. Even the way the clouds move isn&rsquo;t right.&rdquo;        
