
MEXICO CITY &mdash; They were young men, traveling by bus to work in the fields and factories of northeastern Mexico, or perhaps hoping to get across the border to a job in the United States. Somewhere along the way, they vanished.        

The discovery this week of 72 bodies dumped in mass graves in a no-man&rsquo;s-land about 85 miles south of the United States border may offer a terrible answer to the mystery of what happened to at least some of the missing men. They were forced off the buses at gunpoint, perhaps kidnapped for ransom or press-ganged into drug cartels, officials say.        

Much of this is still speculation, awaiting the identification of many of the bodies that are lying in a refrigerated truck outside the morgue in Matamoros, Mexico, across the border from Brownsville, Tex.        

But what it suggests is that criminal gangs operating south of the Texas border in Tamaulipas State have become so bold that they now target innocent victims in full view of witnesses.        

That the kidnappings occurred in an area that should have been the focus of law enforcement efforts makes them even more brazen. Last August, the bodies of 72 South and Central American migrants were found very close to where the latest graves were discovered, in the municipality of San Fernando. Since then, President Felipe Calder&oacute;n, who has not spoken publicly about the latest killings, has poured troops into Tamaulipas.        

Migrants crossing through Mexico have long been vulnerable to kidnapping because they are fearful of going to the authorities. But now, the bus kidnappings suggest that the gangs operating in Tamaulipas, which has become a battleground between the Zetas and their former bosses in the Gulf Cartel, have begun to target Mexicans.        

Since Thursday, when news of the graves broke, families whose relatives have disappeared have been filing into the offices of the Tamaulipas State prosecutor in Matamoros, filling out papers in the hope that sometime next week, when authorities say they will have identified the bodies, there will be news of some kind, even if it is bad.        

Many of the families last saw their relatives long before the reports of the bus kidnappings broke, but they seemed eager to explore even the remotest of possibilities.        

Elio Morales Garcia&rsquo;s 18-year-old son went out to play football last June and never came home to his family in Matamoros. &ldquo;I have heard nothing of him since then,&rdquo; said Mr. Morales, a construction worker who came with his wife and daughter on Friday afternoon.        

At first he was told that his son, who is also called Elio and sold fruit juices on the street, had been arrested by the Mexican Navy, but the navy gave him no information. &ldquo;We thought maybe he was being held in Mexico City for some kind of problem,&rdquo; he said.        

Seizing on any scrap of news, Mr. Morales came to the prosecutor&rsquo;s office on Friday, hoping that perhaps he could speak to one of the freed hostages, that somebody had seen his son.        

&ldquo;We just came to check,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We still have hope. We will be back Tuesday to check.&rdquo;        

Daniel Alvarez Vazquez came in search of news of his son, Emilio Alvarez Perez, 30, who worked the night shift at a hotel in San Fernando. &ldquo;The bad people&rdquo; took him away in a truck one night in March 2010, said Mr. Alvarez, 77.        

Calls have also been coming in from across a central belt of states where people have disappeared after they set off on buses to the border along a route took them across Tamaulipas.        

The authorities in Michoac&aacute;n reported that three groups from that state had disappeared in the past weeks as they crossed through Tamaulipas. A group of 40 people from the central state of Queretaro disappeared in March 2010 without a trace. Twenty agricultural workers from San Luis Potos&iacute;, the state on the border of Tamaulipas, have also been missing since last year.        

Morelos Canseco Gomez, the interior secretary of Tamaulipas state, said in media interviews on Friday that all the victims appeared to be men and that he believed they were all Mexican. Ten graves have been found so far, but he said it was possible that more could be discovered as security forces continue to search.        

The bus kidnappings emerged two weeks ago after family members reported missing relatives. State and federal authorities arrested 14 people and freed five hostages who had been kidnapped from one of the buses. That led the authorities to the mass graves, which they began to uncover on April 1.        

A picture of some of the missing men began to emerge Friday.        

In Guanajuato, 21 people who were traveling to the border through Tamaulipas have been reported missing over the past couple of days, said the attorney general there. Citing relatives and witnesses, the attorney general, Carlos Zamarripa, gave a chilling account of what happened to one group that had set off from the city of Celaya in two buses bound for the border.        

As the buses neared San Fernando, armed men boarded and asked everybody to show their identification, Mr. Zamarripa said. They selected 17 people, forced them off and ordered the buses to drive on.        

The witnesses assumed that it was a criminal group &ldquo;by the way they operated and how they behaved, how they spoke,&rdquo; he said.        
Kirsten Luce contributed reporting from Matamoros, Mexico, and Antonio Betancourt from Mexico City.
