
AJDABIYA, Libya &mdash; NATO acknowledged on Friday that its warplanes hit a rebel convoy the day before, killing at least four people, and after some confusion eventually expressed regret over the accident.        

At a news conference in Naples, Italy, where NATO has its operational headquarters, Rear Adm. Russell Harding, the British deputy commander of the air campaign, said the alliance had not been forewarned that the rebels were using tanks at the time the attack took place, contradicting what the rebels&rsquo; commander, Gen. Abdul Fattah Younes, contended on Thursday.        

The military movements in the area where the attack took place were also &ldquo;very fluid&rdquo; at the time, Admiral Harding said, with vehicles going backward and forward.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m not apologizing,&rdquo; he said of the episode, the second case of friendly fire deaths in a week. &ldquo;The situation on the ground, as I said, was extremely fluid and remains extremely fluid, and up until yesterday we had no information&rdquo; that the rebels planned to deploy tanks.        

But later the secretary general of NATO, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, expressed his remorse over the mix-up. &ldquo;This is a very unfortunate incident,&rdquo; he said at NATO headquarters in Brussels. &ldquo;I strongly regret the loss of life.&rdquo;        

Admiral Harding said that, in the past 48 hours, NATO warplanes had flown 318 sorties and struck 23 targets in several parts of Libya. That brought the total since the alliance assumed overall command of the operation from the United States last week to more than 1,500 sorties, striking antiaircraft missile defenses, tanks, munitions dumps and loyalist forces seeking to advance into Misurata, he said.        

On Thursday, General Younes said he could not understand how NATO could continue to confuse the rebels and the loyalist forces, particularly in this latest mix-up. &ldquo;It is not possible to make a mistake with 20 tanks advancing on a large patch of desert land,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We hope that such a mistake will not be repeated.&rdquo;        

The error left some analysts wondering whether NATO and the Europeans were up to a task that had previously been carried out by the United States military. NATO seemingly stood by while Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces counterattacked over the past week, driving east from his stronghold of Surt and retaking the oil towns of Ras Lanuf and Brega. Then loyalist forces reasserted control temporarily over the vital port at Misurata, which United States warplanes had previously opened to shipping.        

&ldquo;We haven&rsquo;t had a significant military operation in which the Americans have taken a back seat for quite some time,&rdquo; said Malcolm Chalmers, a professor of defense at King&rsquo;s College London, according to The Associated Press. &ldquo;It really is unclear whether the Europeans can rise to that challenge.&rdquo;        

For weeks, rebel leaders &mdash; from military commanders to civilian officials &mdash; have spoken of their communications with the allies attacking Colonel Qaddafi. On several occasions, the rebels have said they have given the allies coordinates for airstrikes.        

Last week, Wahid Bugaighis, the leader of the rebel oil company, said NATO had been supplied with the coordinates of a cluster of Qaddafi fighters threatening an oil facility in eastern Libya. Mr. Bugaighis said he believed that in that instance NATO warplanes had attacked the forces.        

On Thursday, General Younes said he had repeatedly warned NATO about the deployment of tanks to the front lines. &ldquo;We informed them at the time the tanks were leaving Benghazi, and when they arrived at Ajdabiya,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We informed them that in the early morning they would be advancing on Brega. We gave them all the information concerning their number, and that they would be carried on tank transports, and their direction.&rdquo;        

General Younes did not specify who on the rebel side had communicated with NATO, with whom they had spoken or the method that had been used to pass on the information.        

Rebels in the hotly contested area between Brega and Ajdabiya in eastern Libya said that henceforth they would paint the tops of their vehicles pink to help avoid future friendly fire accidents. As the conflict has evolved, however, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces have proved adept at mixing in with civilian populations and mimicking the rebels&rsquo; vehicles, to sow confusion and deter allied airstrikes.        

Despite General Younes&rsquo;s contention that his fighters had recovered from the NATO attack and regained ground, a rebel-held checkpoint on the western edge of Ajdabiya was shelled by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces around 2:45 p.m. on Friday, suggesting they were still within striking distance of the city.        
C . J. Chivers reported from Ajdabiya, and Kareem Fahim from Benghazi, Libya. David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from Tripoli, Libya, and Alan Cowell from Paris.
