
WASHINGTON &mdash; Dire abuses of political and social rights that fueled popular uprisings in the Arab world and a war in Libya are continuing and have in some cases worsened in countries important to American security, including Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Yemen and Pakistan, the State Department said on Friday in its annual report on human rights.        

The report, mandated by Congress for the past 35 years, offered a blistering portrayal of government repression in countries across the Middle East and beyond, including those where the administration retains close security partnerships. It cited continuing restrictions of political freedoms and widespread abuses by the police and security forces against those viewed as dissenters, underscoring the administration&rsquo;s sometimes awkward balance between idealism and pragmatism in foreign relations.        

&ldquo;Societies flourish when they address human rights problems instead of suppressing them,&rdquo; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said as she announced this year&rsquo;s report at the State Department.        

&ldquo;Freedom from fear makes economies grow as citizens invest, innovate and participate,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Where human rights matter, children grow up with the precious belief that they matter, too, that they should be able to live in dignity and shape their own destinies.&rdquo;        

Although it focuses on events of 2010, the report said its observations were &ldquo;now framed by the dramatic changes sweeping across countries in the Middle East in 2011,&rdquo; from the successful uprisings against autocratic leaders in Tunisia and Egypt to the continuing political violence in Libya, Yemen, Bahrain and Syria.        

In the case of Bahrain, a close ally and home to the United States Navy&rsquo;s Fifth Fleet, it cited the Bahraini government&rsquo;s move last September to take over a prominent advocacy group, the Bahrain Human Rights Society, and the arrests a month later of more than 200 Shiites. Those were among a series of repressive measures that led to popular protests that the government violently crushed last month, with the help of troops from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.        

Those troops remain in the country, amid a broad campaign of arrests, intimidation and violence against protesters, journalists and others.        

&ldquo;There are a range of very real issues that need to be addressed,&rdquo; Michael H. Posner, the assistant secretary of state for the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, said of the demands of protesters in Bahrain, mostly Shiites who have long bristled under the rule of Bahrain&rsquo;s Sunni king, Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re not going to be addressed only by security measures.&rdquo;        

In contrast with Tunisia, Egypt and Libya, however, the Obama administration has not called for a change of government in Bahrain.        

The report highlighted a rise in extrajudicial killings, torture and rape by security forces in Pakistan, whose relations with the United States have been deeply strained in recent months. Mrs. Clinton also cited the country as an example of a &ldquo;disturbing trend&rdquo; worldwide in violence against racial, ethnic and religious minority groups.        

&ldquo;In Pakistan, for example, blasphemy remains a crime punishable by death,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;And the blasphemy law has been enforced against Muslims who do not share the beliefs of other Muslims, and also against non-Muslims, who worship differently.&rdquo;        

The report is an exhaustive yearly exercise in cataloging rights abuses in 194 countries, and includes both friends and foes of the United States government. It includes more than two million words and, if printed, more than 7,000 pages.        

Mrs. Clinton said that the United States was &ldquo;particularly concerned&rdquo; by what she called &ldquo;growing trends&rdquo; in restricting civic organizations and blocking access to the Internet. More than 40 countries now restrict online access to varying degrees, while more than 90 countries have laws controlling organizations, according to the report.        

&ldquo;Some censored Web sites for political reasons,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;And in a number of countries, democracy and human rights activists and independent bloggers found their e-mails hacked or their computers infected with spyware that reported back on their every keystroke. Digital activists have been tortured so they would reveal their passwords and implicate their colleagues.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Clinton also singled out several countries that have long been at odds with the United States over human rights and other matters, including Cuba, Venezuela, Iran, Russia and Myanmar. Her most forceful remarks, though, focused on China, a striking departure from her previous statements and one that reflected what she called &ldquo;negative trends&rdquo; that had worsened in recent weeks. She strongly criticized dozens of arbitrary arrests, including the detention last Sunday of the artist Ai Weiwei.        

&ldquo;Such detention is contrary to the rule of law,&rdquo; she said.        
