
TEHRAN &mdash; In what appeared to be an attempt to prod the Iranian government into giving more vigorous support to protesters in Bahrain, non-Iranian religious students from the city of Qum demonstrated Friday morning in Tehran outside the United Nations headquarters and the Saudi Embassy.        

The roughly 1,000 people who gathered, many of them Shiite clerics, came from countries as diverse as Nigeria, Madagascar, India and Bangladesh, as well as from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Lebanon and Bahrain itself. A small number of female protesters wearing customary black chadors stood separately from the main crowd.        

Familiar slogans like &ldquo;Death to America&rdquo; were chanted in heavily accented Persian. But imprecations against the ruling Sunni families of Saudi Arabia and Bahrain &mdash; &ldquo;Death to the Saud family&rdquo; and &ldquo;Death to the Khalifa family&rdquo; &mdash; followed in Arabic and Urdu.        

&ldquo;This dear group has gathered today to protest against the murder of Shias and Muslims in Bahrain and to call on the United Nations to fulfill its responsibility and protect the Bahraini people,&rdquo; said Seyyed Reza Ali-Shah Hosseini, a Shiite cleric from Pakistan.        

&ldquo;Iran&rsquo;s role is the same as that of all Muslim peoples, and that is to support the Bahraini people,&rdquo; he said.        

Weeks of peaceful protests by Shiites in Bahrain were met last month with a violent crackdown that was supported by troops sent in by Saudi Arabia. For Tehran, which has long sought to keep relations nonconfrontational with Saudi Arabia, its powerful Sunni neighbor, the demonstration was potentially embarrassing. By highlighting the Bahrain issue, it makes the government, and particularly President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, look weak for tolerating Sunni repression of Shiites in its own backyard.        

Iranian analysts also say that the country&rsquo;s politically attuned clerics are acutely aware that the Bahrain conflict provides an excellent opportunity to score points against the political establishment. &ldquo;To pass up an opportunity like this, particularly as it involved Bahrain, which used to belong to Iran and has so many Shias, it may be too tempting not to,&rdquo; said Trita Parsi, president of the National Iranian American Council, &ldquo;especially when they already feel that they are losing influence under the reign of Ahmadinejad.&rdquo;        

The demonstration was the latest step in a week of moves by the clerics to push Iran into taking a leading role in supporting the Shiites in Bahrain.        

On Thursday, the semiofficial Fars news agency published an open letter from Bahraini Shiites calling for support for their cause from Iran&rsquo;s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.        

A gathering of clerics and religious students on Wednesday in Tehran and other Iranian cities prefigured Friday&rsquo;s.        
