
ACCRA, Ghana &mdash; The crisis gripping Ivory Coast chipped away at the newfound authority of Alassane Ouattara, the man recognized internationally as its president, on Friday, as his rival&rsquo;s forces regained territory in the main city, the French Embassy came under fresh attack and more than 100 bodies were discovered in areas controlled by Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s forces.        

Mr. Ouattara had seemed to make headway in re-establishing a tentative sense of normalcy on Friday, announcing a campaign to restore electricity and water after a week of fighting in Abidjan, the economic capital seized by his forces in their push to oust the nation&rsquo;s strongman, Laurent Gbagbo.        

Residents ventured out for the first time in days as gunfire diminished. The European Union, heeding Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s appeals, agreed to lift the sanctions it had placed on the country&rsquo;s two ports to suffocate Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s rule.        

And after days of trying to extract Mr. Gbagbo forcibly from his stronghold in the presidential residence, Mr. Ouattara shifted tactics, saying he would pin him inside and seal him off. It is the same strategy Mr. Gbagbo used after refusing to step down upon losing the presidential election in November: He blockaded Mr. Ouattara into a lagoonside hotel for months.        

But spokesmen for Mr. Gbagbo said he was not conceding, and it was clear Friday that the country&rsquo;s crisis had not ended.        

The French Embassy in Abidjan came under mortar and rocket fire late Friday afternoon from positions held by troops loyal to Mr. Gbagbo, the French Foreign Ministry said. It was the second time in two days that the embassy had come under attack.        

Some news reports, citing witnesses, said French forces quickly struck back at Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s residence, as they had earlier in the week, but spokesmen for France&rsquo;s Foreign and Defense Ministries said they had no knowledge of any such military operation on Friday.        

Forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo have also regained ground in Abidjan and taken control of the neighborhoods of Plateau and Cocody, the United Nations peacekeeping chief, Alain Le Roy, said late Friday afternoon.        

Mr. Le Roy said Mr. Gbagbo had used the pretense of engaging in negotiations this week as a trick to consolidate his position, and had reinforced the areas with weapons even as his envoys had been in international talks. Mr. Le Roy said the three generals who entered into talks with the United Nations about surrendering&nbsp; earlier in the week had done so as a ruse to buy time.        

&ldquo;It was a trick to consolidate his position in these two neighborhoods,&rdquo; he said.        

France and the United Nations initiated attacks on Monday against Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s heavy weapons to protect the civilians who have been targeted by them. Yet Mr. Gbagbo&nbsp;still had weaponry, including tanks and armored personnel carriers, and continued to use them against civilians and the United Nations headquarters, Mr. Le Roy said.        

As Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s rival gained ground inside the city, Mr. Ouattara faced challenges in other parts of the country. On Friday, the United Nations announced the discovery of more than 100 additional bodies in the nation&rsquo;s west, in areas that Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s forces took as they swept toward Abidjan.        

The dead were members of an ethnic group that supports Mr. Gbagbo, and the killings &mdash; coming after the deaths of hundreds of people in a western town controlled by forces loyal to Mr. Ouattara &mdash; have cast a shadow on Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s beginnings as president.        

In a speech late Thursday, Mr. Ouattara took on the issue directly, warning the troops supporting him not to attack or steal from civilians, and promising that those who did would be punished.        

But the warning may have come too late.        

&ldquo;The reports that the U.N. human rights team in C&ocirc;te d&rsquo;Ivoire are sending back are utterly horrifying,&rdquo; the United Nations&rsquo; human rights commissioner, Navi Pillays, said in a statement.        

&ldquo;They are finding more bodies every day,&rdquo; she said, noting that more than 100 were found in the towns of Du&eacute;kou&eacute;, Blolequin and Guiglo.        

The United Nations said Blolequin was now a &ldquo;dead town,&rdquo; with its population gone, and the town thoroughly looted.        

Some of the victims appear to have been burned alive, and some bodies had been thrown down a well, a United Nations spokesman said in Geneva. Human Rights Watch also found evidence of &ldquo;heinous violence&rdquo; by troops allied with Mr. Ouattara on a trip to the region, a researcher for the organization, Matt Wells, said Friday.        

In one case, 20 elderly and immobile people from the pro-Gbagbo Guerre ethnic group were executed, and in Du&eacute;kou&eacute;, fighters loyal to Mr. Ouattara pulled men and children out of homes &ldquo;and executed them at point-blank range,&rdquo; Mr. Wells said.        

The country&rsquo;s crisis is far from over, but in Abidjan, besieged citizens tested a fragile, sporadic calm.        

&ldquo;People went out today to do shopping, to buy supplies,&rdquo; said Ben Sylla, a Ouattara youth leader who lives in the Adjam&eacute; neighborhood. &ldquo;Life is beginning again, slowly, slowly.&rdquo;        
Adam Nossiter reported from Accra, and Dan Bilefsky from the United Nations. Alan Cowell and Scott Sayare contributed reporting from Paris.
