
PARIS &mdash; As the wily Ivory Coast strongman Laurent Gbagbo remained cornered in the basement of the presidential residence in Abidjan on Saturday, his forces retook the offensive in a series of military actions, belying recent predictions of his imminent downfall.        

Since Friday, forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo have recaptured territory in Abidjan, the economic capital, repelled a French military operation, attacked his rival&rsquo;s headquarters and recaptured state television and radio, which resumed broadcasting messages of defiance.        

Mr. Gbagbo was still surrounded by forces loyal to his rival, Alassane Ouattara, the country&rsquo;s internationally recognized president, which were backed by troops from France and the United Nations.        

But on Saturday evening, his forces attacked the Golf H&ocirc;tel, where Mr. Ouattara has maintained his headquarters since winning the presidential election in November. A United Nations official said it was the first time Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s forces had attacked the hotel.        

The hotel came under fire from small arms and mortars, witnesses said, while hotel employees, guests and Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s government took cover in the basement.        

&ldquo;Gbagbo&rsquo;s mercenaries lost men,&rdquo; said a hotel employee reached by telephone, who declined to give his name, fearing for his safety.        

A spokesman for the United Nations mission in Ivory Coast, Amadoun Tour&eacute;, however, said no ground forces were involved in the raid, and that United Nations forces had returned artillery fire.        

The state-run RTI television and radio station, which Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s troops had captured 10 days earlier, came back on the air on Friday, returning to its role as a mouthpiece for the Gbagbo government.        

The network broadcast statements claiming French forces had attacked Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s residence and airlifted &ldquo;rebels&rdquo; into the neighborhood in order to surround the redoubt, claims French officials deny.        

&ldquo;The regime of President Laurent Gbagbo is still in place,&rdquo; read another statement, scrawling across the bottom of the screen. &ldquo;We ask for the strong mobilization of all Ivorians.&rdquo;        

Late Friday night, his forces thwarted a French military rescue operation. Responding to a request for aid from another country, which French officials did not identify, French helicopters had mounted an effort to rescue foreign personnel from a diplomatic residence in the Cocody neighborhood, not far from Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s residence.        

But the aircraft encountered a heavier presence of Gbagbo loyalists than anticipated, taking fire from small arms and at least one armored vehicle, which the French military said its forces destroyed; the rescue operation was aborted.        

&ldquo;Last night we observed that they&rsquo;ve been able to expand their perimeter,&rdquo; despite a military blockade announced by Mr. Ouattara, said Col. Thierry Burkhard, a French military spokesman. Pro-Gbagbo forces now occupy several of the diplomatic residences surrounding Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s stronghold, Colonel Burkhard said.        

He declined to identify the nation that had sought French assistance, saying it would not be &ldquo;judicious&rdquo; to do so, given that the diplomatic personnel in question were still considered to be at risk.        

Beyond the Cocody neighborhood, Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s forces have regained ground elsewhere in Abidjan and taken control of the neighborhood of Plateau, the United Nations peacekeeping chief, Alain Le Roy, said Friday. They now appear to have taken up positions near the Golf H&ocirc;tel, where Mr. Ouattara and his government had been holed up for months, surrounded by Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s forces and until recently largely unable to leave. Mr. Le Roy said Mr. Gbagbo had engaged in negotiations last week as a delaying tactic to allow his forces to consolidate their position, and had reinforced the areas around his compound with weapons even as his envoys had been in international talks.        

After the negotiations broke down, forces loyal to Mr. Ouattara tried to force Mr. Gbagbo from his residence, where he is said to be taking refuge in a well-appointed basement, along with family, friends and aides.        

On Friday, however, in a shift in tactics apparently aimed at restoring a semblance of normalcy to Abidjan, which has been ravaged by fighting and where water and electricity remained intermittent, Mr. Ouattara announced he would pin Mr. Gbagbo inside his residence and seal him off.        

But Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s forces &mdash; &ldquo;which he is using quite skillfully,&rdquo; according to Colonel Burkhard &mdash; have so far proved too deft or too determined.        

&ldquo;They have nothing left to lose,&rdquo; Colonel Burkhard said.        
