
PARIS &mdash; A gunman went on a deadly rampage among weekend shoppers in a small town in the Netherlands on Saturday, weaving in and out of shops, shooting and killing until he finally turned his automatic weapon on himself, Dutch officials and witnesses said.        



The attack, in the town of Alphen aan den Rijn, left 7 people dead, including the gunman, and at least 10 wounded, three of them in critical condition, the police said.        

&ldquo;I heard sounds like fireworks, and I saw people running and falling,&rdquo; said a woman who said she watched part of the scene from her balcony and was quoted by NU, a Dutch news Web site.        

The town&rsquo;s mayor, Bas Eenhoorn, told reporters: &ldquo;There were a lot of families around, parents and children, it&rsquo;s almost impossible to understand. It&rsquo;s too terrible for words.&rdquo;        

Several other shopping sites near the town were closed and cordoned off after the police found a note in the attacker&rsquo;s car that said explosives had been placed at three other shopping areas, but the police found no evidence to back up that threat. The office of the public prosecutor said that the man had &ldquo;almost certainly&rdquo; acted alone.        

Investigators have identified the suspect as Tristan van der Vlist, 24, a Dutchman who lived with his father not far from the site of his killing spree. By Saturday evening they said they had not found an explanation for why the young man, dressed in a bomber jacket and camouflage pants, got out of his car on a sunny morning and calmly opened fire, seemingly at random, on adults and children alike.        

The police said Mr. van der Vlist had left a letter at his mother&rsquo;s home, but that it contained no motive for his actions. They said the attacker had had a previous run-in with the law and was once charged with illegal weapons possession.        

Some Dutch news reports said he belonged to a shooting club, and they quoted the police as saying that he had a gun license.        

Residents of the normally tranquil town, some 20 miles south of Amsterdam, gathered throughout the afternoon at a local church, where a Protestant minister and social workers were on hand to provide support. Other support centers for families of the victims were opened by the police and by town officials.        

&ldquo;You hear about this sort of thing happening at American schools and you think that&rsquo;s a long way away,&rdquo; Rob Kuipers, 50, a project manager, told The Associated Press. &ldquo;Now it&rsquo;s happened here in the Netherlands.&rdquo;        
