
BEIRUT, Lebanon (AP) &mdash; Syrian security forces fired live ammunition at protesters in two cities on Saturday, a day after the single bloodiest day of Syria&rsquo;s three-week antigovernment uprising.        

In Dara&rsquo;a, the security forces fired to disperse a funeral march for some of the 37 people killed in protests across the country a day earlier, a human rights group said.        

Several people were wounded, said Ammar Qurabi, who runs Syria&rsquo;s National Organization for Human Rights. The group&rsquo;s information was gathered from residents and witnesses in the city.        

Further details on the shootings were not immediately available. Telephone calls to Dara&rsquo;a, which has been rocked by violence, were not going through, and the government has placed severe restrictions on media coverage in the country.        

Earlier, the security forces fired live ammunition to break up a sit-in in the port city of Latakia, in the heartland of Syria&rsquo;s ruling elite. Residents reported hearing hours of heavy gunfire overnight as the security forces forcefully dispersed hundreds of protesters.        

&ldquo;The shooting went on for almost two hours; it was frightening,&rdquo; said one resident, speaking on the condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals. There was no immediate word on casualties.        

Latakia is significant because it lies in a province that has strong historic ties to the minority Alawite sect of President Bashar al-Assad.        

As the wave of protests gathers steam, Mr. Assad has offered some concessions, like firing local officials and forming committees to look into replacing the country&rsquo;s despised emergency laws.        

On Saturday, he asked a court to investigate the former governor of the Dara&rsquo;a region, Faisal Kalthoum, and a former security officer, Atef Najib, for their role in handling protests in the city, a security official said. Mr. Assad fired Mr. Kalthoum last month.        

Those gestures have failed to appease a growing movement that is raising its demands for concrete reforms and free elections in a country that has been ruled by Mr. Assad&rsquo;s family for more than 40 years.        

On Friday, witnesses said security forces opened fire on tens of thousands of protesters in Dara&rsquo;a, killing 25 people and wounding hundreds. The government said that 19 police officers and members of the security forces were killed when gunmen opened fire.        

Neither account could be independently verified. But the government&rsquo;s claim of casualties could signal plans for a stronger crackdown. State television showed what it said were vandals setting fire to the radio and television building in Dara&rsquo;a and gunmen shooting randomly in the central city of Homs.        

Also on Saturday, the editor of the state-run newspaper Tishrin was fired after giving an interview to the satellite station Al Jazeera in which she held the security forces responsible for the violence in Dara&rsquo;a on Friday.        

An official at the newspaper confirmed Saturday that the editor, Samira Masalmeh, was fired because of the interview.        

More than 170 people have been killed since the protests began in earnest last month, human rights groups say.        
