
MAZAR-I-SHARIF, Afghanistan &mdash; While it is still too early to say who were the killers of the seven United Nations employees here last week, senior police officials say they suspect current or former Taliban members or other insurgents of leading the violence, aided by sympathizers and hard-line mullahs who whipped up a crowd of thousands angered by a Koran burning in the United States.        

Whether the killings were planned or not, the violence has proved to be a disturbing gauge of the depths of Taliban influence in this progressive northern city, and of its potential to foment unrest.        

Perhaps most unsettling for Western and Afghan officials, former Taliban fighters who were supposed to have switched loyalties as part of an American-financed program were among those who snatched weapons from guards at the United Nations compound that was ransacked, police officials said. Three who were living under police protection just a few blocks away have been arrested.        

That former Taliban fighters may have been involved raises serious questions about the American-backed reintegration program, which is an important element in the strategy to wean Taliban fighters from the insurgency and for President Hamid Karzai to forge peace.        

Fewer Taliban members than envisioned have taken advantage of the program, which has received $50 million in American financing. Even for those who have, the violence shows, getting them to change sides may be easier than changing their minds.        

It is just one of many quandaries raised by the deadly events that began with protests against the burning of a Koran at a church led by the pastor Terry Jones in Florida but ended with a mob killing three United Nations staff members &mdash; a Swedish human rights officer, a Norwegian pilot, a Romanian political officer &mdash; and four Nepalese guards. Five Afghan civilians were also killed when the police fired on the crowd, and 20 were wounded.        

As demonstrations continue to ripple across the country, some of them violent, larger questions are being raised as to how serious the government is about protecting foreigners working in Afghanistan and the ability of the Afghan security forces to take over security in broad parts of the country from international forces in the months ahead.        

Diplomats say the horror and scale of the attack in Mazar are a turning point in the relationship between the government and its Western backers, with many questioning Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s ambivalent support for the international effort. &ldquo;One day we will have to analyze why the protests only took place in Afghanistan,&rdquo; said Staffan de Mistura, the head of the United Nations mission in Afghanistan.        

The United Nations and Mr. Karzai have ordered their own inquiries alongside the police investigation. The police are still questioning 21 people, some of whom admitted their involvement in the violence and some of whom were witnesses, police officials said.        

While still blaming the American pastor for inciting the violence, Mr. de Mistura called Friday for the killers to be brought to justice. &ldquo;There is no justification, no excuse, no possible reason for anyone to have done that horrible act, and therefore they should be found and punished,&rdquo; he said.        

Three former Taliban fighters were detained on the evening of the protests in the government-run safe house where they were living under police protection. One of the men had a Kalashnikov rifle that he had seized from an Afghan guard working for the United Nations and has admitted to firing four magazines of bullets, the provincial police chief, Gen. Esmatullah Alizai, said.        

There were 19 former fighters from across northern Afghanistan living in the safe house until the protests. The other 16 have disappeared, according to the police guarding the house.        

It is clear that the government was caught off guard by the violence and that the police were ill-prepared to contain the large crowd; the two top police officials were at a conference in Kabul. Radical mullahs and students misled the government about the plans for the demonstration and changed the approved route, police officials said.        

Taliban or other insurgent or criminal elements in this northern city &mdash; usually one of the most peaceful and secure in the country &mdash; were able to leverage the high emotions of the crowd, police officials said. People loyal to the renegade insurgent leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar also had a hand in organizing the protests, one intelligence official said.        

In recordings of speeches at a rally before the attack, speaker after speaker &mdash; clerics and students &mdash; call for jihad and death for infidels and Jews. A resolution drawn up by some of the protest organizers claimed that hundreds of Korans had been burned in America.        
Sangar Rahimi and Enayat Najafizada contributed reporting.
