
GAZA &mdash; A surge in fighting between Israel and Hamas continued for a third day on Saturday, with Israeli aircraft and artillery killing three more militants, including a senior commander. At least 18 people have been killed since Thursday, Palestinian officials said.        

Thirty rockets and mortar shells from Gaza hit southern Israel, with one damaging a house but causing no injuries.        

Israel said its attacks were in retaliation for a Hamas missile strike on an Israeli school bus on Thursday that critically wounded a 16-year-old boy. Hamas said it fired at the bus because Israel had killed three militants last week, but it said Saturday that it did not know the bus was carrying children.        

An Israeli military spokeswoman said one of the three militants killed in the attack on Saturday was Tayser Abu Snima, a senior commander who had played a major role in firing rockets into Israel. She added that since Friday, Israel&rsquo;s new Iron Dome defense system had intercepted seven rockets, including medium-range Grad missiles aimed at the city of Ashkelon.        

Of the 18 Gazans killed in recent days, nine were civilians and nine were militants, according to hospital officials. The Israeli military said that if civilians were hit, it was because militants shot from among them.        

But the deaths on Friday of 19-year-old Nidal Qudeh, who was studying to be a medical secretary, and her mother, Najah, 40, outside the southeastern city of Khan Yunis did not fit that pattern, witnesses said.        

Ms. Qudeh and her mother were outside their small house about noon on Friday when an Israeli drone fired a missile that landed near them. Both were killed. Ms. Qudeh&rsquo;s sister, Fidaa, was in critical condition in an intensive care unit in Khan Yunis. Neighbors and relatives said there had been no shooting from the area before the missile hit.        

Ms. Qudeh&rsquo;s fianc&eacute;, Jehad al-Qarra, 24, a farmer, said that it was only because a cousin of his had been killed earlier in the day that he had not been at Ms. Qudeh&rsquo;s house, and thereby escaped injury or death himself.        

&ldquo;The last time I saw her was one night before her death,&rdquo; said Jehad, sitting outside a mourning tent. &ldquo;We spent the night discussing arrangements for our wedding &mdash; where she would buy the dress, who we should invite.&rdquo; He pressed his hands between his thighs as he spoke.        

The missile bored a two-foot hole in the sandy ground and scattered shrapnel that hit Ms. Qudeh and also ended up in a wall behind the chair where she was sitting, leaving dozens of tiny pieces there. Other shards ended up in a washing machine that was in use at the time.        

Lt. Col. Avital Leibovich, a spokeswoman for the Israeli military, said that despite the local residents&rsquo; denials, 15 mortar shells had been fired at Israel from the area. She added that mobile launchers were often used to discharge the shells.        

Two of the three militants who were killed on Saturday were hit by a drone in the city of Rafah, witnesses said. The attack injured a third militant who was reported in critical condition. The armed wing of Hamas said in a statement that the two people who were killed were senior commanders, including Mr. Abu Snima.        

Later in the morning, a drone strike hit northeastern Gaza, killing a Hamas militant on a motorcycle, medics said.        

Sami Abu Zuhri, a Hamas spokesman, said that militant groups were restraining themselves and that their rocket attacks were &ldquo;restricted and controlled.&rdquo;        

He blamed Israel for not respecting a unilateral cease-fire that Gazan groups declared on March 23, adding that Israel would be responsible if the escalation continued.        

A spokesman for the military wing of Hamas who calls himself Abu Obeida said the Israeli school bus hit on Thursday was moving between military installations on a road usually used by the military and from which shells were often fired at Gaza.        

Colonel Leibovich, the military spokeswoman, said both assertions were groundless. The bus had been dropping off children and using a normal civilian road, she said.        
Fares Akram reported from Gaza, and Ethan Bronner from Tel Aviv.
