
SANA, Yemen &mdash; A regional bloc of Persian Gulf countries on Sunday renewed its offer to help mediate the political crisis in Yemen and to ease the transition of power from the embattled president, Ali Abdullah Saleh.        

Meeting in Riyadh, the capital of Saudi Arabia, the foreign ministers of the six oil-rich nations in the bloc, which is know as the Gulf Cooperation Council, essentially repeated a proposal the group first made on Thursday to encourage Mr. Saleh to step down.        

The coalition said Mr. Saleh should transfer the presidential powers to his vice president, and it called for the formation of a national unity government, which would be led by the political opposition, according to a statement released on the Web site of Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry. The group also said that Mr. Saleh should be granted immunity from prosecution.        

The members of the Gulf Cooperation Council are Saudi Arabia, Oman, Bahrain, Qatar, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates. Yemen does not belong to the bloc.        

In response to the council&rsquo;s initial proposal on Thursday, leaders of Yemen&rsquo;s opposition coalition said they welcomed it. But student protest leaders rejected the plan, because they were unwilling to grant immunity to Mr. Saleh and his family.        

Although Mr. Saleh has said he welcomed mediation by the Gulf states, he has not responded publicly to the coalition&rsquo;s initial proposal. A government statement released on Monday said that Yemen&rsquo;s leadership would "positively embrace&rdquo; the effort.        

During a speech to tens of thousands of supporters on Friday, Mr. Saleh lashed out at Qatar after Sheik Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani, Qatar&rsquo;s prime minister and foreign minister, told reporters in New York that the Gulf bloc wanted Mr. Saleh to step down.        

The speech made it appear that Mr. Saleh had rejected the bloc&rsquo;s proposal, but officials of the governing party said later on Friday that that was not the case, that Mr. Saleh was just opposed to Qatari intervention in Yemen&rsquo;s domestic affairs.        

Saudi Arabia, which dominates the Gulf bloc, is Yemen&rsquo;s biggest international donor, and Yemeni officials have indicated that the Saudis should play a large role in any political transition in Yemen.        
