
TOKYO &mdash; A top government official on Sunday defended Japan&rsquo;s response to the humanitarian and nuclear crises set off by last month&rsquo;s natural disasters, saying the scale of the earthquake and tsunami that killed thousands and damaged a nuclear power station far surpassed what experts had planned for.        

Responses to disasters are rarely perfect, said Yukio Edano, the chief cabinet secretary. But given the enormousness of the catastrophe, which included the largest earthquake ever recorded in Japan and a historic tsunami, the government has done all that it could, he said.        

&ldquo;We believe that under very severe circumstances, with enough pressure placed on the government of having to make decisions of what needs to be done next, I believe we have selected the best option every time,&rdquo; he said in an interview with several foreign news outlets.        

Mr. Edano, who has effectively become the face of the government&rsquo;s response, thanks to his daily news briefings, said that the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant is &ldquo;a stable situation, relatively speaking,&rdquo; but that much work remained before the damaged reactors, which are emitting high levels of radioactivity, were fully under control.        

&ldquo;The situation, I have to admit, is somewhat bleak and it is very difficult,&rdquo; he said.        

He declined to speculate on what the government could have done differently in the wake of the disaster on March 11, when a 9.0-magnitude earthquake struck off the coast of northeast Japan and unleashed a tsunami that slammed into the eastern coast of Honshu island. He said the tsunami was beyond anyone&rsquo;s imagination, rebutting critics who have said that government regulators and the Tokyo Electric Power Company, which operates the Daiichi plant, ignored warnings that the reactors were vulnerable.        

Detractors, including political opponents and industry experts here and abroad, have also said that nuclear regulators and the power company did not act fast enough to prevent the explosions that damaged the reactor buildings, and that efforts to cool the reactors and spent fuel pools with helicopters and water cannons were ineffective. The government has also been assailed for its evacuation measures, which foreign governments said were insufficient, and its monitoring of radioactive materials in the food supply and ocean, which critics said has been inadequate.        

On Saturday, Tokyo Electric said the tsunami wave that hit the Daiichi plant was as high as 50 feet.        

&ldquo;At least they were fully prepared for emergency situations based on the natural disaster information for the last 100 years or so,&rdquo; he said, adding that &ldquo;after everything is brought under control, experts need to verify what has happened and do some soul searching.&rdquo;        

Mr. Edano said the government was compiling data on the amount of contamination in the soil in Fukushima to determine what other responses are required. For now, residents living within 12 miles of the Daiichi power plant have been evacuated. But &ldquo;as a possibility, we may have to ask other residents in other areas to evacuate&rdquo; to ensure the safety of people living there, he said.        

While Mr. Edano defended his government&rsquo;s management of the crisis, his boss, Prime Minister Naoto Kan, spent Sunday in hard-hit Miyagi Prefecture, where he promised local officials that he would speed up construction of temporary housing for people left homeless by the tsunami. Touring the city of Ishinomaki, Mr. Kan said that 70,000 temporary homes would be built for the region. &ldquo;We want to build these houses as quickly as we can,&rdquo; he said.        

Across northeast Japan, about 13,000 people died from the quake, tsunami and aftershocks that have rattled the region. Nearly 15,000 people remain missing and more than 150,000 people are still living in evacuation centers.        

Japanese and American military forces searched for bodies on Sunday in the coastal and inland areas of the Iwate and Fukushima Prefectures.        

At the Fukushima plant, the dumping of radioactive water into the Pacific Ocean was expected to be completed on Sunday night. The discharge of 11,500 tons of what Japanese officials described as lightly radioactive water was to make room at the plant to store much more heavily radioactive water. But the move caused concern among Japan&rsquo;s neighbors, South Korea and China. The facility that held that water will be filled with more highly radioactive water from the basement of the damaged No. 2 reactor and a nearby trench. Last week, workers at the Fukushima plant plugged a leak that was letting highly radioactive water spill into the Pacific Ocean.        

But water levels are now rising in the trench, which is behind where the leak was plugged. The rising water is increasing fears that some of that water will once again find its way into the ocean. Officials say they will try to empty the trench as soon as possible.        

A worker at the plant fell ill and was taken to the hospital on Sunday morning, according to Tokyo Electric. The man, identified as a contract worker in his 30s, was laying a hose while dressed in a full protective suit. The company said the man&rsquo;s exposure to radiation on Sunday fell below the amount that had been considered acceptable for a day.        

More than 10,000 people showed up Sunday afternoon for two antinuclear protests in Tokyo. &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t know much about nuclear plants, but since the disaster and the accident, I thought I should know more than I do,&rdquo; said Yuka Ito, 33, who attended a rally in Shiba Park. She made her own masks and shirts with the slogan &ldquo;No nukes.&rdquo;        
Reporting was contributed by Norimitsu Onishi, Moshe Komata, Kantaro Suzuki and Ken Ijichi.
