
MOSCOW &mdash; Ceremonies on Sunday and Monday in memory of the president of Poland and dozens of the country&rsquo;s top political and military leaders who died in an airplane crash a year ago are being overshadowed by a dispute between Russia and Poland over the wording of a memorial plaque.        

Both nations had agreed to erect a memorial at the crash site in western Russia, and in preparation the Russians moved a large boulder to serve that purpose. President Lech Kaczynski and 95 other Polish officials, including members of Parliament, the chiefs of the army and navy, and the president of the national bank, died while traveling to commemorate an earlier tragedy near the spot: the Soviet massacre of Polish prisoners at Katyn Forest in 1940.        

Relatives of the Polish victims took the initiative of affixing a sign to the boulder that said, in Polish, that Mr. Kaczynski and his entourage had died while traveling to commemorate &ldquo;the Soviet crime of genocide against prisoners of war, Polish Army officers.&rdquo;        

But on Saturday, the governor of the Smolensk region, Sergei V. Antufyev, ordered the plaque removed. The main objection, he told Russian reporters on Sunday, was that it was in Polish, with no translation into Russian. While the replacement was in both languages, the wording was also changed. No mention was made of the reason the Polish officials had been traveling to the region.        

The new plaque says simply: &ldquo;In memory of 96 Poles led by the president of the Republic of Poland, Lech Kaczynski, who died in a plane crash near Smolensk on April 10, 2010.&rdquo;        

Mr. Antufyev said he had objected to the implication in the Polish wording that the plane crash was a &ldquo;continuation&rdquo; of the Katyn massacre, for which Soviet and Russian officials have apologized, while he said the crash was not Russia&rsquo;s fault.        

&ldquo;These are two absolutely different events, and there is no sense in imposing the idea that the second tragedy was a continuation of the first one,&rdquo; Mr. Antufyev said.        

The Polish president, Bronislaw Komorowski, is scheduled to visit the crash site on Monday with President Dmitri A. Medvedev of Russia, and his spokesman told reporters in Poland that protocol experts were considering how he should respond.        

After the Polish news media reported that Mr. Komorowski would attend the event, but would not lay flowers before the altered monument, the Russian Foreign Ministry issued a statement on Sunday taking pains to clarify the wording change, and to assuage concerns that the Russian action was callous, ignoring the wishes of the relatives of the dead.        

The original wording, the statement said, was not approved by Russian officials; the plaque was put up independent of the agreement between the two governments on erecting a memorial; and Poland had been informed of these objections.        

The ministry&rsquo;s statement went on to say that &ldquo;Polish officials must know that Russian is the official language on the territory of Russia,&rdquo; though language was apparently not at the heart of the Polish objections.        

In Moscow on Sunday, the actual anniversary of the crash, Russia&rsquo;s first lady, Svetlana Medvedeva, expressed a simple message of condolence, visiting the Polish Embassy to sign a guest book before a portrait of the dead president and his wife, Maria, who also died in the crash.        

&ldquo;Despite the heavy loss, love should remain in our hearts,&rdquo; Ms. Medvedeva told reporters while discussing relations between the two countries.        

In Poland, too, the anniversary of the plane crash held some acrimony.        

Opposition politicians have accused the government of accepting without sufficient skepticism the Russian report on the crash, which placed all blame on the Polish pilots, and absolved Russian air traffic controllers. The Russian report suggested that the pilot disregarded the airport tower&rsquo;s warnings that thick fog would make a landing dangerous, fearful he would be reprimanded as a coward by Mr. Kaczynski, who had a history of disparaging his pilots.        

Russian investigators concluded that the pilot descended too quickly through the fog, was apparently straining to see the runway rather than watching his altimeter. They determined that he caught a wing on the tips of trees, dooming the plane.        

Mr. Komorowski and Prime Minister Donald Tusk lay wreaths at a monument to the victims in Powazki Cemetery in Warsaw.        

Mr. Kaczynski&rsquo;s twin brother, Jaroslaw, an opposition leader who has criticized the Russian crash report, shunned the ceremony and attended a separate wreath-laying in a church, Reuters reported.        
