
AJDABIYA, Libya &mdash; Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s military forces appeared to falter in eastern Libya on Sunday on the second day of an assault against the strategic rebel city of Ajdabiya, as opposition fighters aided by NATO airstrikes retook their positions and claimed the checkpoints at the city&rsquo;s approaches.        

Occasional skirmishes on Sunday morning appeared to be subsiding in the late afternoon. And other than an apparent mortar attack against a rebel checkpoint, the loyalists&rsquo; artillery and rocket batteries were mostly silent as evening approached, when rebel fighters roamed many of Ajdabiya&rsquo;s streets with confidence.        

Their presence marked a sharp turnabout from the fighting on Saturday, when sustained artillery or rocket barrages sent the bulk of rebel forces running. As the shells exploded on the streets, loyalist forces infiltrated the city, fighting gun battles in its center against a contingent of local men who had stayed to defend their homes.        

By Sunday, the worst of the threat from the Qaddafi loyalists appeared to have passed. At 4 p.m., a long rebel column of pickup trucks drove slowly through Ajdabiya&rsquo;s main street, firing rifles and anti-aircraft machine guns in the air. It was a celebratory parade. &ldquo;I think the Qaddafi forces go out of the city,&rdquo; a doctor working at the city&rsquo;s hospital said, in English.        

Meanwhile, an African Union delegation said it met with Colonel Qaddafi in Tripoli in an effort to broker a cease-fire and planned to meet with rebel leaders in Benghazi on Monday. A member of the delegation said at a news conference Sunday night that the issue of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s possible departure had been broached, but he said details of the discussion would remain confidential.        

The rebels&rsquo; gains in eastern Libya were aided by NATO airstrikes throughout the morning and afternoon outside Ajdabiya, at a vital crossroads of highway networks in eastern Libya.        

NATO officials reported destroying tanks over the last day on the western approaches to Ajdabiya and in the rebel holdout city of Misurata, where civilian casualties have reportedly been heavy.        

&ldquo;The situation in Ajdabiya, and Misurata in particular, is desperate for those Libyans who are being brutally shelled by the regime,&rdquo; said Lt. Gen. Charles Bouchard, the Canadian commander of the NATO air operation.        

The effects of Western air power were evident in a grisly display near Ajdabiya&rsquo;s southwestern checkpoint, where a line of charred corpses of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s soldiers were arrayed on the sand beside the smoldering remains of their pickup trucks. The nearby checkpoint, overlooking a landscape of ruined military vehicles and abandoned munitions, was back in rebel control.        

The city&rsquo;s morgue presented another chilling site &mdash; the remains of a man whose wrists had been bound and whose torso had bullet wounds. The attendants at the morgue said the man had been executed while helpless.        

Who he was, and who had killed him, was not immediately clear. Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces have been credibly accused of executing detainees during the uprising. But on Saturday, journalists for The New York Times observed a man accused of being a Qaddafi agent being summarily executed by rebels at Ajdabiya&rsquo;s northeast checkpoint.        

With the immediate danger that Ajdabiya might fall now having passed, another shift in mood was discernable among the rebels. They assembled on pickup trucks, many equipped with a fresh batch of jury-rigged surface-to-air rocket pods scrounged from the looted military arsenals, and seemed eager to rush southwest and rejoin the battle for Brega, the oil town where the Qaddafi forces have been entrenched.        

The situation on the dangerous ribbon of highway from Ajdabiya to Brega remained unknown. The rebels claimed to hold isolated pockets in the desert along the highway with groups of fighters who had been cut off from the main rebel forces when the Qaddafi forces had moved northward on Ajdabiya in recent days.        

The rebels seemed to be preparing to resume the push for the oil assets of Brega and Ras Lanuf &mdash; an effort that has been repeatedly frustrated this month by the Qaddafi forces&rsquo; superior tactics and firepower.        

While NATO&rsquo;s operation is focused on destroying the heavy equipment that poses the most threat to civilians, the alliance&rsquo;s statement said the airstrikes were also aiming at ammunition bunkers and supply lines. And it suggested that the events in Ajdabiya were not isolated.        
Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington, and Kareem Fahim from Benghazi, Libya.
