
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; An important diplomatic hot line connecting North and South Korea went back into service on Wednesday after a lapse of more than seven months.        

An official with the Unification Ministry in Seoul said the two sides spoke briefly on the line, which  connects a government office on the North Korean side of the border with a corresponding office on the South Korean side in the so-called truce village of Panmunjom.        

The North shut down the three hot lines connecting the countries last May, as tensions grew over the March sinking of a South Korea warship.        

But the Panmunjom line, the most important, was never physically cut, the ministry official said  Wednesday. And the hardware remained in place.        

&ldquo;It worked,&rdquo; the official said, who was not authorized to speak for attribution about the matter. &ldquo;They just didn&rsquo;t answer.&rdquo;        

On Wednesday afternoon, however, when  the North called, the South picked up.        

&ldquo;We told them it was very important that this hot line keep working consistently,&rdquo; said the official.        

Originally started as a way for Red Cross delegations to connect across the border, the line became the principal military and diplomatic communications link between the two Koreas.        

While the line was not in use,  the Koreas left messages for each other at an unofficial office at the Kaesong Industrial Park, a jointly operated complex in the North where South Korean companies use North Korean workers. It was, essentially, diplomacy conducted through a drop box.        

A line connecting the principal international airports &mdash; Pyongyang in the North and Incheon in the South &mdash; was restored  in October. That link is used for the routing of commercial air traffic.        

The third line, a maritime hot line established in 2004 after deadly naval skirmishes in 1999 and 2002, remains shut off. The line came to be used primarily for the monitoring of commercial ship traffic, but it could  have been put to use during the military confrontation that began in November with a deadly artillery exchange on South Korea&rsquo;s Yeonpyeong Island.        

The Unification Ministry official also said Wednesday that North Korea had sent an official proposal for bilateral talks with the South &mdash; discussions on Feb. 9 concerning the Kaesong operation and on Feb. 11 about the resumption of South Korean tours to the Diamond Mountain resort in the North.        

Kaesong and Diamond Mountain are significant sources of hard currency for the impoverished North.        

The ministry official said the proposed talks were  rejected.        

The South has said the North must first agree to discuss the sinking of the warship, the Cheonan, the shelling of Yeonpyeong,  and  its  nuclear programs.        

&ldquo;That,&rdquo; the official said, &ldquo;has to be the starting point.&rdquo;        
