
TOKYO &mdash; Japan has decided to raise its assessment of the accident at the crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant to the worst rating on an international scale, putting the disaster on par with the 1986 Chernobyl explosion, the Japanese nuclear regulatory agency said on Tuesday.        

The decision to raise the alert level to 7 from 5 on the scale amounts to an admission that the accident at the nuclear facility, brought on by the March 11 earthquake and tsunami, is likely to have substantial and long-lasting consequences for health and for the environment. Some in the nuclear industry have been saying for weeks that the accident released large amounts of radiation, but Japanese officials had played down this possibility.        

The new estimates by Japanese authorities suggest that the total amount of radioactive materials released so far is equal to about 10 percent of that released in the Chernobyl accident, said Hidehiko Nishiyama, deputy director general of Japan&rsquo;s nuclear regulator, the Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency.        

Mr. Nishiyama stressed that unlike at Chernobyl, where the reactor itself exploded and fire fanned the release of radioactive material, the containments at the four troubled reactors at Fukushima remained intact over all.        

But at a separate news conference, an official from the plant&rsquo;s operator, Tokyo Electric and Power, said, &ldquo;The radiation leak has not stopped completely and our concern is that it could eventually exceed Chernobyl.&rdquo;        

On the International Nuclear Event Scale, a Level 7 nuclear accident involves &ldquo;widespread health and environmental effects&rdquo; and the &ldquo;external release of a significant fraction of the reactor core inventory.&rdquo; The scale, which was developed by the International Atomic Energy Agency and countries that use nuclear energy, leaves it to the nuclear agency of the country where the accident occurs to calculate a rating based on complicated criteria.        

Japan&rsquo;s previous rating of 5 placed the Fukushima accident at the same level as the Three Mile Island accident in Pennsylvania in 1979. Level 7 has been applied only to the disaster at Chernobyl, in the former Soviet Union.        

&ldquo;This is an admission by the Japanese government that the amount of radiation released into the environment has reached a new order of magnitude,&rdquo; said Tetsuo Iguchi, a professor in the department of quantum engineering at Nagoya University. &ldquo;The fact that we have now confirmed the world&rsquo;s second-ever level 7 accident will have huge consequences for the global nuclear industry. It shows that current safety standards are woefully inadequate.&rdquo;        

Mr. Nishiyama said &ldquo;tens of thousands of terabecquerels&rdquo; of radiation per hour have been released from the plant. (The measurement refers to how much radioactive material was emitted, not the dose absorbed by living things.) The scale of the radiation leak has since dropped to under one terabecquerel per hour, the Kyodo news agency said, citing government officials.        

.        

The announcement came as Japan was preparing to urge more residents around the crippled nuclear plant to evacuate, because of concerns over long-term exposure to radiation.        

Also on Monday, tens of thousands of people bowed their heads in silence at 2:46 p.m., exactly one month since the 9.0-magnitude earthquake and ensuing tsunami brought widespread destruction to Japan&rsquo;s northeast coast.        

The mourning was punctuated by another strong aftershock near Japan&rsquo;s Pacific coast, which briefly set off a tsunami warning, killed a 16-year-old girl and knocked out cooling at the severely damaged Fukushima Daiichi power station for almost an hour, underscoring the vulnerability of the plant&rsquo;s reactors to continuing seismic activity.        

On Tuesday morning, there was another strong aftershock, which shook Tokyo.        

The authorities have already ordered people living within a 12-mile radius of the plant to evacuate, and recommended that people remain indoors or avoid an area within a radius of 18 miles.        

The government&rsquo;s decision to expand the zone came in response to radiation readings that would be worrisome over months in certain communities beyond those areas, underscoring how difficult it has been to predict the ways radiation spreads from the damaged plant.        

Unlike the previous definitions of the areas to be evacuated, this time the government designated specific communities that should be evacuated, instead of a radius expressed in miles.        
Moshe Komata and Kantaro Suzuki contributed reporting.
