
PARIS &mdash; A week before nuclear talks resume with outside powers, a senior Iranian official was quoted on Wednesday as saying that time was running out for negotiations on some parts of his country&rsquo;s nuclear program because of Tehran&rsquo;s enhanced ability to enrich and manufacture atomic fuel.        

It was not clear whether the remarks were intended as an overture &mdash; or as a maneuver to raise the stakes &mdash; before the negotiations restart.        

The official,  Ali Asghar Soltanieh, Iran&rsquo;s ambassador to the International Atomic Energy Agency, referred in particular to an abortive agreement dating to October 2009 providing for Iran to ship nuclear material abroad in return for nuclear fuel rods for a research reactor in Teheran.  The energy agency is the United Nations&rsquo; nuclear supervisory body.        

&ldquo;Time is moving against the negotiating side,&rdquo; Mr. Soltanieh said, referring to the group of countries &mdash; the United States, Britain, France, Germany, Russia and China &mdash; that, along with the European Union, are set to resume talks with Iranian negotiators in Istanbul on Jan. 21 following inconclusive negotiations in Geneva in December. &ldquo;It should use the chance at the earliest.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;After the installation of the first fuel rods, produced by Iran, in the core of the Tehran research reactor, Iran&rsquo;s Parliament will probably never allow the government to negotiate dispatching uranium to Turkey or other countries,&rdquo; Mr. Soltanieh said.        

Mr. Soltanieh was speaking to French journalists in Paris on Tuesday and excerpts from his remarks were published Wednesday by IRNA, Iran&rsquo;s official news agency.        

His comments played into a much broader international debate about Iran&rsquo;s nuclear intentions. Teheran says its  program is for peaceful purposes permitted under international agreements to which it has long been a signatory. But Western countries fear Tehran is seeking to build nuclear weapons that would upset the regional power balance. The proposal for Iran to swap low-enriched uranium for fuel rods was cast as a confidence-building measure in earlier talks,  but Iran subsequently retreated from it.        

Since then, Iran has announced that it is able to purify uranium to the  level of 20 percent required for the research reactor &mdash; only a part of Iran&rsquo;s wider nuclear enrichment program. Iranian officials have  said in recent days that its scientists  would be able manufacture fuel rods for the Tehran reactor later this year.        

It was not immediately clear why the fuel-swap plan had been revived. Since the tentative deal  was first agreed upon, Iran has produced much more enriched uranium than it had at the time, and it has also enhanced  its ability to enrich uranium. However, a Western diplomat in Vienna, where the U.N.&rsquo;s atomic energy agency has its headquarters, said that it was not clear whether Iran was able to certify the enriched uranium for use as fuel.        

The diplomat spoke in return for anonymity because he was not authorized to brief reporters.        

&ldquo;This kind of last chance language has been used repeatedly by both sides&rdquo; in negotiations with Iran, the diplomat said. &ldquo;But time keeps on running anyhow.&rdquo; Moreover, he added, &ldquo;neither side wants to scupper the deal, even though it has not progressed.&rdquo;        

Last May, Iran announced that it had reached a deal with Turkey to ship roughly half of its nuclear fuel to neighboring Turkey. But the United States, Europe and Russia responded with extreme skepticism to the announcement, saying they would continue to press for new sanctions against Tehran.        

After the talks in Geneva last month, though, Western officials said possible confidence-building measures between Iran and outside powers could include a revision of the fuel swap agreement in the 2009 deal.        

But, later in December, the United States imposed further sanctions on Tehran, making clear that the resumption of negotiations would not ease American pressure.        

Two days ago, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said sanctions had delayed Iran&rsquo;s ability to produce a nuclear weapon. Her remarks offered the strongest and most public claim by the Obama administration that its campaign was impairing Iran&rsquo;s nuclear ambitions.        

&ldquo;Iran has had technological problems that have made it slow down its timetable,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said during a visit to the Gulf state of Abu Dhabi. &ldquo;The sanctions are working.&rdquo;        
