
KAMPALA, Uganda &mdash;Police officers on Monday forcefully countered a small demonstration here over rising commodity prices, swiftly dispersing demonstrators with tear gas and live ammunition and arresting two former presidential candidates.        

Broken glass, chunks of pavement and a tree trunk were scattered across a major road into Kampala, Uganda&rsquo;s capital, on Monday, after a small group of opposition figures led by Kizza Besigye, the runner-up in Uganda&rsquo;s February presidential election, began walking down the street towards central Kampala.        

Another former presidential candidate, Norbert Mao, was also arrested in a different part of Kampala, as well as at least one member of Parliament.        

&ldquo;We had to get him,&rdquo; Ugandan police spokeswoman Judith Nabakooba said of Dr. Besigye and his group. &ldquo;They were blocking traffic.&rdquo;        

She said that when the police blocked the demonstration, which had not been officially registered with the government, demonstrators started hurling rocks and slabs of pavement at the police.        

Dr. Besigye was released on bail Monday afternoon, after being charged with inciting violence and disobedience against police.        

The overpowering show of force by the police in the face of a meager demonstration &mdash; only a handful of people, and crowds of bystanders that grew when the police arrived &mdash; underscored the government&rsquo;s sensitivity to any hint of protest in the wake of the upheaval across north Africa.        

President Yoweri Museveni, who has been in power for 25 years, won re-election in February, but voting irregularities and allegations of widespread corruption tarnished the ballot.        

While voters said they were not ready to risk their lives in protest like people in Egypt or Tunisia, President Museveni warned that protests would not be tolerated.        

Opposition figures had announced Sunday that they would stage a &ldquo;walk to work&rdquo; demonstration on Monday against rising commodity prices, which have suffocated the landlocked east African country&rsquo;s economy in recent months. Gasoline prices have risen sharply in the wake of the spreading unrest in north Africa, forcing a cascade of rising commodity prices.        

In some areas, staples such as soap, rice, and cooking oil have gone up by more than 40 percent since the beginning of the year, though observers here do not see the rising prices having an immediate effect on the country&rsquo;s stability.        

But in Kansangati on the outskirts of Kampala Monday, supporters of Dr. Besigye said that a group of fewer than 10 people had walked only a mile before being stopped by the police, who then surrounded the demonstrators and arrested Dr. Besigye after a two-hour standoff. &ldquo;We came out walking; only six of us,&rdquo; said Sam Mugumya, a personal aide to Dr. Besigye, at the scene of the arrest. Then the police came.        

&ldquo;They said there was no law we were breaking, but that &lsquo;we cannot let you proceed,&rsquo;&rdquo; said Mr. Mugumya. &ldquo;You cannot use five police vehicles and then accuse one person of blocking the road.&rdquo;        

Armored personnel carriers rolled up and down main roads around Kampala on Monday, firing tear gas canisters long after demonstrators dispersed, sending mostly journalists, police, and nearby primary school children fleeing to fresher air.        

&ldquo;They can&rsquo;t keep suppressing things forever,&rdquo; said Father Anthony Musaala, at the police station holding Dr. Besigye. &ldquo;There will come a time.&rdquo;        
