
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; Rebel leaders here rejected a plan presented Monday by the African Union for a cease-fire and an end to the eight-week-old conflict in Libya, saying it did not meet their basic demand that Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, his sons and his inner circle leave immediately.        

The rebels also faulted the proposal for calling for reform within the current Libyan political system.        

&ldquo;We will not negotiate with the blood of our martyrs,&rdquo; said the rebel national council chairman, Mustafa Abdul Jalil. "We will die with them or be victorious."        

The visit by the African Union negotiators came hours after the delegation had left meetings in Tripoli with Colonel Qaddafi, who said he accepted what they called a &ldquo;road map&rdquo; for a political settlement involving a cease-fire and the suspension of NATO airstrikes.        

But as the delegates arrived in Benghazi, they faced a chilly reception, as hundreds of protesters implored the rebel leadership not to accept anything less than the departure of Colonel Qaddafi and his family.        

As the shiny sedans carrying the African delegates pulled up to the Tibesti Hotel, one protester, Ghalia Sanfez, screamed: &ldquo;How much blood does he need to let go? He killed enough. He killed so many young people.&rdquo;        

After the rebels announced they were rejecting the plan, a Western diplomat, pointing out the size of the protests, said he did not expect the colonel&rsquo;s opponents to waver in their demands.        

Despite their rejection of the delegates&rsquo; proposal, the rebels seemed to have a victory of sorts from the day&rsquo;s events. Visited for the first time by the presidents of several African nations, and joined by American and British envoys as they announced their demands, the rebel leaders reveled in the fleeting spotlight that shone on their de facto capital as they reminded the world of their cause.        

Even so, the proposal&rsquo;s failure means that for the moment, there is no viable political solution on the horizon, as it appears less likely that either side will prevail on the battlefield.        

At the same time, foreign governments, perhaps reacting to the rebels&rsquo; repeated messages, seem less likely to press them into negotiations with Colonel Qaddafi.        

In Washington, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton reiterated the Obama administration&rsquo;s call for Colonel Qaddafi to leave power and exit the country.        

&ldquo;We believe, too, that there needs to be a transition that reflects the will of the Libyan people and the departure of Qaddafi from power and from Libya,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said.        

She said the United States would welcome a cease-fire, but she insisted on clear conditions. &ldquo;We want to see the Libyan regime forces pull back from the areas that they have forcibly entered,&rdquo; she said.        

&ldquo;We want to see a resumption of water, electricity and other services to cities that have been brutalized by the Qaddafi forces,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;We want to see humanitarian assistance reach the people of Libya. These terms are nonnegotiable.&rdquo;        

Finland&rsquo;s foreign minister, Alexander Stubb, who appeared with Mrs. Clinton at the State Department, said the European Union was already preparing for assistance to Libya under a new government.        

&ldquo;There is going to be life after Qaddafi, and the European Union should prepare for that,&rdquo; he said.        

The African Union proposal had no immediate impact on NATO, which said air sorties to protect civilians would continue.        

Colonel Qaddafi has declared several cease-fires, but his forces have never stopped fighting. The rebels have also said they would welcome a cease-fire, but only under conditions the colonel is unlikely to accept, including the withdrawal of government troops from the perimeter of cities like Misurata that his forces have been attacking for weeks.        

Abdul Hafidh Ghoga, the vice chairman of the rebel council, said that Colonel Qaddafi accepted the African Union proposal because &ldquo;it protects his position and ensures his presence.&rdquo;        

The only concession some of the rebels seemed willing to make was to let the colonel and his family leave with some of their money, in the hopes that it would change the focus of the discussion to the country to which the Qaddafis would flee.        

&ldquo;We have to open a door for him,&rdquo; said Salwa Bugaighis, a lawyer who is one of the rebel leaders. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want all our young people to die.&rdquo;        

In an initial response from NATO, an official of the alliance, who spoke on condition of anonymity, told Reuters: &ldquo;We will continue to put pressure on forces threatening civilians and our operations will continue. Our aircraft are still flying and when we see a threat to civilians, we will engage.&rdquo;        

According to Reuters, the NATO official said pro-Qaddafi forces shelled the contested western city of Misurata early Monday.        

&ldquo;It does not appear that this indication of a peace deal has any substance at this point,&rdquo; the official was quoted as saying.        

On Monday, Unicef said that the fighting in Misurata over the last seven weeks had led to an increase in the number of children being killed.        

Unicef said at least 20 children &mdash; some as young as 9 months old &mdash; had died in the fighting, from shrapnel wounds and bullets. Most had been killed in the last three weeks, and the majority of the victims were less than 10 years old, they said.        

&ldquo;The siege must stop,&rdquo; said Shahida Azfar, Unicef regional director for the Middle East and North Africa. &ldquo;More and more children in this city are being killed, injured and denied their essential needs due to the fighting.&rdquo;        

In the eastern city of Ajdabiya, which had experienced fierce fighting last week as Qaddafi forces advanced on the city, there was sporadic shelling in the morning and in the afternoon, by the city&rsquo;s western gate.        

A rebel fighter, Khaled Mohammed, said the westernmost rebel positions were about 25 miles west of the city.        

He said that under orders from rebel commanders, the fighters were not advancing beyond that point, to lessen the chances that NATO warplanes would mistakenly bomb the rebels, after two deadly friendly-fire airstrikes last week.        
Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Washington, and Bryan Denton from Ajdabiya, Libya.
