
MINSK, Belarus &mdash; The head of Belarus&rsquo;s security services suggested Tuesday that members of the country&rsquo;s embattled opposition might have been behind the bombing on Monday that killed 12 people and wounded 150 at a subway station close to the office of the country&rsquo;s authoritarian president, Aleksandr G. Lukashenko.        

Vadim Zaitsev, the head of the security services &mdash; still called the K.G.B. in this former Soviet republic &mdash; indicated that the bombers might have had links to the organizers of a large protest against Mr. Lukashenko in December.        

&ldquo;You know that there were events recently, and not all people who have been held responsible or investigated by the prosecutors and the courts agree with the decisions of those courts,&rdquo; Mr. Zaitsev said on government television, apparently referring to the December protest.        

He suggested that &ldquo;members of exceedingly radical extremist youth groups&rdquo; could have carried out the bombing as revenge and warned that they might be plotting similar attacks against law enforcement officials. He offered no evidence to support his claim.        

Mr. Zaitsev&rsquo;s remarks seemed to confirm the fears of several opposition leaders, expressed soon after the bombing, that the authorities could use the attack as a pretext to broaden an already extensive crackdown.        

Political tensions have been heightened since the December protest, when tens of thousands of people converged on a central square here in the capital to denounce what they considered fraud in an election that Mr. Lukashenko had easily won.        

Hundreds were arrested when the police violently dispersed the largely peaceful rally. Authorities have accused the organizers, including several former presidential candidates, of plotting a coup. They could face up to 15 years in prison.        

&ldquo;There are those today who do not like the way of life in Belarus or the Belarussian security structure,&rdquo; Mr. Zaitsev said. &ldquo;They are looking for changes that will exacerbate the situation by spreading fear, panic and distrust of law enforcement agencies and government organs.&rdquo;        

In the wake of the bombing, the authorities appear to have increased the pressure on opposition figures. Four K.G.B. agents accompanied by the police went to the offices of an opposition newspaper, Nasha Niva, on Tuesday and ordered it to remove video of the bombing from its site.        

And the prosecutor general&rsquo;s office sent warnings to several opposition leaders, accusing them of &ldquo;discrediting Belarussian society and the government&rdquo; in their remarks about the attack, a statement on the prosecutor&rsquo;s Web site said.        

A different explanation of the bombing has been proposed by several opposition leaders: that Mr. Lukashenko and his security services may have been behind it. Though no one has offered evidence to support the suspicion, it has begun to enter into hushed conversations in kitchens and courtyards here.        

&ldquo;Everyone has the same theory,&rdquo; said Lada, a 40-year-old doctor who would not give her last name. &ldquo;It is a good excuse to declare a state of emergency and press the opposition,&rdquo; she said, referring to the attack.        

Few, however, seem so certain. The attack appears to have flabbergasted most here in Minsk, a city of about 1.8 million people kept in lockstep by the robust security services.        

&ldquo;I was always so happy that we had a small country and a small city where everything was peaceful and quiet and nothing ever happened,&rdquo; said Diana Bukhalko, 20. &ldquo;Who would want to attack Minsk?&rdquo;        

It was a question many here were having trouble answering as they gathered outside the Oktyabrskaya subway station on Tuesday to place flowers and pay their respects to the victims.        

There have been bombings before in Minsk, including one in 2008 at an outdoor festival that wounded dozens. But nothing has ever reached the scale of Monday&rsquo;s bloodshed.        

Packed with at least 10 pounds of explosives as well as metal balls and nails, the bomb tore off limbs and sent shrapnel straight through bodies when it was detonated, investigators said. The bomb, which was placed under a bench at the subway station, was set off by remote control.        

Anatoly Kuleshov, Belarus&rsquo;s interior minister, told journalists that investigators had come up with a composite sketch of two people suspected in the bombing. Belarussian news agencies, citing the nation&rsquo;s deputy prosecutor general, said several suspects had been detained. None were publicly identified on Tuesday.        
