
ROME &mdash; Since the global financial crisis, the European Union has been deeply divided over economic policy. With the Libya intervention, it has split over foreign policy. But today few issues are proving more divisive within the bloc than immigration.        

That much was clear this week, when the fractious 27-member European Union rejected Italy&rsquo;s idea to make it easier for immigrants who first land in Italy to travel elsewhere in Europe. At a time when a wave of immigrants fleeing the unrest in North Africa shows no signs of abating, the rejection raised the possibility of tightened intra-European border controls for the first time since visa-free travel was introduced in the 1990s.        

Frustrations have been building here for weeks, and over the weekend Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi finally said enough was enough. Visiting the Italian island of Lampedusa, the point of entry for thousands of North African immigrants to Europe, he said: &ldquo;Either Europe is something that&rsquo;s real and concrete or it isn&rsquo;t. And in that case, it&rsquo;s better to go back to each going our own way and letting everyone follow his own policies and egotism.&rdquo;        

Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s statement, echoed by other members of his government and criticized by his European counterparts, highlighted a looming showdown within Europe over how to handle the 23,000 migrants who have arrived in Italy since January.        

Fears of immigrants, fanned by right-wing parties and voter discontent over economic malaise, have deepened already profound divisions within Europe. Experts say the issue is proving to be at least as problematic &mdash; and potentially as destabilizing &mdash; as Europe&rsquo;s struggle to manage a succession of financial crises. And it adds a new source of friction over NATO&rsquo;s intervention in Libya.        

The majority of Africans seeking work or refuge in Europe are Tunisians, but a growing number are sub-Saharan Africans fleeing Libya. To reduce tensions in the makeshift tent camps in Italy where officials shipped the migrants who first arrived on Lampedusa, Italian officials said they would issue temporary residence permits to qualified migrants.        

Italy had asked fellow European Union member states to recognize the permits as valid for entry &mdash; essentially condoning the migrants&rsquo; passage to France and beyond. At a meeting of European Union interior ministers in Luxembourg on Monday, other member states, chief among them France and Germany, said no.        

In response, Italy&rsquo;s interior minister, Roberto Maroni, asked, &ldquo;I wonder if it makes sense to stay in the European Union?&rdquo;        

While European neighbors have criticized the Italians for their poor handling of the immigration situation, the stalwarts of Mr. Maroni&rsquo;s Northern League party, known for its anti-immigrant stance and fierce Euro-skepticism, have criticized the interior minister for not being tough enough.        

As in the divisions over economic and fiscal policies across Europe &mdash; highlighted last week when the European Central Bank raised interest rates, staving off inflation in Germany but putting the heat on southern countries struggling with debt &mdash; the immigration squabble once again showed the seams in the European project.        

Coming after the financial crisis, the Libya intervention and the subsequent influx of immigrants are &ldquo;an extraordinary series of tests on very different fronts for European cohesion and European strategy, and the result is clearly very mixed,&rdquo; said Ian Lesser, a senior trans-Atlantic fellow at the German Marshall Fund.        

&ldquo;The migration piece of this is in some way the toughest,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;There, the measures are very direct; there&rsquo;s a direct connection to public opinion and daily politics.&rdquo;        

Individual European countries have their own policies for handling immigrants, refugees and asylum seekers. Under European law, the country where migrants first arrive is responsible for determining their status, a norm that Italy and Malta have asked to be waived. (So far, they have been rebuffed.)        

&ldquo;At the same time,&rdquo; said Hugo Brady, a senior research fellow in Brussels at the Center for European Reform, &ldquo;free movement, passport-free travel, which didn&rsquo;t even exist inside nation-states a few years ago, are huge achievements. The question is: Are they vulnerable?&rdquo;        

On Monday, not only did France reject Italy&rsquo;s temporary visa idea, but its interior minister said Paris would use &ldquo;all legal means at our disposal&rdquo; to increase patrols on the French-Italian border. In recent weeks, France has turned back more than 1,000 North Africans trying to cross the border.        

Germany criticized Italian officials for undermining the Schengen Agreement, which established passport-free zones, and said Italy should handle the immigrants on its own.        

&ldquo;Within this European solidarity, it is necessary for each individual country to first face its responsibility,&rdquo; Germany&rsquo;s interior minister, Hans-Peter Friedrich, said in a television interview.        

In France, President Nicolas Sarkozy is contending with the rise of the hard-right National Front, known for its anti-immigrant stance, while fears about immigration are also shaping German politics. Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s center-right coalition hinges on the Northern League.        

As Europe&rsquo;s divisions have widened, regional elections have taken on broader European significance, particularly in Germany. Responding to strong political pressures, Chancellor Angela Merkel recently reversed her party&rsquo;s longstanding support of nuclear power &mdash; and still lost in Baden-W&uuml;rttemberg, where her Christian Democrats had held sway since 1953. Earlier, she insisted on stringent &mdash; and, many economists said, self-defeating &mdash; terms in the bailouts of Greece and Ireland, to placate angry German voters who objected to paying for what they saw was the profligacy of others.        

There are also contradictions. &ldquo;In this renationalization of European countries, and the rise of xenophobia, governments are very careful toward new migration flows,&rdquo; said Catherine de Wenden, the director of research at the Center for International Studies and Research at the Institut d&rsquo;&Eacute;tudes Politiques, or Sciences Po, in Paris. &ldquo;At the same time, this is contradictory with liberal European models and the needs of the labor force in most European countries.&rdquo;        

Instead, Europe&rsquo;s policy has been to hope that immigrants will not come and to try to persuade North African nations to compel their citizens to stay home. Although the collapse of governments in Tunisia and Egypt and the unrest in Libya have undone a variety of bilateral treaties with European countries, including agreements on migration, that policy is still in place.        
