
CAIRO &mdash; Hosni Mubarak, the former autocratic president of Egypt forced out by the revolution two months ago, was abruptly hospitalized on Tuesday in the beach resort of Sharm el Sheik. The state-run daily newspaper Al Ahram said it happened after prosecutors had begun questioning him about charges of possible corruption and other crimes.        

The specific reason for his admission to the hospital was not clear. But the justice minister, Mohammed el-Guindi, said questioning of the former president resumed in the hospital, an indication that his health problems were not severe.        

Mr. Mubarak, 82, has been staying in Sharm el Sheik since he left office. His hospitalization came two days after he was told that he would be questioned in connection with possible criminal charges. The newspaper reported that the questioning started on Tuesday.        

Little is publicly known about the state of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s health, a taboo topic during his 30 years as the leader of Egypt. As recently as 2007, a prominent newspaper editor, Ibrahim Eissa, was sentenced to six months in jail for publishing articles about Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s health. Rumors have circulated that Mr. Mubarak has suffered from pancreatic and colon cancer.        

On Sunday, Egypt&rsquo;s public prosecutor ordered the former president and his two sons, Gamal and Alaa, to be questioned in connection with a range of charges related to corruption and the use of violence against protesters during the uprising that began Jan. 25 and unseated him on Feb. 11. More than 800 people were killed during the three-week uprising, according to Egypt&rsquo;s Health Ministry.        

Early Wednesday, just hours after Mr. Mubarak was hospitalized, prosecutors ordered that his sons be detained for 15 days for an investigation into allegations of corruption and abuse of authority, state television reported, according to The Associated Press.        

In Sharm el Sheik, a crowd pelted the police van carrying the brothers with water bottles, stones and flip-flops, The A.P. reported        

The moves follow growing pressure from Egyptians to prosecute Mr. Mubarak and his family. Last Friday, tens of thousands of people rallied in Tahrir Square in Cairo calling for trials of Mr. Mubarak and his associates, including some members of the military council that now rules the country.        

A core of protesters remained in Tahrir Square after that rally. They erected a barricade of barbed wire after clashes with security forces before dawn on Saturday left at least two people dead and dozens wounded.        

On Tuesday afternoon, the protesters were forcibly removed from Tahrir Square by men in civilian clothes armed with clubs, who fought with protesters and removed their barricades, local news reports said. Many protesters were detained by the military police as they fled the square.        

On Sunday, Mr. Mubarak denied the accusations against him and released a five-minute audio recording to a Saudi-owned satellite television network, Al Arabiya, defending his reputation. In the recording, he denied that he or his family had abused power or had any assets abroad.        

Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s hospitalization prompted suspicions that he &mdash; or the ruling military council, which is increasingly seen as bent on protecting him &mdash; may be staging &ldquo;an elaborate ruse to get him out of the country for treatment,&rdquo; said Hani Shakrallah, editor of the news Web site Ahram Online.        

&ldquo;It could be a way to avoid questioning,&rdquo; Mr. Shakrallah said. &ldquo;But avoid it for how long? The military are determined to try him.&rdquo; He added: &ldquo;The report is not that far-fetched. It is possible they brought him in for the questioning, and the man got so upset that he fell ill.&rdquo;        
Mona El-Naggar contributed reporting.
