
ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast &mdash; The sudden shift in the balance of power here was plain to see, of all places, on the tennis courts at the Golf Hotel.        

For four months, the hotel served as the headquarters &mdash; and effectively the prison &mdash; of Alassane Ouattara, the winner of last year&rsquo;s presidential election, who was blockaded inside by the nation&rsquo;s strongman, Laurent Gbagbo.        

Now the tables have turned. On Tuesday, about 40 prisoners taken in the final assault on Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s residence a day earlier sat stripped to the waist under the hot sun and the watchful eyes of Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s forces. The prisoners included several of Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s closest bodyguards.        

Inside the Golf Hotel, Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s generals pledged allegiance to Mr. Ouattara on Tuesday, a spokesman said. All the top officers were there, the spokesman said, except the three whose loyalty to Mr. Gbagbo was &ldquo;unconditional&rdquo;: the heads of the Republican Guard and the feared security services, and the naval forces chief.        

Pickup trucks loaded with Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s soldiers, bristling with guns and dressed in motley makeshift uniforms, set off from the hotel at regular intervals to cruise this city&rsquo;s still jumpy streets. There was little other traffic. Normally bustling districts like Deux Plateaux, near the diplomatic quarter, were quiet and empty. Occasional gunfire and heavy-weapons fire could be heard as Ouattara forces flushed out pockets of resistance in die-hard pro-Gbagbo neighborhoods.        

Outside the presidential residence in the Cocody neighborhood, there was abundant evidence of the ferocity of the French air assault of Sunday night and Monday morning. Remnants of heavy weaponry, which France and the United Nations had cited as justification for aiming so close to Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s residence and offices, were also on display. There were three blasted-out tanks and a shattered antiaircraft gun, its nozzles pointed horizontally at the road, right at the entrance to the presidential mansion.        

While French and United Nations officials acknowledge that their attacks weakened Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s defenses, helping Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s forces to storm in and grab Mr. Gbagbo after a protracted standoff, they have taken pains to say that their actions were motivated by a mandate to protect civilians.        

Seeking to avoid the accusation that they had used force to replace one African leader with another &mdash; a suggestion that could all too easily rekindle associations with France&rsquo;s long interventionist history in colonial and post-colonial Africa &mdash; French officials continued to deny any involvement in Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s arrest. But the suspicions have prompted some in the French opposition to demand clarification of France&rsquo;s role in Ivory Coast, a former colony.        

&ldquo;The French Army delivered Mr. Laurent Gbagbo to his adversary,&rdquo; Roland Dumas, a former French foreign minister who has backed Mr. Gbagbo, told French radio. &ldquo;It even brought him to his adversary&rsquo;s home, a bit like in the traditions of bygone times, of antiquity.&rdquo;        

After his arrest, Mr. Gbagbo was taken to the Golf Hotel, where he remained on Tuesday, according to United Nations officials.        

France&rsquo;s defense minister, G&eacute;rard Longuet, dismissed in a radio interview as &ldquo;totally absurd&rdquo; suggestions that France intervened in a &ldquo;colonial&rdquo; manner. France&rsquo;s military forces in Ivory Coast, which currently number 1,700, will soon be reduced to &ldquo;a few hundred,&rdquo; he said.        

Prime Minister Fran&ccedil;ois Fillon said that France would offer Ivory Coast 400 million euros in aid, about $580 million.        

The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, said the organization would continue to help in trying to restore order, and he urged Mr. Ouattara to prevent any retaliatory attacks against Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s supporters.        

Amnesty International said Tuesday that &ldquo;armed men, some wearing military uniforms, have been conducting house-to-house searches in neighborhoods where real or perceived supporters of Laurent Gbagbo are living,&rdquo; killing at least one.        
Adam Nossiter reported from Abidjan, Ivory Coast, and Scott Sayare from Paris. Dan Bilefsky contributed reporting from the United Nations.
