
KAMPALA, Uganda &mdash; More than 800 civilians have died since January in fragmenting violence in southern Sudan, the United Nations said Wednesday, less than three months before the vast, impoverished, battle-scarred region becomes its own nation.        

Lise Grande, the humanitarian coordinator for the United Nations in southern Sudan, said that the number did not take into account the many soldiers who had died in recent fighting. It also does not reflect the continuing standoff around the contested region of Abyei, a conflict-ridden dividing line between north and south Sudan.        

Southern Sudan held an independence referendum in early January that was more peaceful and orderly than many experts had predicted. But in the violence that has followed, 93,000 people have fled their homes, including more than 40,000 in the last month, Ms. Grande said.        

&ldquo;We have hot spots in Unity, hot spots in Jonglei, a number of problems in Lakes State; just a week ago there was an L.R.A. attack in Western Equatoria,&rdquo; Ms. Grande said, referring to the Lord&rsquo;s Resistance Army, a Ugandan rebel group that has occupied parts of southern Sudan in the past.        

The fighting has come at the hands of a patchwork of militias, renegade southern soldiers and other armed groups. Some of the most volatile regions include Jonglei State and Upper Nile, where clashes among the southern army, a renegade general and militias have killed hundreds, including many soldiers. At one point in early March, a rebel group occupied one of southern Sudan&rsquo;s largest towns.        

The Sudan People&rsquo;s Liberation Army, the southern army, acknowledges that many hundreds have died, but says that the United Nations figure of 800 civilians is too high. It also argues that the fighting has recently slowed.        

&ldquo;The months of March and April have been better,&rdquo; said a southern military spokesperson, Col. Philip Aguer. &ldquo;To me, the insurgencies are down.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;But the borders with the north,&rdquo; Colonel Aguer added, &ldquo;we cannot predict what the north may be planning.&rdquo;        

Even so, Ms. Grande said, &ldquo;in the past month we have had a doubling in the numbers of displaced.&rdquo; She added, &ldquo;When you see that kind of acceleration, we said, this is serious.&rdquo;        

On Tuesday, the United States said that economic sanctions would be lifted from southern Sudan upon its independence, which is expected to be declared on July 9. Still, it is unclear if revenues from oil that has been piped from the south through the north will be included.        

The United States was &ldquo;such a player by kind of moving independence along,&rdquo; said Jordan Sekulow, an adviser for the southern Sudanese government in the United States. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s very important to get behind southern Sudan.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We want to say, &lsquo;We&rsquo;re open for business,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Sekulow said.        

Southern Sudan has some of the world&rsquo;s worst roads and lowest literacy rates, and its government has struggled to keep all corners of the region and the multitude of ethnic groups within it pacified. It is also wrestling with the continuing tensions with the north over Abyei.        

Last week, the Satellite Sentinel Project, led by Google and the Enough Project, published satellite images depicting a significant northern army buildup around Abyei. The project says it also has images depicting the massing of southern-aligned forces.        

Two parts of north Sudan that are traditionally more aligned toward the south have been awaiting special talks on their own destiny, which could further test the stability of the area.        
