
MINSK, Belarus &mdash; President Aleksandr G. Lukashenko of Belarus announced Wednesday that the security services had already caught the perpetrators of a subway bombing that killed 12 people and wounded scores here on Monday, saying that three suspects had confessed to the crime.        

It was a startling turn of events, given that inquiries in such attacks are often long and grueling. But Mr. Lukashenko would provide few if any details about the investigation that led to the arrest of the suspects. Nor did he identify them or offer a clue about their motives, deepening the mystery surrounding both the attack and the aftermath.        

&ldquo;At 5:00 this morning, the crime was solved,&rdquo; Mr. Lukashenko said in televised remarks. &ldquo;The police and security services needed one day to conduct a brilliant operation and detain the perpetrators without any noise, shots or fuss.&rdquo;        

He said one suspect was a lathe operator and another was an electrician, without explaining why they would want to bomb a crowded subway platform at rush hour.        

The president joined a parade of officials who gave news conferences about the bombing throughout the day on Wednesday. Each offered brusque statements that seemed to conceal more than they revealed.        

Less than two days after the bombing, Mr. Lukashenko said, the security services had thoroughly investigated the crime, identified the main suspects, arrested them and secured their confessions. Moreover, he said, the suspects had also confessed to bombings carried out in 2005 and 2008, cases that have never been solved.        

Mr. Lukashenko, who has ruled this former Soviet republic since 1994 and harshly suppressed opposition to his government, also said that his political rivals as well as Western governments may have been involved. The bombing occurred during the evening rush hour on Monday in a subway station in the center of Minsk, the Belarus capital, close to presidential and other government offices. More than 150 people were injured, many seriously.        

&ldquo;I order an investigation of all statements by activists and politicians,&rdquo; Mr. Lukashenko said. &ldquo;Maybe these members of the fifth column can lay down their cards and show us who ordered this.&rdquo;        

Addressing the security services, he said, &ldquo;Question them all, regardless of democracy and the cries and groans of their foreign sympathizers.&rdquo;        

His remarks came as little surprise to opposition leaders, who only hours after the bombing predicted that the president would try to implicate them. Tensions between Mr. Lukashenko and a beleaguered band of opposition activists here have spiked since December, when tens of thousands of people gathered in Independence Square in Minsk to contest the results of an election that the president won handily.        

The remarks by Mr. Lukashenko and his associates did little to dispel widespread bewilderment here over the motive behind the attack. Opposition parties have generally relied on peaceful methods in their efforts to oust Mr. Lukashenko, and, unlike Russia, Belarus has no history of Islamic extremism.        

&ldquo;It is just incomprehensible that this could have happened to us,&rdquo; said Darya Karitskaya, a 19-year-old student, who had placed flowers at the site of the blast. &ldquo;We have no religious conflicts or other clashes. We are peaceful.&rdquo;        

Speaking at a later news conference, Vadim Zaitsev, the head of the security services, said he could not provide information about a possible motive.        

&ldquo;Only two days have passed, and I cannot answer every question,&rdquo; he said.        

Pressed for more details about the suspects, Mr. Zaitsev said, &ldquo;There are people who are unhealthy, not only mentally, but also in their ambitions.&rdquo;        

Andrei Shved, Belarus&rsquo;s deputy prosecutor general, said one suspect resembled a man caught on security cameras at the Oktyabrskaya station on Monday. &ldquo;The recording clearly shows the suspect arriving at the Kupalovskaya station, crossing into the Oktyabrskaya station, placing a bag on a bench and leaving, manipulating something in his pocket,&rdquo; Mr. Shved said. &ldquo;After that, the explosion occurred.&rdquo;        

Like Mr. Lukashenko, Mr. Shved did not identify the suspect or offer any further evidence of his involvement. The three people in custody in connection with the bombing know one another and come from the same city, he said.        

Asked about the suspects as he rushed from another news conference, Anatoly Kuleshov, the interior minister, said, &ldquo;They are Belarussian.&rdquo;        
