
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; A suicide bomber on foot detonated his explosives on Wednesday as tribal elders left a meeting in a remote mountain village in eastern Afghanistan, killing one of the most senior local figures and 11 other people, including 5 schoolboys.        

The meeting, which was being held to resolve local disputes in the village of Jaja in the Asmar district of Kunar Province, included some of the most powerful local leaders. One of the dead was Hajji Malik Zareen, a commander who was renowned for fighting the Russians when they occupied Afghanistan in the 1980s, said Gen. Khalilullah Zaiyee, the provincial police chief.        

The police were investigating the attack and said they did not know who was responsible. The Education Ministry in a statement said that among those killed were five boys under 15.        

A local official who knew Mr. Zareen, but said he was afraid to have his name used in light of the attack, described him &ldquo;as a strong supporter&rdquo; of President Hamid Karzai&rsquo;s government and as being known for tough stands against Pakistan.        

In a rare disavowal, a spokesman for the Taliban denied that anyone linked to the movement had played a role in the attack. In a number of recent suicide attacks, even ones involving civilian deaths, the Taliban have offered explanations about why they carried out the assault.        

&ldquo;After our investigation and assessments,&rdquo; Zabiullah Mujahid, the Taliban&rsquo;s spokesman for the north and east of the country, said he found that the Taliban were not involved.        

&ldquo;Since Hajji Zareen was an old mujahedeen commander in Kunar Province, he may have harassed lots of people and made lots of enemies for himself,&rdquo; Mr. Mujahid said. &ldquo;We think the martyrdom attack has probably originated from an old personal hostility.&rdquo;        

The biggest business in the area is timber smuggling because the mountains and valleys are filled with swaths of the wood known locally as char tarash, a highly valued lumber used for making furniture and building houses, but now illegal to cut down because of serious deforestation and erosion.        

While Taliban and even foreign fighters, particularly Pakistanis, are known to travel through the area, much of the activity is criminal and involves fighting between local clans over timber, gem smuggling and land.        

In addition to those killed, nine were wounded, among them three children, General Zaiyee said.        

A NATO soldier was killed in eastern Afghanistan on Wednesday, according to a statement from a spokesman for the alliance.        
An employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Jalalabad, Afghanistan.
