
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; Mike Campbell, a ferociously independent white Zimbabwean farmer who sued his country&rsquo;s autocratic ruler, Robert Mugabe, to stop the seizure of his land and improbably won, only to lose the farm when the government defied the court ruling, died on Wednesday. He was 78.        

The cause, the family said, was brain injuries sustained in a June 2008 beating administered by thugs from President Mugabe&rsquo;s party to punish Mr. Campbell for the case he had filed months earlier.        

Even in late 2008, six months after the beating, Mr. Campbell seemed frail and diminished. In an interview on his farm, Mount Carmel, a beautiful spread with lush mango groves and fertile fields, Mr. Campbell could remember nothing of the beating. His wife, Angela, said she &ldquo;didn&rsquo;t know he was alive until he groaned.&rdquo;        

His hearing was so damaged that he could not hear the ruling in his favor when a judge on a tribunal set up by the Southern African Development Community, a regional bloc, read it aloud, he said.        

&ldquo;I saw everyone in tears,&rdquo; he said in the interview, &ldquo;and I didn&rsquo;t know whether they were tears of joy or sorrow.&rdquo;        

In its ruling, on Nov. 28, 2008, the court found that the Zimbabwean government had discriminated against white farmers on the basis on race and had awarded many of the country&rsquo;s finest commercial farms to ruling party supporters. Mr. Campbell had bought his farm before Zimbabwe won independence from white minority rule in 1980, but had obtained from the Mugabe government a &ldquo;certificate of no interest&rdquo; in the property in 1999 and built a thriving business growing tobacco and corn.        

Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s government refused to abide by the court ruling. In April 2009, a gang went to Mount Carmel, invaded the Campbells&rsquo; home, beat the farm workers and drove Mr. Campbell and his wife off their land. They lived thereafter with friends and family in Harare, the capital.        

The farmhouse on Mount Carmel was burned down in September 2009, the same month that Zimbabwe formally withdrew from all legal proceedings before the regional tribunal that had ruled against it in the Campbell case.        

Mr. Campbell&rsquo;s life was the subject of a documentary, &ldquo;Mugabe and the White African,&rdquo; released in 2010.        

An M.R.I. done two months ago found &ldquo;there were still bits of the brain continuing the die-off and big areas of fluid on the brain,&rdquo; Mr. Campbell&rsquo;s son-in-law Ben Freeth said on Sunday.        

&ldquo;You have to be fairly defiant to take on a dictator in court,&rdquo; Mr. Freeth said of his father-in-law in an interview in 2008. &ldquo;To sign your name is to sign your death warrant.&rdquo;        

Besides his wife, Mr. Campbell is survived by a son, Bruce; two daughters, Cathy and Laura; and five grandchildren.        
