
WASHINGTON &mdash; C.I.A. drones fired two missiles at militants in Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal areas on Wednesday, two days after Pakistan&rsquo;s spy chief threatened to curtail the drone strikes and demanded more information about the Central Intelligence Agency&rsquo;s operations there.        

The strikes drew a sharp rebuke from a Pakistani government that is increasingly public in its criticism of the C.I.A.&rsquo;s covert role in its country.        

&ldquo;Pakistan strongly condemns the drone attack,&rdquo; according to a statement from the Foreign Ministry in Islamabad, which said it had lodged &ldquo;a strong protest&rdquo; with the United States ambassador there, Cameron P. Munter. &ldquo;We have repeatedly said that such attacks are counterproductive and only contribute to strengthen the hands of the terrorists.&rdquo;        

On Monday, the chief of Pakistan&rsquo;s main spy agency, Lt. Gen. Ahmed Shuja Pasha, met with the C.I.A. director, Leon E. Panetta, and Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to try to resolve tensions between the two counterterrorism allies, most recently over the arrest in Pakistan of Raymond A. Davis, a C.I.A. security officer who killed two Pakistani men in January during what he said was a robbery attempt.        

After the meeting, American and Pakistani officials said that Pakistan&rsquo;s request for advance notice of C.I.A. missile strikes, for fewer strikes over all, and for a fuller accounting of C.I.A. officers and contractors working in Pakistan &ldquo;is being talked about.&rdquo; The American official added: &ldquo;The bottom line is that joint cooperation is essential to the security of the two nations.&nbsp; The stakes are too high.&rdquo;        

But the timing of the strikes on Wednesday served only to infuriate Pakistani officials and raised the question of whether Pakistan would retaliate by shutting down American supply lines from Pakistan into Afghanistan, which it had done in previous disputes.        

The drone attack was widely interpreted by Pakistan&rsquo;s main spy agency, the Inter-Services Intelligence directorate, as a deliberate effort by Washington to embarrass the country. &ldquo;If the message was that business will continue as usual, it was a crude way of sending it,&rdquo; a senior Pakistani intelligence official said.        

A C.I.A. spokesman declined to comment. But an American official familiar with the operations defended the timing and targets, which came after a 27-day gap since the last strike on March 17, the day after Mr. Davis was released from Pakistani custody.        

&ldquo;These operations are consistent with the U.S.-Pakistan agreements that have been in place for some time,&rdquo; said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the political delicacy of the drone program. &ldquo;This was about protecting Americans in the region. This is not about sending a signal to Pakistan.&rdquo;        

The targets of the attack were militants commanded by Maulvi Nazir, a Taliban leader from South Waziristan who is closely allied to the Haqqani network, the main Afghan Taliban group supported by the Pakistani military. American and Pakistani intelligence officials say Mr. Nazir is known to harbor Arabs affiliated with Al Qaeda. The Haqqani network and fighters associated with it are also responsible for many of the attacks against American and Afghan troops in eastern Afghanistan.        

The drones struck a double-cabin pickup truck and a motorcycle as they returned from Afghanistan into Pakistan, a Pakistani military official said. Seven fighters were killed and six others were wounded in the attack just south of the village of Angor Adda on the border between the two countries.        

&ldquo;It may have been for a very good reason and a quality target, but the politics of it look a little insensitive,&rdquo; said Bruce Riedel, a former C.I.A. officer and the author of &ldquo;Deadly Embrace: Pakistan, America, and the Future of Global Jihad.&rdquo;        

In an additional irritant to relations between the United States and Pakistan, a federal court released statements on Tuesday by a Pakistani-American man named David Headley in which he says that he helped Lashkar-e-Taiba plot the 2008 terrorist attacks on Mumbai with the support of top ISI officials. Mr. Headley&rsquo;s role in the Mumbai attacks has not only been a source of tension between Pakistan and the United States, but has also ignited outrage in India, where critics accuse the United States of allying itself with a government that they say knowingly colludes with terrorists. Pakistan has long denied that the spy agency itself had anything to do with the attacks.        

Pakistan&rsquo;s military and civilian leaders have privately supported the drone strikes as a way to attack militants, particularly in North Waziristan, where the Pakistani Army has conducted few if any operations. In the past two years, however, the C.I.A. has developed its own network of covert Pakistani sources to help identify targets for drone strikes and no longer relies on the ISI for that type of assistance, American officials said.        

Pakistani officials have grown more alarmed at the frequency of the drone attacks &mdash; 117 last year, more than all previous years combined &mdash; and the fact that the targets are now largely low-level fighters and junior commanders, not top operatives. Wednesday&rsquo;s strikes bring this year&rsquo;s number of attacks to 20, according to the Long War Journal, a Web site that tracks the wars in Afghanistan and Pakistan.        

On popular Pakistani television talk shows in the past several weeks, commentators have railed against the American drone campaign in unusually strong language. Some have suggested that Pakistan should shoot at the drones to stop them, an extreme measure that more moderate voices have said could result in American retaliation. The leadership of the Pakistani military knew that the drones could not be stopped by force, said Talat Masood, a retired lieutenant general and military analyst in Islamabad. &ldquo;The army knows it can&rsquo;t stop completely the main counterterrorism tool of the United States,&rdquo; he said.        

Moreover, as unpalatable as the drones are, the Pakistani Army does not want to see a possible alternative: American soldiers fighting against the militants on Pakistani territory, General Masood said. General Masood said that the most that Pakistanis could expect from the Americans was more limited use of the drones.        

Some American experts on Pakistan, however, offered a counterexplanation to the Pakistani fury over the attacks. They say Pakistani protests may be part of a complicated political theater in which Pakistani officials angrily protest some affront to their sovereignty to whip up already fervent anti-Americanism in the country, and then use the tumult as leverage to extract concessions from the Americans.        

&ldquo;The Pakistanis are masterful at creating these imbroglios which become enormous domestic issues, which they then use to try to reset the relationship with the United States more on their terms,&rdquo; said Christine Fair, a political scientist at Georgetown University who has worked and traveled widely in Pakistan.        
Reporting was contributed by Ismail Khan in Peshawar, Pakistan; Pir Zubair Shah in New York; Jane Perlez in Islamabad, Pakistan; and Ginger Thompson in Washington.
