
RIO DE JANEIRO (Reuters) &mdash; Floods and landslides devastated several mountain towns near Rio de Janeiro on Wednesday, killing at least 257 people as torrents of water and mud swept through the region, burying many families as they slept.        

At least 130 people were killed in Teres&oacute;polis, about 60 miles north of Rio, town officials said, after hillsides and riverbanks buckled under the equivalent of a month&rsquo;s rainfall in only 24 hours, sending water and mud surging through communities.        

In two other towns in the region, at least 127 people were killed, local officials said. Beyond that, the rains sweeping southeastern Brazil also killed 13 people in S&atilde;o Paulo State on Tuesday and snarled transportation in the city of S&atilde;o Paulo, the country&rsquo;s financial capital, bringing the total death toll to at least 270.        

About 50 people were thought to be missing in Teres&oacute;polis alone, the city&rsquo;s mayor, Jorge Mario, told Globo television. &ldquo;Rescue teams are still arriving in the areas that have been worst affected,&rdquo; he said, adding that about 1,000 people had been left homeless. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the biggest catastrophe in the history of the town.&rdquo;        

Thousands of people in the picturesque area, known as the Serrana region, were isolated by the floodwaters and mostly without power and telephone service. The downpour caused at least one river to burst its banks, submerging cars and destroying houses in Teres&oacute;polis, television images showed.        

&ldquo;I saw six bodies on my street,&rdquo; Antonio Venancio, 53, whose house in Teres&oacute;polis was inundated with mud but remained standing, said by telephone. &ldquo;We just don&rsquo;t know what to do in the face of something so horrible.&rdquo;        

The governor of Rio State, S&eacute;rgio Cabral, said in a statement that he had asked the navy for aircraft to take rescue crews and equipment to the region.        

In Nova Friburgo, a town in the Serrana region,  three firefighters were missing after being buried by a mudslide while they tried to rescue people, fire officials said. One three-story house collapsed on Tuesday, killing three people, including two children. Buses and trucks were shown stranded on streets with floodwaters reaching to their windows.        
