
MOSCOW &mdash; As Russia heads into a season of deepening political uncertainty, Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin laid out his rationale on Wednesday for keeping the public, and the government, in the dark about who would be the country&rsquo;s next president.        

Mr. Putin said an announcement would usher in a lame-duck period that would presumably extend until next March&rsquo;s election. President Dmitri A. Medvedev, who has articulated a tentative reform agenda, may run for another term, or he may step aside to make way for Mr. Putin. Either would win easily in a political system nearly devoid of competition.        

&ldquo;If we give any wrong signals today, half of the administration and more than half of the government will stop working in the expectation of change,&rdquo; Mr. Putin said in televised remarks. He also said, a little crankily, &ldquo;All this fuss around elections does not promote normal organizational work.&rdquo;        

Answering journalists&rsquo; questions, Mr. Putin said neither he nor Mr. Medvedev had ruled out running next spring &mdash; an answer even more ambiguous than the one he had given in the past, that the two of them would make the decision together. Officials have said privately that the plan will be announced in September or October, but anxiety has been building in the corridors of power, as officials try to secure their status beyond the spring elections.        

The comments came a day after Mr. Medvedev told Chinese television that &ldquo;the decision will be taken very shortly.&rdquo;        

Mr. Medvedev said it would hinge on public opinion, as well as political and economic conditions. &ldquo;One has to weigh the possibilities, avoid acting mechanically and, instead, act with a clear understanding of the situation,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I expect such an understanding to form within a relatively short time.&rdquo;        

In passing the presidency to Mr. Medvedev, his longtime prot&eacute;g&eacute;, and taking the post of prime minister, Mr. Putin ushered in a new form of government, which balanced the president&rsquo;s constitutional powers against his own enormous political clout. The two men have perfected a kind of team play, in which Mr. Medvedev gives voice to the aspirations of urban elites, and Mr. Putin delivers red-meat politics that appeal to average Russians.        

But it is not clear how long that system will continue &mdash; or whether, if Mr. Medvedev serves a second term, he will accrue more power than he did in his first. In the meantime, political observers are seizing on any hint of conflict between the men, despite constant official reassurances that they are not competing with each other.        

Among those urging the leaders to cut short the uncertainty is Igor Y. Yurgens, the chairman of the liberal-leaning Institute of Contemporary Development in Moscow and an occasional adviser to Mr. Medvedev.        

&ldquo;It is time to dispense with the mantra &lsquo;We will get together at some point, consult with one another and decide in the interests of the Russian people,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Yurgens told Komsomolskaya Pravda, a daily newspaper. &ldquo;This worked well for the first year and passably for the second, but by the third, it had stopped working.&rdquo;        

He continued: &ldquo;The indecision about who will run for president makes the elite nervous. Those who have the money will simply go overseas &mdash; just in case.&rdquo;        
