
MINSK, Belarus &mdash; The authorities here on Thursday released a few more details about this week&rsquo;s deadly subway blast, including what they said were freeze frames from surveillance video of the attacker carrying the bomb that killed 12 people and wounded nearly 200.        

Officials continued, however, to withhold important facts in the case, like the identities of the suspects or their possible motives. The dearth of information has fueled doubts about the government&rsquo;s assertion that the security services were able to solve the crime so quickly.        

Andrei Shved, Belarus&rsquo;s deputy prosecutor general, said the police had arrested two more suspects, bringing the total to five, including the man believed to have carried out the attack. All are Belarussian citizens under the age of 30 with no prior criminal records, Mr. Shved said at a news conference here.        

A day earlier, President Aleksandr G. Lukashenko praised law enforcement agencies for the &ldquo;brilliant operation&rdquo; that led to arrests so soon after the attack on Monday. Mr. Lukashenko said all the men had confessed. One was an electrician and another was a lathe operator, he said.        

Mr. Shved said Thursday that investigators were able to make arrests quickly thanks in large part to this city&rsquo;s extensive network of surveillance cameras, which tracked the attacker as he entered the subway, dropped off the bomb and made his getaway.        

But the images Mr. Shved produced were grainy and did not show the moment that the man identified as the attacker set down a bag, which investigators said contained a bomb that exploded on or under a bench.        

In one frame, a man in dark clothing is shown on a staircase holding a large bag. In the next, the supposed bomber is mingling in a crowd on the station platform. Then he appears in another location, no longer with the bag.        

Asked about the bomber&rsquo;s motives, Mr. Shved said, &ldquo;In the interest of the investigation, I cannot say.&rdquo;        
