
LONDON &mdash; In the bleakest winter Britain has known in years, it has been, for millions, the source of unbridled good cheer. In the pubs, untold tankards of beer have been washed down in celebration. Keeping abreast of it has kept the prime minister up into the predawn hours, glued to the television, then taking his BlackBerry to bed to get regular updates through the night.        

At home, Britain&rsquo;s 60 million people have had to cope with some of the heaviest snowstorms in memory, with airports closed for want of snow-clearing equipment and heavy floods as the snow has turned to rain. With it all, there has been the anticipation of new rounds of job losses and strikes, of transportation shutdowns and shrinking public services, as Europe&rsquo;s harshest government spending cutbacks begin to bite.        

But in far-off Australia, something remarkable has been taking place: England has been beating the Australians in cricket, and not just beating them but walloping them &mdash; or skittling  them out, as cricket parlance has it &mdash; to the point that the English have turned to something deeply unnatural. They have actually begun to feel sorry for the Aussies, who never showed much sympathy in the long years when English cricket teams playing in Australia have been lambs to the slaughter.        

How improbable that has been was captured when England won the fourth of five, five-day &ldquo;test matches,&rdquo; in Melbourne after Christmas, taking a 2-1 lead (there was one draw) that put an Australian victory in the series out of reach.        

The prime minister, David Cameron, beaming, emerged from his country residence, Chequers, to congratulate the English players. Did he feel any sympathy for the Australians, whose captain, Ricky Ponting, had acknowledged that his team had been &ldquo;outbowled, outbatted and outfielded,&rdquo; the man from the BBC asked. &ldquo;Sympathy? Absolutely not!&rdquo; Mr. Cameron cried, before checking himself and saying well, yes, he could sympathize with the losers.        

The celebrations in Britain have worn off fast in recent days as Australia has turned its attention to the floods now bringing loss of life and heavy property damage to Queensland and the east coast city of Brisbane. But it will be years before people in England &mdash; cricket lovers especially, but many others, too, for whom English debility at cricket has been a bellwether of decades of post-imperial decline &mdash; forget how England, in the &ldquo;Ashes&rdquo; contest of 2010-11, achieved one of the most convincing triumphs  in the 129-year history of the series, winning three games to one.        

Records tumbled as quickly as Australia&rsquo;s batsmen, with England surpassing 500 runs in an innings twice and 600 on two other occasions &mdash; mammoth scores whose baseball equivalent might be scoring 20 or more runs in a game. One English batsman, Alistair Cook, 25, spent a total of 36 hours at the wicket in the five games, racking up a total of 776 runs that has only once been exceeded by an Englishman in Australia, in 1928-29.        

Beating Australia in Australia, something England had not done in 25 years, has had a resonance in the English consciousness that may be hard for those not steeped in Britain&rsquo;s popular culture to comprehend. Harder still, perhaps, for Americans, whose national experience in the years since World War II, for all its low moments, has been the mirror-image of Britain&rsquo;s. As Britain has declined in wealth and power relative to other nations, its lofty place in the world, undisputed at the high tide of British imperial power, has been supplanted by the United States.        

Losing, in some ways, became the default setting in the British national psyche. Britain won rugby&rsquo;s World Cup in Australia in 2003, and soccer&rsquo;s World Cup in London in 1966, but both were blips on an otherwise dismal screen. So much so, in fact, that in the decades after 1945, self-mockery became an export, finding a characteristic vehicle in the humor of Monty Python, with its puncturing of British pomposity, social protocols and pretensions.        
(Page 2 of 2)
A country whose industries led the world found a shrinking market for its steel and textiles and its cars, its currency devalued, its armed forces a shadow of their former selves. And England became increasingly accustomed to losing at cricket, especially against Australia.        

The turnaround this winter provided rich material for newspapers in both countries. In Britain, the sharpest jibe came with headlines declaring that &ldquo;Australians Are the New English,&rdquo; and vice versa &mdash; suggesting that the English team had become the tough, focused, ruthless winning machine that Australia had been for years, with the Australians imitating the irresolute, quick-to-fold, content-to-lose &ldquo;poms&rdquo; &mdash; Australian slang for the British, derived from World War I trenches in France where Australian troops took to joshing British soldiers who pined for their pommes de terre, or potatoes.        

Australian newspapers were equally unsparing, referring to their own team with terms like &ldquo;clueless,&rdquo; &ldquo;rabble,&rdquo; &ldquo;disgrace,&rdquo; &ldquo;shambles&rdquo; and &ldquo;our worst side ever.&rdquo; Australia&rsquo;s pride of nationhood has long found a focal point in the sense of the former colony having evolved its own distinctively rugged culture &mdash; and of besting the old colonial masters at a game, cricket, that English traditionalists have cast as an expression, in its measured rhythms and its emphasis on gentlemanly &ldquo;fair play,&rdquo; of much that is best about the Mother Country.        

If the Australians could take any comfort, it might have come from the fact that the English players were not, well, through-and-through English. The foundations of the team&rsquo;s success lay, to a great extent, in those other former colonial outposts, South Africa and Zimbabwe. The English coach, Andy Flower, is the former Zimbabwe captain, best known for having joined with a black teammate, Henry Olonga, in taking to the field in an international match in Harare, the Zimbabwean capital, in 2003 wearing black armbands to protest &ldquo;the death of democracy in our beloved Zimbabwe&rdquo; under President Robert Mugabe. Neither man played for the country again.        

Mr. Flower had four players among the 11 who form the regular on-field team who were born and learned their cricket in South Africa, including the captain, Andrew Strauss. But in their euphoria, few in England cared.        

For his part, Mr. Strauss credited the success less to anything natively English than to the embrace of decidedly un-English attitudes. After losing the last series in Australia 5-0, in 2007, he said, he had resolved to adopt a novel approach, learned from the Australians.        

What they had taught him, he said, was &ldquo;that the best way to compete was to strangle the opposition.&rdquo;        
