
SHANGHAI &mdash; Ai Weiwei, the prominent Chinese artist and social critic who was detained by the police this month, is being investigated for tax evasion, destroying evidence and distributing pornography, according to a Hong Kong-based newspaper with close ties to Beijing.        

The newspaper, Wen Wei Po, was the latest Chinese publication to speculate about the fate of Mr. Ai, an internationally recognized artist and outspoken government critic. Its claims were immediately disputed by his wife.        

The newspaper cited anonymous sources and did not offer details of the allegations. The paper&rsquo;s sources said that Mr. Ai had begun to confess, a claim that was impossible to verify.        

Mr. Ai&rsquo;s wife, Lu Qing, rejected the allegations, maintaining that her husband had been arrested because of his political views.        

In an interview with The Associated Press, she said his financial affairs were controlled by a company registered to her, so any tax issues would be her responsibility, not his. The allegations of pornography, she said, were probably related to a seminude self-portrait Mr. Ai had posted on a Web site, apparently to mock government censors.        

Mr. Ai has not been charged. China&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry has said only that he is being investigated for &ldquo;economic crimes.&rdquo;        

His family and friends believe he was arrested as part of a crackdown on dissidents and social activists after calls for pro-democracy demonstrations in China, inspired by those in the Middle East and North Africa.        

For years, Mr. Ai has been a frequent and daring critic of the Chinese government and its human rights record. He is widely recognized for his mix of provocative art and social activism, and his work has been exhibited in some of the world&rsquo;s leading museums and galleries.        

The Obama administration and European officials have pressed Beijing to release Mr. Ai. International museums and arts organizations are also lobbying the Chinese authorities on his behalf.        
