
JERUSALEM &mdash; Three members of the United Nations panel that investigated Israel&rsquo;s Gaza war two years ago rejected on Thursday an essay written by the fourth, the former chairman Richard Goldstone, in which he retracted the panel&rsquo;s key conclusions, especially that Israel had deliberately made civilians targets.        

The three &mdash; Hina Jilani of Pakistan, Desmond Travers of Ireland and Christine Chinkin of Britain &mdash; issued a statement to The Guardian in London saying that any attempt to backtrack on their report amounted to yielding to outside pressure, and that doing so would deprive the victims of justice.        

Although their statement did not refer directly to Mr. Goldstone&rsquo;s commentary in The Washington Post or to the issue of whether armed force was used intentionally against civilians, it was nonetheless a firm rebuke of Mr. Goldstone, and of efforts to reconsider and even nullify the report the panel submitted to the United Nations Human Rights Council in September 2009. The report is headed for the Security Council and General Assembly this year.        

&ldquo;In recent days some articles and comments appearing in the press with respect to the report of the United Nations (U.N.) fact-finding mission on the Gaza conflict of 2008-2009 have misrepresented facts in an attempt to delegitimize the findings of this report and to cast doubts on its credibility,&rdquo; their joint statement began.        

&ldquo;Members of the mission, signatories to this statement, find it necessary to dispel any impression that subsequent developments have rendered any part of the mission&rsquo;s report unsubstantiated, erroneous or inaccurate,&rdquo; it said.        

Mr. Goldstone said by e-mail that he declined to respond to his colleagues&rsquo; statement.        

His Washington Post essay included this broad statement: &ldquo;If I had known then what I know now, the Goldstone Report would have been a different document.&rdquo;        

In particular, he said that what his panel believed to be an intentional attack on a Palestinian family, gathered by Israeli troops into one building that was then bombed, now appeared to have been caused instead by the fog of war &mdash; a misread drone report that, he had noted elsewhere, showed men carrying firewood that may have looked like rockets.        

Mr. Goldstone, who is Jewish and South African, said that Israeli military investigations, while slow and incomplete, were showing him that civilians were probably not targets. Meanwhile, he complained that Hamas had conducted no internal investigation of its firing of rockets at Israeli civilians, that it continued to launch such rockets and that the council should make a point of condemning those attacks.        

He added, &ldquo;I had hoped that our inquiry into all aspects of the Gaza conflict would begin a new era of evenhandedness at the U.N. Human Rights Council, whose history of bias against Israel cannot be doubted.&rdquo;        

The biggest complaints that Israel and its backers had about the panel&rsquo;s original report was that it accused Israel of aiming to kill civilians and that it was too soft on Hamas.        

The statement by Mr. Goldstone&rsquo;s three colleagues shows that they share none of his second thoughts about the report and that they are eager to prevent his essay from being used to cast aside the report entirely, as the Israeli government and some members of Congress are hoping it will.        

Mr. Goldstone referred in his essay to a follow-up report by a panel led by a retired New York State judge, Mary McGowan Davis. His three colleagues refer to the same report but reach a very different conclusion. Mr. Goldstone notes that, according to the follow-up, Israel has begun 400 inquires into wrongdoing during the military campaign in Gaza, which it called Operation Cast Lead, and that much has been learned. His former colleagues say, by contrast, that of the 400 inquiries, 3 have yielded submissions for prosecution and 2 have led to someone being punished, in both cases with minor penalties.        

&ldquo;Therefore, the mechanisms that are being used by the Israeli authorities to investigate the incidents are proving inadequate to genuinely ascertain the facts and any ensuing legal responsibility,&rdquo; they write.        

&ldquo;In addition, with regard to the issue of the policies guiding Operation Cast Lead, the committee states that there is &lsquo;no indication that Israel has opened investigations into the actions of those who designed, planned, ordered and oversaw Operation Cast Lead.&rsquo; In other words, one of the most serious allegations about the conduct of Israel&rsquo;s military operations remains completely unaddressed.&rdquo;        

The three conclude by saying that pressure had been applied to all members of the panel but that, unlike Mr. Goldstone, they had not yielded to it. They say: &ldquo;Had we given in to pressures from any quarter to sanitize our conclusions, we would be doing a serious injustice to the hundreds of innocent civilians killed during the Gaza conflict, the thousands injured, and the hundreds of thousands whose lives continue to be deeply affected by the conflict and the blockade.        

&ldquo;The report has triggered a process that is still under way and should continue until justice is done and respect for international human rights and humanitarian law by everyone is ensured.&rdquo;        
