
TOKYO &mdash; The leader of Japan&rsquo;s largest opposition party called Thursday for Prime Minister Naoto Kan to resign, abruptly ending an uneasy political truce forged after the devastating earthquake and tsunami.        

The political bickering that has long marred Japanese politics had seemed to give way since March 11 to mutual gestures of cooperation. Just hours after the 9.0 magnitude earthquake, Mr. Kan huddled with opposition leaders, who quickly declared their full support for government relief efforts.        

But Mr. Kan has come under increasing fire for the government&rsquo;s handling of the crisis, especially its inability to help bring the crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant under control. Among other criticisms, Mr. Kan has been accused of surrounding himself with newly appointed aides and advisers, sidelining bureaucrats and causing confusion in a government already overwhelmed in the aftermath of the multiple disasters.        

What critics call the prime minister&rsquo;s increasingly top-down leadership style has also backfired. The morning after the quake, Mr. Kan flew by helicopter to the Fukushima complex, insisting that he needed to directly assess the developing accident. The news media accused him of interfering with recovery efforts there, with some even suggesting that his arrival delayed crucial venting work at the plant.        

&ldquo;I think the time has come for the prime minister to consider his resignation,&rdquo; Sadakazu Tanigaki, president of the opposition Liberal Democratic Party, said at a news conference on Thursday. &ldquo;To keep going under the current leadership would be very unfortunate for the Japanese people.&rdquo;        

The renewed feuding highlights the shaky foundations of a government, just 20 months into power, that has struggled in its response to Japan&rsquo;s worst disaster in many decades. Mr. Kan&rsquo;s Democratic Party came to power in August 2009 with much fanfare, sweeping aside a Liberal Democratic party that had governed Japan nearly uninterrupted for more than a half-century. But the Democrats&rsquo; relative inexperience has become a liability, especially since the earthquake and tsunami.        

The political infighting also raises fears that Japan will be left rudderless even as it embarks on the huge task of reconstruction. And it could prolong political paralysis in a country that has already produced five prime ministers in five years, weak leaders from both of the major parties.        

In another development, the police moved their search for bodies closer to the Fukushima Daiichi reactors on Thursday, while workers continued to remove radioactive water from the plant. Until now, rescuers had largely stayed out of a 12-mile evacuation zone around the power station.        

Police officials said that radiation levels had dropped enough to allow workers to safely comb the area closer to the plant for victims of the earthquake and tsunami.        

Mr. Kan was already in political trouble before the disaster, weighed down by a gridlocked Parliament that had blocked important budget bills and by accusations that he had accepted political donations from a foreigner in violation of local laws. Mr. Kan has said he did not know that the donor was a foreigner.        

Opposition lawmakers were in fact grilling Mr. Kan over the donation allegations when the earthquake struck, forcing a suspension of the Parliament session. Eager to avoid any semblance of political maneuvering at a time of crisis, opposition parties initially rallied around the leader.        

Mr. Kan&rsquo;s popularity was at first buoyed somewhat in the aftermath, but it now appears to be sliding. He has increasingly avoided the public over the past month, appearing at only a handful of news conferences.        

In local elections last week, the Democrats lost two races for governor to candidates backed by the Liberal Democratic Party, while the governor of Tokyo, Shintaro Ishihara, an independent allied with the Liberal Democrats, was re-elected to a fourth term. In prefectural assembly elections, the Democrats won 346 seats, compared with the Liberal Democrats&rsquo; 1,119.        

&ldquo;Can a government that has lost public support really handle a national crisis?&rdquo; Nobuteru Ishihara, the Liberal Democrats&rsquo; No. 2 official and the Tokyo governor&rsquo;s son, said on NHK, the public broadcaster, after the elections.        

On Tuesday, Mr. Kan defended his response to the crisis. &ldquo;In this disaster, my priority lies in saving lives,&rdquo; he said at a news conference. &ldquo;I believe I have built a strong team and that we have deployed everything in our power.&rdquo;        
