
Oleg Grabar, a historian of Islamic art and architecture whose imposingly broad range and analytical subtlety helped transform the Western study of Islamic culture, died Saturday at his home in Princeton, N.J. He was 81.        

The cause was heart failure, his wife, Terry, said.        

Professor Grabar, the son of the eminent Byzantinist Andre Grabar, specialized in the architecture of the seventh-  and eighth-century Umayyad dynasty early in his career. In the 1960s he led the excavations at Qasr al-Hayr East in Syria, the site of an early Islamic palace in an area long thought to be a historical blank.        

His interests broadened to embrace the Islamic world beyond the Middle East and a wide variety of subjects, including the architecture of Jerusalem under Islamic rule, Arabic and Persian illustrated manuscripts, Islamic ornament and contemporary Islamic architecture.        

Many of his books are regarded as classics, notably &ldquo;The Formation of Islamic Art&rdquo; (1973) and &ldquo;Islamic Art and Architecture, 650 to 1250&rdquo; (1987), written with Richard Ettinghausen for the Pelican History of Art.        

Through Professor Grabar&rsquo;s work as a teacher, he prepared generations of art historians and museum directors who followed his lead to create new disciplines within the field of Islamic studies, expanding its scope far beyond the rather narrow limits he encountered when he entered the field.        

The excavations at Qasr al-Hayr from 1964 to 1971, a project sponsored by the University of Michigan and Harvard, unearthed a palace complex in the desert northeast of Palmyra whose outer walls enclosed an area nearly three miles square with a fortified residence, courtyards and a mosque.        

With others, Professor Grabar described and interpreted the site in &ldquo;City in the Desert: Qasr al-Hayr East&rdquo; (1978). He later directed excavations in Israel and Jordan.        

In his many books and articles, he posed sweeping questions about the nature of Islamic art, seeking to discover the impulses that generated its specific forms and dynamics of growth, and to explore the interconnections between faith and sociohistorical circumstances in its development.        

At the same time he wrote focused, detailed studies on the meaning of forms peculiar to Islamic art and architecture, and, in later studies, examined the relationship between traditional and modern Islamic art.        

In 1982 he founded Muqarnas, a periodical for the study of Islamic art and architecture, which he edited for the next decade.        

Oleg Grabar was born on Nov. 3, 1929, in Strasbourg, France, where his father taught art history at the University of Strasbourg. He attended lyc&eacute;es in Paris before studying ancient history at the University of Paris. In 1948, when his father received an appointment to Dumbarton Oaks, the center for Byzantine studies in Washington, he moved to the United States.        

After earning a bachelor&rsquo;s degree in medieval history from Harvard and diplomas in medieval and modern history from the University of Paris in 1950, he earned a master&rsquo;s (1953) and a doctorate (1955) in Oriental languages and literatures from Princeton, where he wrote a dissertation on the ceremonial art of the Umayyad court.        

Professor Grabar taught at the University of Michigan and Harvard, where he was named the first Aga Khan professor of Islamic art and architecture in 1980, before accepting a position at the school of historical studies at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton in 1990.        

Professor Grabar&rsquo;s many books included &ldquo;The Alhambra&rdquo; (1978), &ldquo;The Illustrations of the Maqamat&rdquo; (1984), &ldquo;The Great Mosque of Isfahan&rdquo; (1990), &ldquo;The Mediation of Ornament&rdquo; (1992) and &ldquo;The Shape of the Holy: Early Islamic Jerusalem&rdquo; (1996). More than 80 of his essays were collected in the four-volume &ldquo;Constructing the Study of Islamic Art,&rdquo; published in 2005 and 2006.        

In addition to his wife, he is survived by a son, Nicolas, of Manhattan; a brother, Nicolas, of Paris; and three grandchildren.        
