
OUAGADOUGOU, Burkina Faso (Reuters) &mdash; Burkina Faso&rsquo;s president dismissed his cabinet and his army chief on Friday, national radio reported, after disgruntled soldiers went on a rampage in the capital and fired their weapons, apparently in a mutiny.        

President Blaise Compaore also fired the head of his security regiment, national radio said, after the most serious in a string of protests over the past month by disgruntled soldiers, including members of the presidential guard.        

Mr. Compaore dissolved his government in a statement read over national radio. &ldquo;The secretary generals of ministerial departments will ensure the execution of current business,&rdquo; the statement said.        

Members of the presidential security regiment stationed near Mr. Compaore&rsquo;s palace had fired into the air in protest late on Thursday, angry that promised benefits had not been paid, said a military official who asked not to be identified.        

Soldiers from three other barracks joined the protest, and the houses of some military chiefs responsible for the president&rsquo;s security were attacked, the official said.        

Witnesses heard automatic weapons firing from around 9 p.m. Thursday. The shooting continued on Friday in parts of the capital, Ouagadougou, with soldiers looting shops and commandeering cars.        

Calm returned to the city&rsquo;s streets in the early afternoon Friday.        

Pierre Tapsoba, a resident of the Gounghin neighborhood in the west of Ouagadougou, said he was heading toward the Lamizana military camp when he heard gunfire.        

&ldquo;I saw people rushing back towards me, so I turned around and went back home,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I haven&rsquo;t been out since. It&rsquo;s bad.&rdquo;        

A government statement said that soldiers had been demonstrating since Thursday to demand housing and food subsidies.        

&ldquo;The government reassures the population that measures are being taken at this moment to resolve this situation, and expresses its regret and solidarity for all the people who have suffered inconveniences in this event,&rdquo; the statement said.        

A military official later said that mutineers in the presidential guard had received housing and food allowances. He said the soldiers had stolen 40 cars.        

Burkina Faso has been under the tight rule of Mr. Compaore since he took power in a 1987 coup and has so far avoided the conflicts and upheavals seen in many of its neighbors.        

Mr. Compaore won a new five-year term in a November election in which he took 80 percent of votes.        

In March, he agreed to discuss grievances within the military after violent protests by soldiers over the arrest of a colleague.        

&ldquo;The mutiny is a major concern as soldiers of the presidential guard are better paid than the others,&rdquo; said Lydie Boka, an analyst at Strategico, a private risk analysis company. &ldquo;Over the recent weeks, students and the general population as well as the opposition have taken to the streets in Burkina to protest against the regime.&rdquo;        

The West African country ranks 161st out of 169 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index, a composite measure of life quality.        
