
MATAMOROS, Mexico &mdash; The last time anybody heard from Josu&eacute; Rom&aacute;n Garc&iacute;a was last August, after he and his older brother stopped for dinner in an isolated town about 90 miles south of the Texas border. His final known words went out via text message, from inside the trunk of a car.        

&ldquo;They just kidnapped us in San Fernando,&rdquo; Mr. Rom&aacute;n, a 21-year-old student, wrote to a friend. He warned against calling, and added, &ldquo;If anything happens, just tell my parents, &lsquo;thanks, I love them.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

On Wednesday, his father, Arturo Rom&aacute;n Medina, answering calls on a cellphone that stores that brief note, arrived at the morgue in this border city, hoping and fearing that he would find his sons. For two weeks now, the authorities have been bringing in bodies from mass graves around San Fernando, 145 corpses at last count, and with each new grave discovered, another crowd appears, seeking news of missing loved ones, clutching photographs, holding out their arms to give blood for a DNA sample.        

They are looking for closure, but as their gathering has grown into the hundreds, it has hardened a perception that government authorities have fought desperately to dispel: parts of northern Mexico, including most of this state, Tamaulipas, have been lost to criminal gangs, and for quite some time.        

Even after government promises of more security following the discovery of a mass grave holding the remains of 72 Central and South American migrants last summer, also in San Fernando, Tamaulipas remains a state that experts describe as ungoverned &mdash; or simply failed.        

Open war between the Gulf Cartel and its former enforcers, the Zetas, means that the roads here are still filled with gang lookouts on motorcycles, who report back to cartel leaders, residents say.        

Gunmen believed to be tied to the Zetas assassinated the lead candidate for governor last year and later forced a mass exodus from a small town near the Texas border. Extortion payments have become more regular than taxes, security analysts say, while many of the authorities are either terrorized or bought off: 16 municipal police officers have been arrested so far in connection with kidnappings and killings.        

&ldquo;It is one of the places where clearly state, federal and local authorities are not in control,&rdquo; said Eric Olson, a security expert at the Woodrow Wilson International Center. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s tragic, it&rsquo;s unfortunate, but it&rsquo;s a reality.&rdquo;        

For the Mexican government, few things are as sensitive as an American pointing out lost territory. When Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton likened Mexico&rsquo;s drug trafficking last year to an insurgency, &ldquo;where the narco-traffickers control certain parts of the country,&rdquo; Mexican lawmakers responded with fierce condemnation.        

The tensions only worsened after Carlos Pascual, the American ambassador, questioned Mexico&rsquo;s crime-fighting abilities in diplomatic cables, quoting a former high-ranking Mexican official who &ldquo;expressed a real concern with &lsquo;losing&rsquo; certain regions&rdquo; of the country to cartels. Mexico&rsquo;s president, Felipe Calder&oacute;n, was so infuriated by that cable and others that he insisted on pushing out Mr. Pascual, who resigned last month.        

And yet, despite promises of help, the families and residents here say they have seen little progress in Tamaulipas. Instead, they have witnessed squabbling between top officials &mdash; Tamaulipas is governed by political rivals to the president&rsquo;s party &mdash; and lackluster enforcement.        

Mr. Rom&aacute;n, the father of two missing sons, complained that government checkpoints were always in the same place and easy for criminals to avoid. Alfonso Ortega, whose brother Mart&iacute;n disappeared a year ago on his way to Matamoros, described a galling lack of urgency.        

&ldquo;The government is not moving,&rdquo; Mr. Ortega said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not doing anything.&rdquo;        

The authorities believe the Zetas are behind the murders in San Fernando, though they have only theories about the motives: kidnappings for ransom, perhaps, or attempts at forced recruitment.        

Regardless, experts say the trouble in Tamaulipas stems partly from the gang&rsquo;s history. Its leaders started out as enforcers, so when they split with their former patrons in the Gulf Cartel a few years ago, the Zetas could not rely on historic ties with drug suppliers or traffickers. To thrive and expand, they branched out to other crimes, including extortion, migrant smuggling and the siphoning of oil and gas from pipelines in the area.        

Elisabeth Malkin reported from Matamoros, and Damien Cave reported from Mexico City.
