
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; In a sophisticated attack, at least one suicide bomber entered the tightly secured police headquarters in Kandahar City on Friday afternoon and detonated his explosives, killing a police chief and two police officers, according to local government officials.        

The police chief, Gen. Khan Mohammed Mujahid, was a native of the nearby Arghandab district of Kandahar and a career officer respected for his role as a fighter against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan in the 1980s. He had survived two previous assassination attempts.        

The suicide bomber was wearing a police uniform, easing his ability to enter the police headquarters, said Zalmai Ayoubi, the spokesman for the provincial governor. The bomber gained entrance to the building and then waited for the police chief to emerge from his office. When he did, the attacker detonated his bomb.        

At least two previous Kandahar provincial police chiefs have been assassinated: one in 2009 &mdash; also in a government office &mdash; and another in 2005. The deputy governor was assassinated in February, and two deputy mayors and the government&rsquo;s director of information and culture were killed in 2010 along with many tribal elders.        

News of the killing spread through the province where General Mujahid has many tribesmen and supporters, some of whom expressed defiance and grief.        

&ldquo;He was killed because he was useful for Kandahar,&rdquo; said Hajji Agha Lalai, a tribal elder who belongs to the same tribe and who has worked with the government to persuade local Taliban fighters to lay down their arms. &ldquo;He has great influence in the society, he knows every person in Kandahar, so he stopped or neutralized terrorist activities in Kandahar,&rdquo; Mr. Lalai said.        

&ldquo;His death will certainly affect Kandahar&rsquo;s security, but Kandahari people are ready for this kind of sacrifice,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;His loss is a great loss for all Kandahari people, he was working day and night to improve the security situation.&rdquo;        

Another admirer was Noori ul Haq Ulloumi, a Kandahar native and onetime general from the days when the Soviets wielded power in Afghanistan. &ldquo;By killing Mujahid, the insurgents sent two messages &mdash; the first was to show their power and ability, and the second was to show the big weakness of the government, which cannot even protect its own people,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Ulloumi said that with corruption rife in Kandahar, it was difficult for the government to guarantee people&rsquo;s safety. Attacks in which the bombers gain entrance into heavily guarded areas often involve bribes as well as intensive preparation. Guards have to be bribed to look the other way or to be diverted from their posts at the moment the assassin enters. Attacks like the one on General Mujahid also involve substantial reconnaissance, because the planners needed to know the police chief&rsquo;s habits and whether he would be in his office at the time of the attack.        

The Kandahar security chief, Shir Shah Yusufzai, said an investigation was under way.        

Also on Friday, a NATO soldier was killed in eastern Afghanistan, according to a statement from a NATO spokesman.        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting.
