
SANTIAGO, Chile (Agence France-Presse) &mdash; Decades after President Salvador Allende died in a 1973 coup, Chile is preparing to exhume his body to determine once and for all whether he took his own life or was murdered by Gen. Augusto Pinochet&rsquo;s forces.        

Judge Mario Carroza on Friday ordered the disinterment after receiving a request from Mr. Allende&rsquo;s relatives, and the action should take place in the second half of May, according to a spokesman for the judiciary.        

Mr. Allende&rsquo;s death during the bloody military coup that brought General Pinochet to power in September 1973 had been ruled a suicide, although that has long been questioned by some politicians and human rights groups. Mr. Allende&rsquo;s family has been leaning toward the theory that he killed himself.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not that the family has changed their minds, or that we have doubts that we didn&rsquo;t have before, but we support a criminal investigation that has never happened,&rdquo; Isabel Allende, the late president&rsquo;s daughter and a Socialist member of Parliament, told CNN-Chile. &ldquo;We think it is extremely important for the country and the world that we legally establish the causes and circumstances of his death, which occurred under extreme violence.&rdquo;        

The exhumation is a logical extension of an investigation, announced by a Chilean prosecutor in January, into the death of Mr. Allende as well as 725 other human rights complaints against General Pinochet&rsquo;s military dictatorship from 1973 to 1990.        

But the family nevertheless made a symbolic formal request for the exhumation, Ms. Allende said this week.        

Once Mr. Allende&rsquo;s remains are removed from his marble tomb in Santiago, a new autopsy will be performed by experts at the Legal Medical Service.        

Mr. Allende was a Marxist who was narrowly elected in 1970. At the time, conservatives in Chile and the United States were concerned about his attempts to pave a Chilean path toward socialism, including the nationalization of American mining interests, and feared that he would usher in a pro-Soviet Communist government.        

The circumstances surrounding Mr. Allende&rsquo;s death, at 65, have been a point of contention for decades. An autopsy was performed at the Santiago Military Hospital hours after his death on Sept. 11, 1973, at La Moneda, the presidential palace, which was under aerial bombardment and a ground assault at the time.        

A doctor testified that Mr. Allende had committed suicide by shooting himself in the chin, apparently with an AK-47 assault rifle presented by Fidel Castro, then the Cuban president.        

The death was never the subject of a criminal investigation.        

A respected medical examiner, Luis Ravanal, fed doubts about Mr. Allende&rsquo;s death in a 2008 report in which he asserted, on the basis of the 1973 autopsy, that Mr. Allende&rsquo;s injuries were not consistent with a self-inflicted gunshot.        

Ms. Allende said the family was never able to see her father&rsquo;s body. It was transported by helicopter to Vi&ntilde;a del Mar, 75 miles from Santiago on the Chilean coast, where he was first laid to rest in the presence of his wife, Hortensia Bussi, and his three daughters.        

&ldquo;They did not let my mother open the coffin,&rdquo; Ms. Allende said.        
