
SANA, Yemen &mdash; More than 100,000 demonstrators returned to the streets of the Yemeni capital, Sana, on Friday, some chanting for President Ali Abdullah Saleh and, about two miles away, many against.        

In what has become a weekly ritual, Mr. Saleh delivered a speech in front of tens of thousands of supporters following midday prayers. Many carried banners with pro-Saleh slogans or slurs against the political opposition and Al Jazeera, the satellite news channel. Others climbed to the top of flagpoles and waved Saleh posters.        

Clashes were reported in the central city of Taiz between plainclothes government supporters and protesters. More than a dozen protesters were injured by thrown rocks and daggers, according to a local doctor.        

&ldquo;I swear, we knew that they were going to attack us today,&rdquo; said Mahmud al-Shaobi, 33, an antigovernment activist at the Taiz demonstration, who said that men dressed in civilian clothes attacked the protesters with rocks and the traditional Yemeni dagger, called the jambiya. &ldquo;But we, the sons of Taiz, came to protest anyway. And we will keep doing it until Ali Abdullah Saleh leaves.&rdquo;        

By contrast, the opposing demonstrations in the capital took on a more relaxed &mdash; at times, even jovial &mdash; feel, a month after government-linked snipers opened fire on antigovernment protesters here, killing 52 people. The military was notably less present on the streets on Friday than it was in previous weeks.        

Even Mr. Saleh appeared less defiant, focusing on how, as he put it, the masses &ldquo;come to these squares to say yes to the constitutional legitimacy, yes to freedom and democracy, yes to Ali Abdullah Saleh, president of this nation.&rdquo;        

Mr. Saleh tried a religious jab at his opposition, condemning the antigovernment protest at Sana University for allowing men and women to mix. &ldquo;I call on them to prevent the mixing on University Avenue, which is not approved by Islam,&rdquo; he said. But that line of attack appeared unlikely to gain much traction among average Yemenis, who do not view the president as particularly devout.        

Antigovernment protesters gathered at their usual place in front of the university. As on previous Fridays, the sit-in swelled to tens of thousands, as large portions of Sana&rsquo;s population participated in the noon prayers.        

By midafternoon, a thunderstorm soaked the protest area, a near daily event as Yemen enters its rainy season. Protesters have promised to ride out the poor weather, and many of their tents are fortified with wooden planks and risers to protect against rain and winds, making the sit-in feel like a small town within the capital.        

&ldquo;If I go home, I get bored and I want to come back,&rdquo; said Bassem Moghrum, 24, a protester who has been at the sit-in for two months.        

With protests showing no signs of abating and political stagnation taking hold, international support for Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s rule has diminished in recent weeks. According to high-ranking Yemeni officials, the United States and the European Union, in conjunction with the regional Gulf Cooperation Council, are working on a plan that would ensure his departure in the months to come and include an immediate transfer of presidential powers to his deputy.        
