
NEW DELHI &mdash; India&rsquo;s Supreme Court granted bail on Friday to a prominent doctor who is appealing a sentence of life imprisonment after being convicted of sedition for helping Maoist rebels in the central tribal areas of the country.        

The arrest of the doctor, Binayak Sen, drew international condemnation, and 22 Nobel laureates wrote to Indian leaders asking that he be released from jail as he awaited trial.        

Dr. Sen, who had worked for years to provide medical treatment and other aid to tribal people in Maoist areas, was arrested in May 2007 in Raipur in the central state of Chhattisgarh. Government officials contended that he had stepped over the line from helping civilians caught up in violence to helping Maoist rebels.        

The rebels are considered by the Indian government to be the country&rsquo;s biggest internal security threat. Operating in hilly and remote areas of central and eastern India, the fighters have killed 843 security personnel and 1,869 civilians since 2008.        

Dr. Sen, 61, was convicted of sedition in December. He challenged his conviction and applied for bail while awaiting his appeal, but it was denied by a state court.        

The Supreme Court, which ruled that Dr. Sen should be granted bail while he appeals the ruling, also appeared to reject much of the government&rsquo;s case against him, saying that simply possessing Maoist literature was not enough to prove that Dr. Sen had broken the law. The court did not overturn his conviction; that appeal will first be heard in lower courts.        

Dr. Sen&rsquo;s wife, Ilina, said, &ldquo;There is really no evidence of sedition charges or any violence.&rdquo;        

Dr. Sen, a celebrated specialist in rural health care, received the Jonathan Mann Award for global health and human rights in 2008 for creating one of the most successful community-based health-care models in India.        

Swami Agnivesh, a human rights activist who tried to negotiate between the government and rebels to end the fighting, said, &ldquo;Many such activists are in jail on the name of helping Maoist rebels in many states without any evidence.&rdquo;        
