
MOSCOW &mdash; As Capt. Arkadiusz Protasiuk peered down at a dense fog over the Russian city of Smolensk last April, weighing whether to land an aircraft carrying Poland&rsquo;s president and dozens of other government officials, no one told him what to do.        

But no one had to, according to a Russian-led investigation of the subsequent crash, which killed everyone on board.        

Captain Protasiuk had been in an eerily similar position in 2008, according to the report on the inquiry, which was released Wednesday. Still a co-pilot then, he looked on as his captain defied President Lech Kaczynski&rsquo;s order to make a risky landing in Georgia&rsquo;s capital, Tbilisi. Mr. Kaczynski was reported by the Polish news media to be furious, remarking that &ldquo;if someone decides to become a pilot, he cannot be fearful.&rdquo;        

There were consequences: The president was forced to drive all day. The defiant captain never flew the president&rsquo;s plane again, the report says. And when Captain Protasiuk himself became a captain, the memory of that day returned to him over Smolensk.        

Since April 10, when Mr. Kaczynski and 95 others died in a Russian forest, Captain Protasiuk&rsquo;s decision to land has remained a mystery. A nine-month inquiry by the Interstate Aviation Committee, which investigates air disasters in the former Soviet Union, sketches out an intricate psychological portrait of a captain and the invisible pressures on him. The report attributes the crash to pilot error, but it also strongly suggests that the blame extends to some of his passengers.        

Polish officials on Wednesday rejected the analysis, and indeed, a cockpit voice recording offers no evidence that Mr. Kaczynski or any other official ordered the pilot to land. But the Russian-led report evokes a cascade of stress &mdash; much of it emanating from his powerful passengers &mdash; as Captain Protasiuk slipped below the &ldquo;decision altitude.&rdquo;        

The commander of Poland&rsquo;s air force was right behind him in the cockpit, and, investigators concluded from remarks he made to crew members, the memory of Mr. Kaczynski&rsquo;s wrath in Tbilisi was fresh in his mind.        

The pilot  &ldquo;recognized the complicated and dangerous nature of the situation,&rdquo; it concluded. &ldquo;On the other hand, there was a motive to complete the tasks and wishes of the Main Passenger.&rdquo;        

The question of blame  could hardly be more delicate. The disaster occurred against the backdrop of longstanding tension between Moscow and Warsaw, and initially seemed grounds for a deeper rift. Instead, Russia&rsquo;s outpouring of sympathy  laid the groundwork for a political reconciliation.        

That warmth has not extended to the investigative stage. Polish leaders pressed investigators to look into such possible causes as airport equipment and air traffic control, repeatedly seeking information on those subjects from Russia. Many responded angrily Wednesday: Mr. Kaczynski&rsquo;s twin brother, Jaroslaw, a prominent opposition leader, said Poland&rsquo;s prime minister should never have trusted the inquiry to Russians.        

&ldquo;If we were to take this report seriously, we would have to assume that the whole crew and some of the passengers on this flight were suicidal,&rdquo; Jaroslaw Kaczynski told reporters in Warsaw.        

Poland&rsquo;s prime minister, Donald Tusk, who called an earlier draft of the text &ldquo;unacceptable,&rdquo; cut short a vacation to return to Warsaw. Eugeniusz Klopotek, a lawmaker, said Warsaw should revisit the softer line it had taken recently toward Russia. &ldquo;I feel slapped in the face,&rdquo; he said.        

The report excludes many external factors that could have contributed to the crash &mdash; the aircraft, air traffic control, radio communications and meteorological support, among others &mdash; and at times reads like psychoanalysis. Indeed, it relied heavily on psychologists. After more than a decade as a co-pilot, it says, Captain Protasiuk had the conformist, conflict-averse personality to suit that role.        

As the plane approached Smolensk, amid multiple warnings about the weather, Captain Protasiuk seemed to be recalling the president&rsquo;s anger in Tbilisi, remarking, &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not sure, but if we don&rsquo;t land here, he&rsquo;ll give me trouble,&rdquo; the report says, citing voice recordings. The investigators suspect another reference was made to Mr. Kaczynski when a crew member said, as the plane descended, &ldquo;He&rsquo;ll blow his stack if on top of all of this. ...&rdquo;        

Ratcheting up that stress was the presence of Gen. Andrzej Blasik, the commander of Poland&rsquo;s air force, who, voice recordings show, entered the cockpit two minutes before the crash. General Blasik was mildly intoxicated,  the report says, and despite the obviously hazardous conditions, he did not suggest diverting to another airport nearby. His silence was itself a form of pressure, the report contends.        

&ldquo;He kept himself aloof from the emergency situation, by this confirming the motive of completing the task of mandatory landing at the destination airdrome,&rdquo; the report says, remarking that the presence of high-ranking officials in the cockpit &ldquo;evidently increased the stress and distracted the crew from their duties.&rdquo;        

At that point, the pilot was torn between his impulse to pull up or try the landing,  the report says. He descended too quickly, looking away from his instruments to search for the runway through the fog. The plane snagged a birch tree with one wing and slammed into the ground, the report said, with a force that amounted to 100 times gravity.        

Officials in Moscow emphasized that the investigation involved civil and military experts from Poland, Russia and the United States, among other countries, according to the Interfax news service. Asked why no Polish investigators were at the news conference on Wednesday, Tatyana Anodina, head of the Interstate Aviation Committee, said that announcing the results of an inquiry was the prerogative of the country that carried it out.        
Joanna Berendt contributed reporting from Warsaw.
