
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Hezbollah and its political allies withdrew from Lebanon&rsquo;s cabinet on Wednesday, toppling a national unity government that had brought a measure of calm to the troubled Middle Eastern country since 2009 and deepening an emerging crisis over a United Nations-backed tribunal investigating the assassination of a former prime minister.        

In practical terms, however, the turmoil will have little effect, as the government has been paralyzed for months.        

The resignations returned Lebanon to familiar terrain. Hezbollah and its foes have wrestled over the direction of the country since the former prime minister, Rafik Hariri, was killed in a bombing along the Beirut seafront in February 2005.        

After a lengthy investigation, the tribunal is now expected to indict members of Hezbollah, a Shiite movement that the United States considers a terrorist organization and the single most powerful force in Lebanon.        

Hezbollah has denied any involvement in the attack and denounced the tribunal as an Israeli-American tool. It has further urged Prime Minister Saad Hariri, Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s son, to end all cooperation with the tribunal and to reject its findings. Otherwise, it has promised to act, with Wednesday&rsquo;s resignations serving as its first salvo.        

In Washington to meet President Obama on Wednesday, Mr. Hariri has so far resisted the pressure, and American officials have sought to rally friendly Arab states to his aid.        

For Mr. Obama, the point of the meeting was twofold: not just to ensure that Mr. Hariri did not fold but also to send a message to Syria that its continued backing of Hezbollah and its interference in Lebanon would further erode its already fragile relationship with the United States.        

The Obama administration appears to be calculating that even if the prospect of the indictments has led to the collapse of Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s government, he can continue in an interim capacity long enough for the actual indictments &mdash; which it expects to be deeply embarrassing to Hezbollah and Syria &mdash; to come out.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re sort of in uncharted territory now,&rdquo; said Robert Malley, head of Middle East affairs with the International Crisis Group. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re in the position where we&rsquo;re supporting him, but he doesn&rsquo;t have a government, nor is it clear that he has a parliamentary majority.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hariri left shortly after the meeting for Paris, where he was scheduled to meet with President Nicolas Sarkozy before returning to Lebanon on Thursday. France has closer ties to Syria than the United States, and French officials hope to mediate with Syria to avert any violence in Lebanon in the coming days and weeks.        

As is often the case with Lebanon, internal crises take on disproportionate importance, given the role that foreign powers habitually play in the country&rsquo;s domestic affairs. Hezbollah is supported by Iran and Syria, while the United States, France and Saudi Arabia have backed Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s government.        

This crisis has the added danger of offering little room for compromise. For months now, Hezbollah has staked its reputation on having the tribunal discredited. To comply completely with Hezbollah&rsquo;s demands, Mr. Hariri would probably sacrifice his political career.        

&ldquo;There is no easy solution,&rdquo; said Hilal Khashan, a political science professor at the American University of Beirut. &ldquo;It is a dilemma. You have two polar-opposite positions, and there is no way that you can reconcile the two camps.&rdquo;        

The unity government had been widely expected to collapse after the tribunal announces the indictments, but few expected it to fall so soon.        

Nevertheless, the withdrawal by Hezbollah&rsquo;s ministers and their allies has almost certainly created the worst crisis in Lebanon since 2008. In that year, an agreement was reached in Qatar to end sectarian clashes that had killed 81 people and brought Lebanon to the brink of a renewal of its 15-year civil war, which ended in 1990.        

The national unity government was a step away from that brink. It was made up of 15 ministers from Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s bloc and 10 from Hezbollah and its allies. The remaining five were nominated by President Michel Suleiman, under a formula that gave neither side a majority. Hezbollah managed to persuade one of Mr. Suleiman&rsquo;s nominees, Minister of State Adnan Sayyed Hussein, to submit his resignation, which he did in a statement.        

As soon as the government fell, both sides defended their positions.        

After a meeting, Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s bloc released a statement, expressing a willingness to compromise. But the statement, read by Boutros Harb, a lawmaker and minister, added, &ldquo;There&rsquo;s no way to compromise on the issue of the court and justice.&rdquo;        

Hezbollah refused to comment until Thursday. But an allied official, Health Minister Mohamad Jawad Khalifeh, said: &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want any escalation. We are committed to the Constitution. We don&rsquo;t know what commitment the others are talking about.&rdquo;        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and Helene Cooper from Tucson.
