
CAIRO &mdash; An Egyptian court on Saturday continued the process of dismantling Hosni Mubarak&rsquo;s institutions of power when it formally dissolved the political organization that ruled the nation for decades, the National Democratic Party.        

In practical terms, the decision appears to simply formalize what had already occurred. Most of the party&rsquo;s top leaders, including Mr. Mubarak and his son Gamal, are under arrest; its offices around the country were burned during the days of the popular uprising; and it had already been renamed the New National Democratic Party by those who had taken it over.        

But the move, by the Supreme Administrative Court, was seen as another effort by Egypt&rsquo;s military leaders to appease public opinion, which grew angry and frustrated with the slow pace of change and the initial delay in holding former officials accountable.        

&ldquo;Practically and realistically, the party was already dead, but this decision was like issuing the death certificate,&rdquo; said Amar Aly Hassan, a popular columnist with the independent newspaper Al Masry Al Youm. &ldquo;It would be very hard to build a new democratic system as long as it continued to exist.&rdquo;        

The court decision, which cannot be appealed, satisfies a specific demand of people who had grown increasingly hostile toward the military council leading Egypt. The tension led to a confrontation last weekend, with demonstrators retaking Tahrir Square and for the first time calling for the downfall of the top military leader, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi. Security forces stormed the square, killing two demonstrators and injuring more than 70, setting up what appeared to be a looming clash between the street and the armed forces.        

But while the Supreme Council for the Armed Forces continued to rule by decree and continues to show little tolerance for criticism, it has moved aggressively in recent days to break with the former Mubarak government. The court&rsquo;s decision is seen as another step in assuring the public of that break with the past.        

There had been concern that the National Democratic Party would hold an organizational advantage in parliamentary elections scheduled for September because other parties have not had much time to organize.        

The Supreme Administrative Court said in a statement, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s illogical for any instruments of the regime to remain, now that the regime itself has fallen.&rdquo;        

The court also ordered that the party&rsquo;s assets be turned over to the state because, the statement said, &ldquo;This money is actually the money of the people.&rdquo;        

The N.D.P. was founded by Anwar el-Sadat and became one of the two primary pillars of the Mubarak era. The second was the security services. The military council, which took control after Mr. Mubarak resigned on Feb. 11, also formally dissolved the much maligned office of state security. But in that case it appears to have been more of a renaming, from state security to national security, because it seems to still be functioning as before.        

Under Mr. Mubarak, the National Democratic Party was more a collection of special interests, its primary appeal being its direct control of Parliament and the government. When the party issued a policy paper, it became government policy. When it ran candidates for office, they almost always won.        

In local council elections in 2008, 99 percent of the seats nationwide went to the party. In elections in 2010, opposition groups won fewer than 20 of the 518 seats in the lower house.        

It was possible to create a political party only with the approval of a special government-appointed committee, which was led by Safwat el-Sherif, the National Democratic Party&rsquo;s longtime secretary general.        

&ldquo;This party oppressed Egyptians, ruled through rigging and it corrupted political life,&rdquo; said Mr. Hassan, the newspaper columnist, adding that even if the court&rsquo;s move was largely symbolic, it was still important.        
