
IGARAP&Eacute; DO COSTA, Brazil &mdash; Along the rivers of the Amazon rain forest, people still recount legends in which pink dolphins are magical creatures that can turn into men and impregnate women. Brazilian musicians write songs about them, singing lovingly about the &ldquo;eye of the river dolphin.&rdquo;        

But for Ronan Ben&iacute;cio Rego, a fisherman in this tiny settlement, pink dolphins are both rival &mdash; and prey.        

Standing on the muddy banks of the river here recently, he said he had killed river dolphins many times before, to use as bait to catch a catfish that is sold to unknowing consumers in Brazil and Colombia.        

&ldquo;We want to make money,&rdquo; said Mr. Rego, 43, the president of the community here. Two dead dolphins could yield about $2,400 in catfish sales in a single day of fishing, he said.        

But bait is not the only objective. Though the pink dolphins are protected by law, the fishermen see them as nettlesome competitors for the catches that feed their families, and their frustration sometimes boils over.        

&ldquo;I have harpooned some just to be mean,&rdquo; Mr. Rego said, lifting a harpoon to demonstrate how he would spear dolphins at close range.        

The illegal slaughtering of dolphins is on the rise here, threatening one of the storied symbols of the Amazon and illustrating the challenge of policing environmental law in such a vast territory, researchers and government officials say. Hundreds, if not thousands, of the estimated 30,000 river dolphins plying the Amazon region are dying every year, they say.        

Miguel Migu&eacute;is, 41, a Portuguese researcher from the Federal University of Western Par&aacute; who studies river dolphin populations around the city of Santar&eacute;m, said the high rate of killings could lead to their extinction. &ldquo;They are killing their culture, their folklore,&rdquo; Dr. Migu&eacute;is said. &ldquo;They are killing the Amazon.&rdquo;        

Several hours upriver from here, in the biological reserve of Rio Trombetas, where river dolphins swim in an Amazon tributary teeming with piranhas and crocodiles, Dr. Migu&eacute;is said he had seen the dolphin population fall to a little over 50 earlier this year from about 250 in 2009.        

&ldquo;I am really worried about what is happening at the reserve,&rdquo; Dr. Migu&eacute;is said.        

Brazil&rsquo;s environmental laws strictly prohibit the killing of dolphins and many other wild animals. Violators could face up to four years in prison. But enforcement in the vast Amazon is a huge challenge for Ibama, the Brazilian environmental protection agency, which has 1,300 agents covering the entire country. The Brazilian Amazon alone is larger than India.        

Fishermen in Igarap&eacute;, about three hours by boat from Santar&eacute;m, said agents from Ibama had never visited their community of about 350 people.        

Luciano Evaristo, the director of environmental protection with Ibama, acknowledged a growing problem with the killing of river dolphins in the Amazon related to high demand in Colombia for the catfish, and he vowed to crack down on the practice.        

Using dolphin meat as bait for the catfish &ldquo;is horrible, and Ibama will stop this,&rdquo; Mr. Evaristo said. &ldquo;When Ibama gets there, many people will be arrested.&rdquo;        

Yet here in the heart of the Brazilian Amazon, many people are indifferent about the killings. At an open-air market in Santar&eacute;m, vendors sell genitals removed from dead dolphins as good luck charms for sex and love. Jars of oil from river dolphin fat sit alongside oil from anacondas and crocodiles. The dolphin oil potion, which sells for about $25 a small bottle, is used to treat rheumatism, a saleswoman explained.        

At a Santar&eacute;m fish market, customers said they had no idea fishermen were using dolphins to catch the catfish, known as piracatinga in Brazil. Still, they said protecting dolphins was not a priority.        

&ldquo;I would eat the fish if I knew it ate dolphins because the dolphins are healthy and come from the Amazon River,&rdquo; said Teresa Oliveira, 67.        

Local legends, dating to before Columbus arrived in the New World, have long warned Amazon residents to be respectful but wary of the river dolphins, which they believe have magical powers and can do evil.        

&ldquo;I always tell my daughters to stay away from the water during their menstrual cycle,&rdquo; said Maria Siqueira, 59, who lives in Trombetas. &ldquo;Just like my mother told me, I tell them the dolphin will impregnate them.&rdquo;        
Myrna Domit contributed reporting from Igarapé do Costa, and Toby Muse from Bogotá, Colombia.
