
MISURATA, Libya &mdash; Muftah Militan, a rebel with his wounded right arm in a sling and a two-way radio in his left hand, peered from a rooftop at a low-slung skyline. Occasional gunfire chattered below.        

To the right, several blocks away, the bright green flag of the government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi fluttered above a building that had been cracked and scarred by fighting. This was a headquarters of the pro-Qaddafi forces besieging this city.        

To the left, another tall building, also pockmarked by fire, rose above the neighborhood. &ldquo;Snipers are there,&rdquo; Mr. Militan said, unwilling to venture into the open.        

Between these buildings runs a long and shattered stretch of Tripoli Street, formerly one of Misurata&rsquo;s main thoroughfares, now one of its main battlegrounds. The street and the adjacent blocks are a ribbon-shaped wasteland of scattered debris, shattered facades and bloodstains.        

Barricades block the way, aided by the husks of charred cars and trucks. Rubble and broken glass crunch underfoot. Along this urban stretch of boulevard, in building after building, Misurata&rsquo;s rebels hide in clusters, waiting for the next fight.        

Misurata is nearly severed from the world, a densely inhabited city where anti-Qaddafi rebels have been all but surrounded by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s conventional troops. They face front lines to their south, east and west. The Mediterranean Sea is at their back.        

They endure regular barrages from high-explosive munitions and shortages of equipment and ammunition. But kept alive by tenuous resupply into the port they barely hold, the rebels have created a maze of fighting positions and tank obstacles. They have managed for almost two months to prevent their city from being overrun.        

On Tripoli Street, and elsewhere in Misurata, some of the reasons were visible.        

In eastern Libya, the Forces of Free Libya, as the rebels call themselves, have been woefully unprepared for warfare along the highways and open desert, where the pro-Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces have advantages in organization, training, numbers and firepower.        

But on the streets of Misurata, the Qaddafi forces&rsquo; upper hand has been at least partly negated by advantages realized by local men fighting in the neighborhoods where they have lived their lives.        

Where Tripoli Street runs through the neighborhood of Beera, for example, the men have hidden themselves in concrete buildings against the shelling and formed a defense-in-depth, with knots of fighters in the street&rsquo;s storefronts supported by others many blocks back.        

The rebels move back and forth on familiar streets, disappearing quickly into buildings and reappearing in courtyards, possessing an intimate knowledge of their own terrain.        

They have so few weapons that many men on the front at any given moment are unarmed, and share weapons in shifts or stand ready to take up the rifle of a comrade who falls. Their ammunition supply is short enough that fighters in the second and third ranks often carry a single magazine, so that those in the storefronts might have enough.        

But they have shown signs of organization and adaptability that have given them an unexpected endurance.        

Rebels here have a modicum of communication equipment. One local commander, a former professional soccer player whose troops said had no previous military experience but became a leader because he was respected, weaved through the streets in a sedan with a pair of two-way radios and two antennas.        

War can be a ruthless teacher, and in Misurata the rebels have also learned something that the rebels of eastern Libya mostly have not: that dirt is their friend.        

Throughout the neighborhoods, rebels have piled up sand to block roadways and to force the Qaddafi forces&rsquo; armored vehicles to slow down or change course.        

The rebels have also parked lines of dump trucks heavy with sand at exposed intersections, to impede the movement of pro-Qaddafi armored patrols and to provide cover from snipers.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;One of our guys thought of this idea,&rdquo; said Abdul Hamid, a fighter who said he was 64. &ldquo;Qaddafi guys were coming in here, so we started doing this with sand. It stops the tanks.&rdquo;        

As he spoke, in a doorway, long bursts of gunfire snapped by. A few mortar rounds landed a few buildings away. Then a rocket-propelled grenade slammed into a wall about 50 yards away. It exploded, and shrapnel fell to the street. He seemed not to care.        

&ldquo;That&rsquo;s music,&rdquo; Mr. Hamid said. &ldquo;Our music.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hamid&rsquo;s calm demeanor framed another evident difference between the rebels fighting for the roads and oil infrastructure of the eastern desert and those fighting to keep Misurata.        

In eastern Libya, the rebels have retreated under fire repeatedly, and panic has moved through their ranks like a contagion. Here the fighters have stubbornly held ground. On Saturday they emanated a visible calm.        

This calm was not na&iuml;vet&eacute;. Several said that once they decided to fight they had no choice but to continue; if the city falls, they said, they expect to be killed.        

They have suffered miserably in their weeks under arms. During a long battle on Friday evening and into early Saturday, their wounded streamed into a trauma center &mdash; a man with a missing arm, another missing both legs, a third who was quickly moved to a casket, to cries of &ldquo;God is great!&rdquo; In the trauma center in the predawn hours of Saturday, a doctor showed some of the toll from recent fighting. &ldquo;He is shot in the neck,&rdquo; he said, of one. He pointed to another. &ldquo;Amputation, above right knee.&rdquo;        

By dawn Tripoli Street was quiet. Now several hours later, the shooting had resumed.        

Ehab Shteye, 31, leaned against a pickup truck with a rifle slung across his chest, wearing a black Chicago Bulls watch cap. He said he had been a philosophy teacher until two months ago.        

Long bursts of bullets flew by. He had no helmet, armor or first aid kit. But he knew his terrain well and was just behind a corner and between high walls, out of the bullets&rsquo; path. The occasional mortar round landed a few buildings away, each exploding with a heavy crunch. Mr. Shteye did not flinch. &ldquo;We got used to it,&rdquo; he said.        

A younger rebel arrived, stood beside Mr. Shteye and began to strum an acoustic guitar. At first the chords were faintly familiar, though the song could not be discerned. But as he played, his chords gained volume and confidence, and then, in soft and not quite perfectly enunciated English, he started to sing.        

After a few lines, it was clear. He was covering &ldquo;Good Riddance (Time of Your Life),&rdquo; by Green Day.        

It&rsquo;s something unpredictable, but in the end it&rsquo;s right        

I hope you had the time of your life        

He stopped playing abruptly and walked toward the wasteland of Tripoli Street. For a moment, the only remaining sound was the gunfire, crisscrossing overhead.        
