
BEIJING &mdash; It has all the trappings one would expect from the capital&rsquo;s most well-heeled and prestigious Christian congregation: a Sunday school for children, nature hikes for singles and clothing drives for the needy. Last year, the church, called Shouwang, or Lighthouse, collected $4 million from its 1,000 members to buy its own house of worship.        

But Shouwang, according to China&rsquo;s officially atheist Communist Party leadership, is technically illegal. It is a so-called house church, which in recent years had come to symbolize the government&rsquo;s wary tolerance for big-city congregations outside the constellation of state-controlled churches. The church has been a release valve for an educated elite seeking a nonpolitical refuge for its faith.        

That is, until now.        

Evicted yet again from its meeting place by the authorities, Shouwang announced this month that its congregants would worship outside rather than disband or go back underground. Its demands were straightforward but bold: allow the church to take possession of the space it had legally purchased. Officials responded with a clenched fist.        

On Sunday, for the second week in a row, the police rounded up scores of parishioners who tried to pray outdoors at a public plaza. Most of the church&rsquo;s leadership is now in custody or under house arrest. Its Web site has been blocked.        

&ldquo;We are not antigovernment, but we cannot give up our church family and our faith,&rdquo; Wei Na, 30, the church choir director, said last week just before more than 160 congregants were corralled onto buses and detained. &ldquo;Satan is using the government to destroy us, and we can&rsquo;t let that happen.&rdquo;        

The move against Shouwang, as well as other house churches, coincides with the most expansive assault on dissent in China in years, one that has led to the arrests of high-profile critics like the artist Ai Weiwei, but also legions of little-known bloggers, rights lawyers and democracy advocates who have disappeared into the country&rsquo;s opaque legal system. The crackdown, now in its second month, was prompted by government fears that the Arab revolts against autocracy could spread to China and undermine the Communist Party&rsquo;s six-decade hold on power.        

Although many congregations continue to hold services unhindered, in recent weeks the pastors of two large unofficial churches in the southern city of Guangzhou have been detained and their congregations rendered homeless. In Shanxi Province, a house church organizer said the police attacked him with electric batons, and religious leaders in places like Xinjiang in the far west and Inner Mongolia in the north have reported increased harassment, according to China Aid, a Texas-based Christian advocacy group. Last year, the organization reported 3,343 instances in which house church members or leaders were detained or beaten, a 15 percent increase over 2009. Bob Fu, the group&rsquo;s president, said such incidents were part of the latest government campaign to try to force house church members into state-run congregations.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m not optimistic a peaceful solution will be found to this crisis,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The government&rsquo;s moves are forcing nonpolitical churches to commit acts of civil disobedience, which the government is not likely to tolerate.&rdquo;        

Global Times, a state-owned newspaper that broke new ground last year by writing positively about house churches, gave voice to the most recent shift in official attitude with an editorial last week that condemned Shouwang as trying to &ldquo;twist Chinese society by politicizing religion&rdquo; and suggested that overseas Christian groups were using the church to subvert the government.        

&ldquo;All Christians, as well as those of other faiths, are Chinese citizens first and foremost. It is their obligation to observe discipline and abide by the law,&rdquo; it wrote.        

Although house church leaders are careful to say that they have no interest in politics, their insistence on independence from state supervision and their real or imagined associations with foreign churches have stoked deep-seated fears among China&rsquo;s authoritarian leaders, who have been suspicious of Christianity since 1949, when the Communists took power, branded missionaries as agents of imperialism and threw them out of the country.        

&ldquo;The bottom line is that house church members believe in Jesus, not the party&rsquo;s version of Jesus,&rdquo; said Zhang Minxuan, a pastor and president of the Chinese House Church Alliance, who says he has been detained 41 times.        

Mia Li and Zhang Jing contributed research.
