
SULAIMANIYA, Iraq (AP) &mdash; The police opened fire Sunday on stone-throwing crowds protesting government corruption in Iraq&rsquo;s northern Kurdish region, and seven people were struck by gunfire, according to a doctor here. Another 28 were injured by rocks or hospitalized with breathing problems caused by tear gas, the doctor said.        

It was the latest protest to turn violent in Sulaimaniya, 160 miles northeast of Baghdad in the normally peaceful Kurdish region, where demonstrations calling for political and economic reforms have been held nearly every day during the last several months.        

Some police officers fired into the air to clear protesters blocking a road, witnesses said, and others shot into the crowd. Two local journalists were among the seven people who were shot, said the doctor, Sulaimaniya&rsquo;s health director, Dr. Regald Hama Rasheed. No deaths were immediately reported.        

At least nine protesters have been killed since Feb. 17 in antigovernment demonstrations in the semiautonomous Kurdish region. The demonstrations appear to have been inspired by the other flashes of unrest across the Middle East and North Africa.        

In other matters, Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki met in Baghdad on Saturday with John A. Boehner, the speaker of the United States House of Representatives, and said that Iraq&rsquo;s security forces were ready to protect the country.        

&ldquo;The Iraqi armed and security forces are able to handle the responsibility of maintaining security and work in a professional way,&rdquo; Mr. Maliki told Mr. Boehner, according to a statement issued by the prime minister&rsquo;s office.        

Mr. Maliki has maintained that the estimated 46,000 American troops currently in Iraq must leave by Dec. 31, as required under a security agreement between Baghdad and Washington. However, a small number of active-duty soldiers, currently estimated at 119, will remain in Iraq next year to continue training Iraqi forces as they buy new arms and equipment from American companies.        

Violence across Iraq has dropped drastically in the last few years, but deadly bombings and shootings still occur almost every day.        

In Baghdad late Saturday, gunmen stormed the home of a Shiite family living in a mostly Sunni neighborhood and killed all four family members, including a 16-year-old boy and a 14-year-old girl, the police and health officials said.        

On Sunday night, a concealed car bomb killed a government security worker in Baghdad, the police said. Four passers-by were wounded in the explosion.        
