
AJDABIYA, Libya &mdash; Large numbers of rebel fighters fled this city on Sunday after a rocket and artillery attack by government forces who were reportedly on the western outskirts.        

Scores of rebel pickups and other vehicles could be seen leaving the eastern approaches of Ajdabiya, and explosions could be heard in the city. They were headed toward the rebel capital, Benghazi, about 100 miles north.        

Their flight seemed to end a rebel push that they said had taken them to the outskirts of the oil-refinery town of Brega, about 50 miles farther west of Ajdabiya, but some rebels did remain at positions in Ajdabiya to try to prevent it from falling to forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

Many of the fighters in the vehicles criticized NATO as failing to give them enough support and also said that they had insufficient weapons to match those of government forces.        

In Benghazi, a spokesman for the rebels, Mustafa Gheriani, also expressed frustration with NATO airstrikes. &ldquo;Maybe NATO took off Saturday and Sunday,&rdquo; he said, adding that the rebels were unaware of any airstrikes by the alliance in the past two days.        

&ldquo;Where are the NATO forces?&rdquo; asked Absalam Hamid, who identified himself as a rebel captain. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know why they didn&rsquo;t bomb them.&rdquo;        

Strong winds and a sandstorm lowered visibility on Sunday and may have made it difficult for aircraft to operate. Captain Hamid said NATO planes had not been active the day before, either, when government forces began advancing toward Ajdabiya from Brega.        

The captain turned around his pickup, which, like many trucks, had a mounted machine gun on the back, and headed toward Benghazi, followed by a dozen other vehicles. Some truck beds had rocket pods from helicopter gunships and jet fighters mounted on the rear; others sported long rocket tubes but no rockets to use in them.        

&ldquo;Where is America? Where is France? We need Sarkozy,&rdquo; one of the men shouted, referring to President Nicolas Sarkozy of France. &ldquo;We have no army.&rdquo;        

Many of the fighters were clearly jittery and frightened.        

In Brussels, a NATO official said Sunday, &ldquo;Air sorties, including strike sorties, have continued throughout today.&rdquo;        

Operational reports released by the alliance&rsquo;s military headquarters showed that airstrikes continued at a high tempo through Saturday, the latest day for which details were available.        

NATO warplanes flew 144 sorties on Saturday, 42 of them airstrikes, according to the operational reports. That was fairly typical of the tempo of the air campaign since March 27, when NATO began to enforce a United Nations mandate to establish a no-fly zone and to protect civilians.        

None of those 42 airstrikes on Saturday, nor any of a similar number on Friday, were near the front lines in eastern Libya. They were concentrated in the country&rsquo;s west, particularly around the besieged city of Misurata, as well as in Tripoli, the capital, and Surt, the hometown of Colonel Qaddafi.        

NATO&rsquo;s mandate does not include providing close air support to reverse the military fortunes of rebel forces, although many of the individual fighters make it clear that they regard NATO as the rebel air wing.        

On Saturday, the rebel military leader, Gen. Abdel Fattah Younes, told Al Arabiya television that rebel fighters were already in Brega and expected to conclude their capture of the city by Sunday.        

&ldquo;We are in a not-too-bad state of preparedness, and our army fighters, youths and rebels are now doing a good job &mdash; and in the morning there will be good news,&rdquo; Al Arabiya quoted General Younes as saying about Brega on Saturday.        

Repeated efforts to reach a spokesman for General Younes on Saturday and Sunday were unsuccessful.        

Fighting has seesawed around Ajdabiya for weeks, with neither side firmly in control of the highway that runs through it, connecting the rebel-held east with the rest of Libya.        
