
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Opposition leaders from Yemen said on Sunday that they planned to travel to Saudi Arabia later in the day to discuss an agreement with the Gulf Cooperation Council on a timetable for President Ali Abdullah Saleh to leave office.        

Separately, on Sunday afternoon, security forces opened fire on protesters who were marching through Sana, the capital, according to witnesses. At least 15 protesters were shot, according to doctors at a makeshift clinic at the main gathering area for protesters at Sana University.        

The protesters were trying to march to the house of Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s son, Ahmed, a leading military commander whom it is believed the president wanted to be his successor. The protesters had marched about a mile from the main sit-in area at the university, and witnesses said they were less than a quarter mile from the house when security forces fired tear gas and live ammunition.        

It appeared to be the largest such march yet outside the demonstration area in the capital.        

At the clinic Sunday night, there was a frantic rush to pull hundreds of men, coughing from tear gas, out of emergency vehicles, off motorcycles and out of taxis, even from the trunks.        

An elderly man sat on the ground, gripping his face. Some protesters said that they were beaten with sticks by security officers in cars as they were trying to retreat from the clash.        

Others there had a more casual demeanor. &ldquo;They started with tear gas, and, after that, they fired bullets,&rdquo; said Ghasim Saleh, a tribesman from just outside the capital who was shot in the leg. After his wound had been treated and bandaged, he sat on the ground and smoked a cigarette while chatting on a cellphone, reassuring his wife on the other end that he was fine. A soldier who had defected and was shot in the back walked around the clinic casually as well.        

A group of women standing in corners nearby were crying. They said that their husbands had been marching and that they still had not heard from them.        

&ldquo;This is peaceful! Peaceful!&rdquo; Amina al-Shaouby shouted from behind her tears. &ldquo;Every day we sit here. And we want to march so we can show those outside the sit-in that we are peaceful and we don&rsquo;t have weapons.&rdquo;        

Yassin Saeed Noman, the leader of a coalition of opposition parties known as the Joint Meeting Parties, or J.M.P., said that he and three other opposition leaders would travel to Riyadh, the Saudi capital, to meet Sunday with Gulf Cooperation Council officials about an initiative discussed earlier this month. It calls for Mr. Saleh to transfer presidential powers to his deputy and leave office.        

The draft agreement also gives the president and his family immunity from prosecution, presumably to head off a situation similar to that in Egypt, where the military has detained former President Hosni Mubarak and his two sons.        

Saudi Arabia, Yemen&rsquo;s largest donor, dominates the Gulf Cooperation Council, a Persian Gulf regional bloc that also includes Oman, Bahrain, Qatar, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates. Yemen does not belong to the council.        

Senior Yemeni officials have said in recent days that the United States and the European Union are pressing for a plan &mdash; in conjunction with the Gulf Cooperation Council &mdash; that would have Mr. Saleh hand over his powers immediately and formally leave office within the next three months.        

It was not immediately clear whether any Western officials would join the gathering in Riyadh.        

Leaders of the Joint Meeting Parties have previously insisted that they would not meet with the Gulf Cooperation Council in Riyadh unless an agreement on a transfer of power was in place.        

One of the opposition leaders, Mohammed Abdulmalik al-Mutawakil, said Sunday that the opposition group was not going to Saudi Arabia for a dialogue, nor would the group compromise on its demands for Mr. Saleh to step down.        
