
BAGHDAD &mdash; Violence erupted repeatedly across Baghdad on Monday, including a double suicide car bombing outside a heavily fortified entrance to the Green Zone that killed at least 6 people and wounded 20.        

The attacks started around 6 a.m., when bombs were detonated near liquor stores in southeast Baghdad. About an hour later, a device in the same area of Baghdad exploded near a convoy belonging to the Finance Ministry.        

A little before 8 a.m., a bomb was detonated near Baghdad University, wounding two people, government officials said.        

A few minutes later, a car bomb went off outside the Green Zone entrance, where government employees and officials are usually screened for explosives and weapons.        

Security officers at the checkpoint opened fire, and a few minutes later a second car bomb exploded at the same entrance.        

At noon, gunmen stormed a jewelry shop in the area. One person was killed and another wounded, but nothing was taken, officials said.        

About two hours later, Naseer al-Chaderchi, a member of the governing council that led Iraq after the American invasion, was wounded, along with two of his guards and three others, when a bomb struck their convoy.        

A spokesman for the Baghdad security command, Maj. Gen. Qassim al-Moussawi, blamed Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia for the attacks on the Green Zone entrance. He said the attackers appeared to be aiming at a convoy that included an aide to the speaker of Parliament. The aide survived the attack.        

&ldquo;The goal was to detonate the first car and then let the second one get into the Green Zone,&rdquo; General Moussawi said. &ldquo;But they didn&rsquo;t accomplish this, and they were unable to even get close to the checkpoint&rsquo;s gate, which led to them exploding them about 500 meters from the checkpoint.&rdquo;        

General Moussawi dismissed any notion that the attacks constituted a message to the Arab League summit meeting scheduled for Baghdad next month.        

&ldquo;I was knocked out, and then I found myself in the hospital,&rdquo; said Abbas Asi Belal, 55, a laborer who was renovating a house near the Green Zone checkpoint and sustained a head wound. &ldquo;How can the bombers get this close? No one can get to this road unless they work with the government.&rdquo;        

There was violence elsewhere, as well. In the western city of Falluja a device placed on a car exploded, wounding two Iraqi Army officers. In the northern province of Diyala, a convoy of American military personnel was attacked, but no injuries were reported.        

Hamid al-Mutlaq, a member of the Iraqiya bloc, in opposition to Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, blamed Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s unwillingness to appoint security ministers for the continuing attacks. Instead, Mr. Maliki supervises the security forces.        

Mr. Mutlaq, a member of the security committee, said &ldquo;the problem is that the parties have tried to place men in the security positions but they are not qualified,&rdquo; which delays the process.        

&ldquo;And the streets are really getting angry with what&rsquo;s going on, and we in Parliament are really afraid we will lose control of the streets,&rdquo; he said.        
Duraid Adnan, Khalid D. Ali and Yasir Ghazi contributed reporting from Baghdad. An Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Falluja.
