
CAIRO &mdash; Weeks of clashes in Syria between protesters and the government intensified on Monday and early Tuesday as security forces fired on a crowd of thousands of demonstrators in the central square of the city of Homs, witnesses said.        

The crowd had gathered to protest a deadly crackdown by the security forces, who activists say killed 14 demonstrators on Sunday. Tensions mounted throughout the day, and at about 2:10 a.m. on Tuesday the forces began firing again, witnesses said.        

Shortly before 3 a.m., a woman who lives near the square said by cellphone: &ldquo;Shooting is heard echoing through the city. The mosques are all calling for help. We fear that many are killed in the square, that it&rsquo;s a massacre.&rdquo;        

Razan Zeitouneh, an activist with the Syrian Human Rights Information Link in Damascus, said she heard shots over the phone while talking to a distraught friend in the square. He told her that he saw four people killed and dozens injured.        

The renewed protests amounted to a rejection of concessions outlined by President Bashar al-Assad in a televised address Saturday, notably lifting the country&rsquo;s 48-year-old state of emergency by the end of this week.        

At the funeral processions in Homs on Monday, mourners in New Clock Tower Square at first offered traditional prayers for the dead. But then protesters began clapping and chanting against Mr. Assad as funeral marchers lofted coffins overhead.        

Security forces fired in the air in the afternoon, witnesses said by telephone, but the crowds refused to disperse. At 7:45 p.m. a protester reported that security forces had begun surrounding the square as the crowd chanted, &ldquo;A sit-in, a sit-in until the overthrow of the regime!&rdquo;        

The activists were calling the square &ldquo;Tahrir&rdquo; &mdash; the Arabic word for liberation and the name of the square in Cairo where mass protests toppled President Hosni Mubarak in February.        

&ldquo;They want to create a Tahrir-like moment, a watershed event,&rdquo; said Ammar Abdulhamid, a Syrian opposition leader based in Maryland who is in touch with some of the young activists.        

Another human rights activist, Rassem al-Atassy, said by telephone from Homs during the day, &ldquo;The people are in charge in the city center now.&rdquo;        

Ahmad, 28, a university student at the Homs protest, said: &ldquo;We people of Homs are calling for three days&rsquo; general strike to show our rejection of the cold-blooded killing of peaceful protesters. Homs is boiling and no one can tell you what will happen in the near future.&rdquo;        

Mr. Abdulhamid said the activists in the square were unarmed, but had organized themselves to sleep in shifts, anticipating an overnight confrontation.        

Late Monday night, the state news agency, SANA, reported that the Interior Ministry was calling the unrest &ldquo;an armed mutiny&rdquo; led by radical Salafi Muslims.        

&ldquo;The ministry added that these armed groups have committed vicious crimes that the law would punish with the strongest penalties,&rdquo; SANA said. &ldquo;Those groups aim to create chaos and terrify the Syrian people, exploiting the reform and freedom process launched within a comprehensive program according to specific timetables announced by President Bashar al-Assad.&rdquo;        

Radwan Ziadeh, a Syrian human rights activist who is a visiting scholar at George Washington University, said the ministry&rsquo;s statement suggested that Syria&rsquo;s government was planning a showdown with protesters.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m very concerned about the statement,&rdquo; Mr. Ziadeh said. &ldquo;This is a justification for what they intend to do in next few hours. This is the green light for armed confrontation.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve just talked to five or six protesters in Homs, and there are lots of women and children in the square, families, the women making sandwiches. From the minarets they were calling for more to join the demonstration. They estimated there were 50,000 by now.        

&ldquo;But all the communication has been cut now. I lost them.&rdquo;        

Ms. Zeitouneh, of the Syrian Human Rights Information Link, said as many as 20 people might have died in Homs on Sunday. Security forces opened fire on a crowd of protesters with live ammunition and tear gas, said another witness reached by phone.        

State media reported that an army officer, Brig. Gen. Khodir al-Tilawi, two of his sons, and a nephew were ambushed, shot to death and brutally mutilated by &ldquo;armed criminal groups.&rdquo;        

Ms. Zeitouneh also said she had received reports from the coastal town of Latakia that security forces had opened fire Sunday night on protesters there as well. The number of casualties was not immediately known.        

Wissam Tarif, executive director of Insan, a Syrian human rights group, said that five died in Latakia.        

Human rights activists said on Monday that forces in both Homs and Latakia were arresting wounded protesters inside local hospitals, leading a doctor in Homs to say that as many as a dozen patients in critical condition might have died in detention.        

The Syrian protests coincided with new disclosures that in 2005 the United States began to secretly finance some Syrian opposition groups intent on toppling Mr. Assad. The disclosures, in diplomatic cables obtained by WikiLeaks, showed State Department funding for Barada TV, an anti-Assad satellite broadcaster run by Syrian exiles in London, as well as concern by American diplomats in Syria that Syrian intelligence agents began to suspect the financing two years ago.        
Liam Stack reported from Cairo, and Katherine Zoepf from New York. An employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Damascus, Syria, Scott Shane from Washington, and J. David Goodman from New York.
