
LONDON &mdash; Britain&rsquo;s decision to send experienced military officers to Libya, to advise rebels fighting forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, marks the latest development in the international community&rsquo;s search for a means to end a bloody military stalemate that has killed hundreds in the contested cities of Misurata and Ajdabiya and left the rebels in only tenuous control of a few major coastal cities.        

The soldiers&rsquo; marching orders are to help the makeshift rebel forces &ldquo;improve their military organizational structures, communications and logistics,&rdquo; Britain&rsquo;s foreign secretary, William Hague, said in a statement.        

Britain had previously been providing what Mr. Hague described as &ldquo;nonlethal assistance,&rdquo; in the form of telecommunications equipment and body armor. He maintained that the new deployment fell within the United Nations Security Council resolution authorizing the international community to protect Libyan civilians but ruling out an occupation force. The military team will work with British diplomats who are already in Benghazi, the de facto rebel capital, he said.        

The officers will be deployed &ldquo;quickly,&rdquo; said Britain&rsquo;s Defense Ministry, but it declined to provide further details on the timeline or the number of soldiers. The Associated Press reported that there could be as many as 20.        

A government official, who did not want to be named as he was not authorized to discuss operational matters, said that though some of the soldiers had special forces backgrounds, they were not directly drawn from Britain&rsquo;s elite Special Air Service and Special Boat Service teams.        

The move was cause for concern among some current and former politicians. Sir Menzies Campbell, former leader of the Liberal Democrat Party, which is now part of a governing coalition with the Conservatives, said Tuesday that the advisers &ldquo;must not be seen as a first installment of further military deployment.&rdquo; He added, &ldquo;Vietnam began with an American president sending military advisers.&rdquo;        

Current members of Parliament have also called for a fresh debate. &ldquo;This is clear evidence of mission creep,&rdquo; said John Baron, a Conservative member. &ldquo;Now we are beginning to put military personnel on the ground, something that wasn&rsquo;t even discussed when we debated this issue.&rdquo;        

Allied bombing sorties and Tomahawk missiles have failed to tip the balance decisively in favor of a rebel group with disjointed leadership, limited weapons and many inexperienced fighters. And civilian casualties have continued to mount. On Tuesday, the United Nations said that at least 20 children had been killed in the siege of Misurata, a rebel-held city in western Libya.        

President Nicolas Sarkozy of France will meet the rebel leader Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, formerly Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s justice minister, on Wednesday, Reuters reported, to try and find a means to break the deadlock. Reuters, citing a source close to the opposition, said Mr. Abdel-Jalil would provide details on military targets, including some in Misurata.        

But France&rsquo;s foreign minister, Alain Jupp&eacute;, told reporters in Paris on Tuesday that he remained &ldquo;absolutely opposed to a deployment of troops on the ground.&rdquo; He said that the coalition had underestimated Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s capacity to adapt military tactics to mitigate the airstrikes and cling to power.        
