
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The Afghan government announced Wednesday that the scandal-plagued Kabul Bank, the nation&rsquo;s largest private financial institution, whose shareholders had ties to high-ranking politicians, would be split in two as part of a drastic overhaul to save it from failure, stabilize the country&rsquo;s financial system and reassure foreign lenders and donors.        

Under the overhaul plan, the government has divided Kabul Bank into a &ldquo;good bank&rdquo; with its deposits, good loans and other assets, and a second institution that will handle the hundreds of millions of dollars in bad loans, Afghan banking officials said.        

The second institution&rsquo;s purpose would be to recoup the bad loans. The bank had lent $579 million, mostly to its own shareholders. Including interest, it was owed $909 million, Abdul Qadir Fitrat, the central bank&rsquo;s chairman, said at a packed news conference at the central bank&rsquo;s headquarters to announce the new arrangement.        

Western officials reacted cautiously, saying that while it was a step in the right direction, they looked forward to a renewal of the International Monetary Fund&rsquo;s program with Afghanistan. The monetary fund program is a signal to many Western donors that the country&rsquo;s economy is relatively sound.        

The announcement represented what the central bank and the Ministry of Finance regarded as a major advance in dealing with a fraud of enormous proportions that had threatened to destabilize the Afghan financial system. It was particularly sensitive for the government because the bank&rsquo;s shareholders included a brother of President Hamid Karzai and a brother of First Vice President Muhammad Fahim. Both had borrowed millions of dollars from the bank that they had not paid back. Both now have repayment agreements for some of their loans.        

The new bank will have no connection to the previous Kabul Bank&rsquo;s shareholders or management. &ldquo;The relationship with the former shareholders has been terminated; they cannot claim ownership,&rdquo; Mr. Fitrat said.        

The bank&rsquo;s problems and the lack of scrutiny of the financial system were so serious that the monetary fund had refused to extend its program with Afghanistan, a step that hampered the ability of international donors, including the World Bank, which manages the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, and the British donor program to funnel money to the country.        

Among other steps, the monetary fund had prodded the central bank to put Kabul Bank into receivership, obtain a credible audit to find out where the money went and prosecute those who defrauded the bank. The process of putting a bank into receivership includes a rigorous effort to recoup as much as possible from bad loans and force those who borrowed money to repay it.        

Those steps were under way, Mr. Fitrat said. Those borrowers who did not agree to pay back their loans, he said, would be &ldquo;legally prosecuted and severely punished.&rdquo;        

The steps were announced came after a week of meetings with the monetary fund in Washington. The fund had indicated that it was pleased that there was agreement on the measures the Afghan government needed to take. Once the government took those steps, the fund would consider renewing Afghanistan&rsquo;s program, said Raphael Anspach, a fund spokesman.        

The British Department for International Development noted that it was pleased about the monetary fund discussions, but was not ready to comment on the Afghan government&rsquo;s announcement. The department had delayed a donation of &pound;40 million, or about $65.6 million.        

Under the plan outlined by the central bank, the new bank, to be called New Kabul Bank, would be owned by the Finance Ministry for the next three months, then sold to the private sector.        

Mr. Fitrat said he hoped that an international bank would want to buy it. &ldquo;It would be very good if an international bank took it over,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;because technology will come in from outside and we can use the experience to enrich our banking system. &ldquo;        
