
BRUSSELS &mdash; A call by the European Commission on Wednesday for a bigger budget for 2012 set off furious criticism from ministers and lawmakers, who said radical belt-tightening was needed to overcome the European Union&rsquo;s debt crisis.        

&ldquo;It is time that we fitted some sort of gastric band to the commission,&rdquo; said Martin Callanan, a member of the European Parliament and of the governing Conservative Party in Britain.        

&ldquo;Every other public sector organization is tightening its belt, and the E.U. must do the same,&rdquo; said Mr. Callanan, whose party has long been a critic of handing more power to European Union institutions.        

The proposal presented Wednesday by the commission, the executive office for the European Union, sought an increase of 4.9 percent in the bloc&rsquo;s overall budget for 2012. The increase would amount to about 6.2 billion euros, or $9 billion, and bring the budget to 132.7 billion euros, almost $193 billion.        

The money is paid by member states, many of which already are guaranteeing hundreds of billions of euros to bail out countries including Greece and Ireland.        

While the union&rsquo;s budget amounts to only about 1 percent of the combined national budgets of the 27 member states, it is still a political hot potato in countries like Britain, where skepticism about the bloc runs deep.        

Last year, the commission proposed a 5.9 percent increase in spending for 2011. But that was eventually capped at 2.9 percent after a long battle with governments, partly led by Britain.        

A major chunk of the budget, amounting to more than 40 percent, would go to less affluent countries to help them catch up with the rest of the bloc.        

Farmers also have long been big beneficiaries of the budget and would get more than a third under the proposals unveiled Wednesday.        

About 6 percent of the budget goes to running European Union institutions like the commission, in Brussels; the European Parliament, in Brussels and Strasbourg, France; and the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg.        

The Dutch finance minister, Jan Kees de Jager, said he would push for a substantially lower figure, which must be approved by the bloc&rsquo;s member governments and the European Parliament.        

&ldquo;These proposals are out of proportion,&rdquo; Mr. de Jager said. &ldquo;I understand that European expenditure increases in some areas, but we should cut in other areas instead of inflating the budget year after year.&rdquo;        

The commission said it expected a final agreement on the budget in November, after a vote by the European Parliament.        

Janusz Lewandowski, the union&rsquo;s budget commissioner, said the increase was vital to maintain previous commitments and to help poorer parts of the union, like former members of the Soviet bloc.        

Mr. Lewandowski said that if the commission failed to pay for some projects then it could be sued for breach of contract. He emphasized that Britain was among the countries that would benefit because union money was helping pay for an electricity project connecting Britain and Ireland.        

&ldquo;We cannot punish our citizens, companies, local and regional authorities who have a right to get their bills paid,&rdquo; Mr. Lewandowski said.        

He also said the budget had been structured to account for the needs of austerity by reducing spending on buildings, computers, publications, overseas missions and conferences. The proposals also called for cuts in financing for a satellite system for Europe, called Galileo, of 24.9 million euros, or about $36 million.        

Claims of waste have been made often against the European Union budget. Last year, for instance, the commission asked Italy for a refund of 720,000 euros, or about $983,000, after it emerged that the money was used to pay for an Elton John concert in Naples.        
