
BEIJING &mdash; Two leading Chinese human rights lawyers have been released after disappearing during the country&rsquo;s continuing crackdown on dissent.        

One of the lawyers, Jiang Tianyong, returned home on Tuesday after being detained two months ago, according to human rights groups in touch with his family.        

Mr. Jiang&rsquo;s phones were either switched off or out of order, but China Aid, a Christian human rights group that has tracked the lawyer since his conversion to Christianity, said he was at home and in good spirits. His wife, Jin Bianling, told Reuters that he was in good health but that the couple could not speak to the media.        

Mr. Jiang was picked up twice in mid-February. After his first detention on Feb. 16, he said in an interview that he had been taken to a police station, where he was assaulted. Three days later, he was forced into an unmarked van and taken into custody again, his wife said. The couple&rsquo;s home was searched, and his computer and briefcase were confiscated.        

Mr. Jiang&rsquo;s case was raised by the State Department, which accused China of extralegal detentions.        

The second lawyer, Liu Xiaoyuan, said in an interview on Wednesday that he had been released Tuesday after having been held for five days. He said he had been bundled into a van on April 14 and did not know where he had been taken.        

During his detention, Mr. Liu said, he was not directly questioned about his friend, the detained dissident artist Ai Weiwei, who was picked up this month and is under investigation on suspicion of economic crimes. Mr. Liu said his willingness to represent Mr. Ai might have been a factor in his detention.        

But Mr. Liu said he would be willing to represent Mr. Ai in a trial. &ldquo;If Weiwei&rsquo;s family asks me to represent him, I will say yes,&rdquo; he said.        

Human rights groups estimate that 18 other lawyers or activists are still missing.        

The crackdown appears to be related to a call this year for Chinese to start their own &ldquo;Jasmine Revolution&rdquo; &mdash; a reference to the revolts in the Arab world that have felled governments in Tunisia and Egypt and are still under way in Syria, Yemen, Bahrain and Libya.        

Also on Wednesday, the Web site Boxun posted reports that truck drivers at Shanghai&rsquo;s container port went on strike over rising fuel prices. The site had photographs that seemed to show at least hundreds of people protesting and a strong police presence.        

By Wednesday evening, Chinese microblogs were scrubbed of news of the protests, a sign of the government&rsquo;s concern over the reports.        
Mia Li contributed research.
