
SYDNEY, Australia &mdash; After weeks of embarrassment over sexual scandals in the Australian military, Prime Minister Julia Gillard&rsquo;s government appears intent on giving the armed forces their biggest shake-up in more than a decade, including making all combat roles available to women.        

In the most notorious example of the sexual scandals, a male cadet at the elite Australian Defense Force Academy was caught streaming video of himself having sex with a female colleague to his friends via Skype, without the colleague&rsquo;s knowledge. The female cadet was reported to have been hauled before a disciplinary committee on charges of drinking and being absent without leave, and she was told to apologize to the other cadets for having gone to the news media with her story.        

The Australian Defense Force has encountered controversy before &mdash; a report released this year found that sailors aboard the naval supply ship Success had routinely engaged in &ldquo;predatory sexual and drunken misconduct.&rdquo;        

More recent problems have included Australian soldiers in Afghanistan posting racist epithets about Afghan civilians and crude taunts against Ms. Gillard on Facebook, as well as a page on that Web site dedicated to singling out gay soldiers for attacks.        

The government is now ordering a number of inquiries intended to crack what critics say is a culture of sexism in the military.        

Defense Minister Stephen Smith has ordered Elizabeth Broderick, Australia&rsquo;s sexual discrimination commissioner, to conduct a &ldquo;comprehensive review of the culture&rdquo; in the armed forces and the elite academy, focusing on the treatment of women, as well as the use of alcohol and social media.        

The country&rsquo;s senior military officer, Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, acknowledged the depth of the problems and strongly endorsed the planned overhaul.        

Marshal Houston, who is chief of the defense force, said in an e-mail that the military would act on government recommendations to open all posts to women.        

&ldquo;Women will be able to work in any position in which they meet the demands of the job &mdash; including roles involved in direct combat,&rdquo; he said.        

More than 10,000 women currently serve in more than 300 capacities across the services, according to the military.        

Marshal Houston said that 93 percent of positions in the services were currently open to women. But combat roles in infantry, artillery, engineering, airfield defense and special operations units, as well as work as clearance divers in the navy, have been out of bounds.        

If combat roles are also made available, Australia will join Canada, New Zealand and several European nations among those that allow women to serve in all frontline combat roles. Women make up 14 percent of the United States armed forces, but they cannot serve in certain combat positions, including in the infantry and Special Forces.        

There are signs that the Australian military could still prove highly resistant to change.        

Neil James, executive director of the Australia Defense Association, an independent research organization widely seen as expressing the viewpoint of more conservative elements within the military, accused the news media of devoting too much attention to the sexual scandals. He called the investigations &ldquo;a public witch hunt worthy of Salem, Massachusetts, in the 17th century.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;In each case, the incident is either a very isolated one or it&rsquo;s otherwise explicable,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not indicating a systemic problem.&rdquo;        

As for expanding the opportunities for women in combat, Mr. James said: &ldquo;In certain types of jobs, they are likely to disproportionately suffer a higher rate of casualties. And our point that we keep making to some of the more ideological feminists is, &lsquo;How is that equitable?&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

Ben Wadham, a senior lecturer at Flinders University in Adelaide and a former infantry corporal, called the response to the scandals &ldquo;the most significant expression of public concern with A.D.F. culture&rdquo; he had seen in three decades of study.        

He warned that the &ldquo;us against the world&rdquo; mentality that the military promoted to encourage unit cohesion could make any investigation extremely difficult.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a dark side to that mateship,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And the dark side of it is when it begins to wheel and turn on its own logic and we get this very closed, secret culture of denial.&rdquo;        

He contended that the military&rsquo;s culture could prove dangerous if the reforms were pushed through without addressing the armed forces&rsquo; deep-seated sexism.        

&ldquo;The A.D.F. isn&rsquo;t ready for women in the front line,&rdquo; Mr. Wadham said. &ldquo;There has to be a lot of preparation going forward.&rdquo;        
