
SHANGHAI (AP) &mdash; The police on Thursday clamped down on a demonstration by hundreds of truck drivers upset over rising fees and fuel prices in Shanghai, China&rsquo;s busiest port city, in the latest display of public resentment over surging inflation.        

The police acted after the drivers blocked a dock in the Pudong district of eastern Shanghai on Wednesday, according to an employee of a logistics company.        

Drivers gathered about 40 trucks on Thursday at a cargo-handling center in the Baoshan district on the city&rsquo;s northeastern outskirts, but there was no repeat of the violence that broke out on Wednesday, when a trucking company owner said that eight or nine truckers were arrested when they tried to overturn a traffic patrol car.        

China&rsquo;s leaders have been trying to defuse mounting public frustration over inflation, which reached 5.4 percent in March, a 32-month high, driven substantially by a nearly 12 percent increase in food costs.        

They have said that restraining inflation is their priority this year. Cities have raised minimum wages by 10 percent to 20 percent, but that has failed to keep pace with rising living costs in many areas.        

The authorities reacted quickly to the Shanghai truckers&rsquo; protest, deploying police officers and removing accounts of the unrest from Chinese Web sites.        

Late Wednesday, protesting drivers smashed the windows of trucks belonging to drivers who refused to take part in the protest, said the employee at the Shanghai Oriland International Logistics Company, who gave only his last name, Zhang.        

In the Baoshan district on Thursday, reporters saw about 40 drivers, but no sign of violence or arrests. Ten vans with police officers were at the scene, with some officers in military-style bulletproof vests. The main gate of the cargo-handling complex was sealed with yellow police tape.        

The drivers are upset about new fees charged by private warehouse operators and rising fuel prices, which they say sharply cut into their profits. Gasoline and diesel prices, which are set by the government, are at a record high after an increase of about 5 percent two weeks ago to reflect higher global crude prices.        

The protests also suggest that tensions are growing in China over the gulf between the nation&rsquo;s tiny elite and its poor majority. Incomes are rising, but inflation is squeezing families and small business people like self-employed truckers, while profits at major state-owned companies are higher than ever.        
