
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Syria deployed police officers, soldiers and military vehicles in two of the country&rsquo;s three largest cities on Thursday ahead of a call for nationwide protests that will test the popular reception of reforms decreed by President Bashar al-Assad as well as the momentum that organizers have sought to bring to a five-week uprising.        

Residents described a mobilization in the capital, Damascus, and, in more pronounced fashion, in the restive city of Homs, where a government crackdown this week dispersed one of the largest gatherings since demonstrations began last month. For days, organizers have looked to Friday as a potential show of strength for a movement that has yet to build the critical mass reached in Egypt and Tunisia.        

&ldquo;Together toward freedom,&rdquo; read a Facebook page that has served as a pulpit of the uprising, the words posed over symbols of Christianity and Islam. &ldquo;One heart, one hand, one goal.&rdquo;        

The aim of both sides is the same: to prove they have the upper hand in the biggest challenge yet to the 40-year rule of the Assad family. While organizers were reluctant to call Friday a decisive moment, they acknowledged that it would signal their degree of support in a country that remained divided, with the government still claiming bastions of support among minorities, loyalists of the Baath Party and wealthier segments of the population.        

&ldquo;People are still hesitant,&rdquo; said Wissam Tarif, the executive director of Insan, a human rights group. But he added, &ldquo;If it&rsquo;s not this Friday, it will be the coming Friday.&rdquo;        

Residents of Damascus said police officers were seen heading from a headquarters on the outskirts in Zabadani toward the capital, where military security officers had reportedly turned out in greater numbers. The security presence was more pronounced in Homs, residents said, as scores of military vehicles loaded with soldiers and equipment were seen on the highway from Damascus. Police officers in plain clothes had gathered at the New Clock Square, where thousands of protesters had tried to stage an Egyptian-style sit-in on Monday night.        

Cellphones were hard to reach, and some land lines had been cut.        

In Homs, an organizer, Abu Kamel al-Dimashki, said the city was &ldquo;like a ghost town and we are still mourning our martyrs, so everything is closed.&rdquo; He said, &ldquo;Things are a little scary.&rdquo;        

In a sign of the anxiety, some protesters were already predicting violence.        

&ldquo;We know if we&rsquo;re asking for freedom, we will lose people,&rdquo; said Salem Abu al-Saud, a protester who fled Homs this week but has remained in contact with people there. &ldquo;At least in Homs, people are more determined than ever to participate, without fear.&rdquo;        

The government has maintained that the uprising is led by militant Islamists, and organizers acknowledge that organized religious forces like the banned Muslim Brotherhood have forcefully taken part. The government has also accused foreign countries of supporting the protests. And, indeed, some of the largest have occurred in cities near Syria&rsquo;s borders: Dara&rsquo;a, a poor town in southwestern Syria near Jordan, and Homs, the country&rsquo;s third largest city and an industrial center near conservative northern Lebanon.        

But so far, the government has sought to hew to a policy of crackdown and compromise. On Thursday, Mr. Assad signed decrees that repealed harsh emergency rule, in place since 1963, abolished draconian security courts and granted citizens the right to protest peacefully, though they still need government permission to gather. The orders had already been handed down to his government on Tuesday, making his endorsement a formality; its timing seemed aimed in part at blunting Friday&rsquo;s protests.        

He also appointed a new governor in Homs. Two weeks ago, the previous governor, Mohammed Iyad Ghazzal, was dismissed. He had been in power since 2004 and was widely despised.        

&ldquo;Homs wasn&rsquo;t happy with the old governor, but a new one isn&rsquo;t the urgent issue,&rdquo; said a government employee who gave his name as Khalid. &ldquo;We want to change the mentality of how the country is run, not change a governor or his administration.&rdquo;        

Sporadic protests erupted again Thursday, though their numbers were not as large as in past demonstrations, and they seemed confined to Kurdish areas.        

Organizers said about 300 people protested at a university in Hasakah, a city near the Turkish and Iraqi borders, and a larger demonstration occurred in Ayn al-Arab, east of Aleppo. Between 5,000 and 8,000 people marched there, though Mr. Tarif said it seemed more spontaneous than organized. He said the Kurdish leadership in the region had yet to endorse bigger turnouts, debating whether they could instead extract more concessions from a government that has already granted citizenship to as many as 300,000 stateless Kurds.        

The debate is a microcosm of a larger one taking place in Syria, where many fear the prospect of chaos or score-settling in the event of the government&rsquo;s collapse. Many activists said the reforms so far were too little and too late; in the words of Haitham Maleh, an oft-imprisoned activist and former judge, &ldquo;the mentality of the regime has to change.&rdquo;        

But some worry about the combustibility of a society that is shadowed by sectarian resentments fostered by the government. And many identify that government almost entirely with the Alawite minority, a heterodox Muslim sect that accounts for 10 percent of Syria&rsquo;s population.        

&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s be realistic, let&rsquo;s not destroy the country,&rdquo; said Camille Otrakji, a Damascus-born political blogger in Montreal. &ldquo;Why do you think there aren&rsquo;t millions in the street demonstrating against Bashar? It&rsquo;s not because they&rsquo;re afraid of the security forces. It&rsquo;s because they&rsquo;re afraid of what would replace Assad.&rdquo;        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, Katherine Zoepf from New York, and employees of The New York Times from Beirut and Damascus, Syria.
