
CHENGDU, China &mdash; Ever since Deng Xiaoping signaled in 1978 that it was fine to get rich, much of China has seemed hell-bent on that goal. But some local governments would like those who succeed not to lord it over others, at least when it comes to paying final respects.        

As of last month, in the cemeteries of this hilly megalopolis in south central China, modest burial sites are in. Fancy tombs are out. And in some places, so are fancy funerals.        

Plots for ashes are limited to 1.5 square meters, about 4 feet by 4 feet. Tombstones are supposed to be no higher than 100 centimeters, or 39 inches, although it is not clear that limit will be enforced. Sellers of oversize plots have been warned of severe fines, as much as 300 times the plot&rsquo;s price.        

&ldquo;Ordinary people who walk by and see these lavish tombs might not be able to keep their emotions in balance,&rdquo; said Zheng Wenzhong, as he visited the relatively modest resting place of a relative at The Temple of the Lighted Lamp cemetery. That is apparently exactly what many officials fear. After a quarter of a century in which the gap between rich and poor has steadily widened, the wretched excesses of the affluent are increasingly a Chinese government concern.        

China&rsquo;s income inequality, as measured by a standard called the Gini coefficient, is now on a par with some Latin American and African countries, according to the World Bank. Justin Yifu Lin, the bank&rsquo;s chief economist, last year identified the growing disparity as one of China&rsquo;s biggest economic problems.        

Li Shi, an economics professor at Beijing Normal University, said that in 1988 the average income of the top 10 percent of Chinese was about 12 times that of the bottom 10 percent. By 2007, he said, those at the top earned 23 times more.        

China&rsquo;s long-term solutions to the divide include more market reforms, stronger social security programs, lower taxes on low-income families and tighter controls on illicit income. But while waiting for Beijing for all that, some local officials are looking for ways to gloss over the gap.        

A regulation posted last month on the Web site of the Beijing Administration for Industry and Commerce banned outdoor advertisements promoting &ldquo;unhealthy&rdquo; tendencies, including &ldquo;hedonism, feudalism and royalty, worshiping of and groveling before foreign things, supreme aristocracy and vulgar tastes.&rdquo;        

Mr. Li said that measures governing luxury advertisements or tombs might &ldquo;to a certain extent alleviate the general hatred toward rich people&rdquo; but were essentially stopgaps. Still, Chen Changwen, director of the sociology department at Sichuan University, said he saw their merit in averting social conflict.        

&ldquo;Of course, if we cannot change the fact of the disparity between the rich and poor, the least we can do is lessen the impact of it on society and lessen the advertising of it,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;A lot of people cannot handle the extravagant ways of this first generation of the wealthy. It really grates on the public.&rdquo;        

Ostentatious tombs are particularly irksome, he said, because many Chinese find even a simple grave marker beyond their means. In a coinage that captures the widespread frustration, someone struggling to afford burial costs is called a &ldquo;grave slave.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;There are many examples of how the rich can afford to bury the dead, but not the common people,&rdquo; said Zheng Fengtian, a professor of rural development at Beijing&rsquo;s Renmin University. &ldquo;This makes many people very angry.&rdquo;        

One spectacular example took place last month in Wenling, a coastal city south of Shanghai. Five brothers commandeered the grounds of a high school to bid their mother goodbye with pomp befitting a state funeral.        

Thousands of onlookers watched a ceremony that featured nine flower-decked limousines, a uniformed band and a 16-gun salute. One brother told reporters that his mother wanted to be buried with &ldquo;face.&rdquo;        

Just last August, though, Wenling passed a regulation against funeral &ldquo;extravagance and waste.&rdquo; It limited the number of cars and wreaths and prohibited processions past schools and hospitals. The high school principal, the assistant principal and the government&rsquo;s head of funeral practices were all fired, according to media reports, and the family was fined about $450.        

Xiyun Yang and Jonathan Kaiman contributed research from Beijing, and Jack Begg from New York.
