
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; The top American military officer warned Friday that the conflict on the ground in Libya threatened to become a stalemate, but Obama administration and military officials said that neither the United States nor its allies planned to fundamentally alter the NATO-led air operations despite criticism that they were not doing enough.        

The officer, Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said that a month of airstrikes had destroyed 30 percent to 40 percent of the capabilities of the military forces loyal to Libya&rsquo;s leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, but had not yet drastically tilted the conflict with opposition militias one way or another. He cited shifts in tactics by Libyan forces that made it difficult for NATO warplanes to distinguish them from the rebel fighters and civilians.        

&ldquo;So it&rsquo;s become a much more difficult fight, much more difficult targets,&rdquo; Admiral Mullen said in Baghdad, where he visited American troops involved in another American war. &ldquo;As I have observed in recent days, essentially it&rsquo;s very much stalemate-like in the vicinity of Ajdabiya and Brega,&rdquo; two contested cities east of the capital, Tripoli.        

His remarks were echoed by those of the most prominent American yet to visit the rebel strongholds in Libya: Senator John McCain. Appearing on Friday in Benghazi, he, too, used the word stalemate as he called on the United States to intensify its attacks on pro-Qaddafi forces, using aircraft like A-10 jets and AC-130 gunships that the White House and Pentagon have pulled from the fight, citing the threat from portable missiles on the ground and saying allied warplanes should take the lead.        

Mr. McCain, a strong advocate of intervention in Libya, called for the United States to recognize the rebels&rsquo; governing council as the country&rsquo;s legitimate government, as France, Italy and Qatar have done, and provide it with money and arms on a scale similar to what the United States did in support of those who fought the Soviet Union&rsquo;s occupation of Afghanistan in the 1980s.        

&ldquo;I have met these brave fighters, and they are not Al Qaeda,&rdquo; said Mr. McCain, Republican of Arizona. &ldquo;They are Libyan patriots who want to liberate their nation.&rdquo; His comments came after a brief visit that included meetings with the members of the Transitional National Council, led by a former justice minister, Mustafa Abdul Jalil, and a former interior minister, Abdul Fateh Younes, who both defected when the uprising began in February.        

Mr. McCain&rsquo;s visit, though coordinated with the White House and the State Department, nonetheless underscored a mounting sense of frustration among critics and even some supporters of the Obama administration that it was not acting aggressively enough to help the rebels overthrow Colonel Qaddafi.        

Although this week President Obama authorized the use of armed drones in Libya and a $25 million contribution of nonlethal military surplus for the rebel forces, the administration resists deepening the American military involvement. Asked on Thursday whether American soldiers or advisers should be sent to help improve the effectiveness of the rebel forces, Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates said Mr. Obama had explicitly ruled that out. &ldquo;And there is no wiggle room in that,&rdquo; he said.        

Instead, administration officials have pleaded for patience. They said that while it could take weeks or months for the rebels to mature as fighters, they asserted that the operation continued to weaken Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s military and that sanctions and an arms embargo allowed the United States &ldquo;quite aggressively, both unilaterally and multilaterally, to put the squeeze on Qaddafi,&rdquo; as the White House spokesman, Jay Carney, put it on Friday.        

&ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s important to remember that Qaddafi&rsquo;s resources are limited,&rdquo; Mr. Carney told reporters returning with the president to Washington from California. &ldquo;And the arms embargo and the sanctions that have been put in place will, as each day goes by, make it harder and harder for him to function and for his regime to function.&rdquo;        

Military officials said the greatest shortcoming among the ragtag rebel militias was not weapons but training, communications systems and a sensible command structure. The supplies the United States is sending &mdash; including uniforms, body armor and nonclassified communications gear &mdash; are suited to building a more effective fighting force. With the anticipated arrival in Libya of liaison officers from France, Italy and Britain, officials expressed hope that the rebels would become better organized and coordinate their battlefield movements more effectively.        

Even so, Admiral Mullen and other NATO officials acknowledged that an evolving tactic adopted by pro-Qaddafi forces &mdash; hiding among the population and moving about the battlefield in civilian vehicles &mdash; had vastly complicated NATO&rsquo;s attempts to locate, identify and attack government troops, armor and artillery.        

The use of armed Predator drones is intended to counter that. Those drones, though, will operate only on the frontlines separating the rebels and the government forces, with the justification of protecting civilians in besieged cities like Misurata. As of late Friday, no Predators had yet attacked Libyan government forces, officials said.        

A senior administration official acknowledged that the fierce fighting in Misurata in particular called into question whether the NATO campaign was succeeding in protecting civilians. &ldquo;There are constraints on doing that because of the stated desire to avoid civilian casualties, the technical limits of air power and even the weather,&rdquo; the official said.        

Overall, though, the NATO campaign was never intended, by itself, to overthrow Colonel Qaddafi. The measure of success, the official added, is &ldquo;not whether the rebels are marching on Tripoli.&rdquo;        

The fighting in Misurata seesawed Friday.        

The rebels there said they had driven Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s men from buildings along Tripoli Avenue, a central artery, where snipers had been shooting at anyone who dared venture out. Shooting resumed later, though, near the main hospital, not far from Tripoli Avenue, according to a foreign journalist at the hospital, suggesting that whatever success the rebels had enjoyed was probably short-lived. The Libyan flag, which had been taken down the day before, was once again flying over the city&rsquo;s tallest building.        

Libya&rsquo;s deputy foreign minister, Khaled Kaim, said the army might stop fighting in Misurata because of NATO airstrikes, Reuters reported. Instead, he said, local tribes will try to negotiate with the rebels, and if that fails, the tribes will fight the rebels, the news agency reported.        

In Benghazi, the rebels seemed buoyed by the news from the front and from Mr. McCain&rsquo;s visit. He stopped briefly at the courthouse that has been the headquarters of the uprising&rsquo;s leaders. Only a few dozen Libyans were there, and they chanted pro-American and anti-Qaddafi slogans.        

&ldquo;This,&rdquo; Mr. McCain said, &ldquo;was one of the most exciting and inspiring days of my life.&rdquo;        

Rod Nordland reported from Benghazi, and Steven Lee Myers from Washington. Reporting was contributed by C. J. Chivers from Benghazi, Michael S. Schmidt from Baghdad, Thom Shanker from Washington, Alan Cowell from London and J. David Goodman from New York.
