
ROME &mdash; In his first question-and-answer television appearance, shown by Italy&rsquo;s national broadcaster on Friday, Pope Benedict XVI urged the Christian minority not to abandon Iraq and offered his thoughts on euthanasia and the tsunami in Japan.        

In a segment recorded last week and broadcast on one of the holiest days in the Christian calendar, the pope, dressed in white and seated behind a desk in his library, responded to questions from seven people selected from among thousands of submissions.        

Like the book-length interview the pope published last November, the television appearance seemed aimed at helping him speak more directly with his followers, exactly a year after a sexual abuse crisis in Europe plunged the Roman Catholic world into a tailspin and revealed profound problems of communications at the Vatican.        

There were no curveball questions among those selected by Italy&rsquo;s RAI state broadcaster &mdash; and nothing about the sexual abuse crisis. On Thursday, Benedict addressed the crisis in a liturgy, speaking of &ldquo;the shame we feel over our failings,&rdquo; but adding that &ldquo;there are radiant examples of faith,&rdquo; including his predecessor John Paul II, who is expected to move one step closer to sainthood at a beatification Mass on May 1.        

In the television question-and-answer session on Friday, the pope urged Christians in war-torn Iraq &ldquo;to resist the temptation to emigrate, which is very understandable in the conditions they are living in.&rdquo;        

The program revealed a rich tension between the mysteries of faith and the limitations of the television interview format.        

Asked by an Italian man, &ldquo;What is Jesus doing in the time between his death and resurrection?&rdquo; the pope answered: &ldquo;This descent of Jesus&rsquo; soul should not be imagined as a geographical or a spatial trip, from one continent to another. It is the soul&rsquo;s journey.&rdquo;        

Elena, a 7-year-old tsunami survivor from Japan, asked: &ldquo;Why do children have to be so sad? I am asking the pope, who speaks with God, to explain it to me?&rdquo;        

The pope answered, &ldquo;This suffering was not empty, it wasn&rsquo;t in vain, but behind it was a good plan.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;You can be sure that God will help you,&rdquo; he added.        

The pope also told a woman whose son has been in a vegetative coma since April 2009 that &ldquo;certainly his soul is still present in his body.&rdquo;        

The television interview was part of a talk show in which a panel of three experts discussed the Crucifixion. A tagline at the bottom of the screen read, &ldquo;The pope responds to questions about Jesus.&rdquo;        

Later on Friday, Benedict was scheduled to participate in a Good Friday ceremony at St. Peter&rsquo;s Basilica and perform the annual Stations of the Cross procession near the Colosseum.        

The texts for the procession this year were written by several nuns, one of the first times the pope will read texts prepared by women.        

On Friday, the Vatican also announced that Benedict would be the first pope to call outer space. On May 4, he is expected to be in satellite contact with two Italian astronauts aboard the International Space Station when the space shuttle Endeavour docks with the station.        
