
BEIJING &mdash; The United States and China will have their annual meeting on human rights next week, but there are signs that the session may be more tense than usual.        

According to a statement issued by the State Department, the two sides are to meet Wednesday and Thursday in Beijing for what has become a regular springtime meeting on human rights.        

But the statement was highly unusual for several reasons, not least because Washington made the announcement for a meeting to be held in Beijing &mdash; which runs counter to diplomatic protocol &mdash; and because it was made just days before the event.        

Indeed, the Chinese government confirmed the meeting late Friday only after repeated calls to the Foreign Ministry. A day earlier, a ministry spokesman said details still had to be &ldquo;discussed and arranged.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Objectively speaking, the announcement is being made at the last minute,&rdquo; said Joshua Rosenzweig of the Dui Hua Foundation, a rights group in Hong Kong. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s also interesting that the U.S. is making it unilaterally and that they&rsquo;re using this language.&rdquo;        

The American announcement bluntly says that the talks will focus on &ldquo;the recent negative trend of forced disappearances, extralegal detentions and arrests and convictions&rdquo; &mdash; highly unusual in such a statement and most likely reflecting Washington&rsquo;s growing frustration with the human rights situation in China.        

China is in the midst of a crackdown on dissent in which dozens of lawyers and activists have been rounded up. Some have been detained for brief questioning; others have disappeared for months without a trace.        

The most prominent is Ai Weiwei, an artist and critic detained this month when trying to board a flight to Hong Kong. The immediate catalyst for the crackdown seems to have been a call by dissidents for Chinese to emulate the &ldquo;jasmine&rdquo; revolutions of North Africa. Even though few people heeded the calls to protest, the government has reacted strongly.        

Western human rights analysts say the clampdown shows the limits of government-to-government human rights dialogue. Besides the United States, other countries and the European Union have similar sessions, which usually take place in private once a year. Typically, Western countries bring up problems or lists of detained dissidents, and China responds by saying that it is a country ruled by laws, and that those people violated the law.        

&ldquo;Having the meeting now that so many human rights activists are missing puts the spotlight on the fact that these kinds of meetings are toothless,&rdquo; said Nicholas Bequelin of Human Rights Watch in Hong Kong. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a talk shop more than anything else.&rdquo;        
