
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The police on Saturday ratcheted up enforcement on stores and tailor shops that illegally make and sell military and police uniforms after a string of attacks by insurgents dressed as Afghan service members that have cast suspicion on the country&rsquo;s security forces.        

In the Kohan Froshi market, a sprawling open-air bazaar in downtown Kabul, teams of police officers made morning raids through the stalls, confiscating hundreds of uniforms, boots, badges, insignia and other military and police items, said Gen. Mohammad Ayoub Salangi, the police chief of Kabul Province.        

In addition to confiscating uniforms and equipment, the police issued stern warnings to shop owners, telling them that if they were caught again, they would face arrest.        

&ldquo;We warned the people not to sell military uniforms and boots,&rdquo; General Salangi said. Similar crackdowns were under way or about to start in the volatile southern provinces of Kandahar and Helmand, officials there said.        

A thriving trade in military clothing has existed for years. There is ample supply; soldiers and police officers often sell their extra uniforms to supplement their relatively low pay, and deserters also try to cash in. The demand is also high: pieces of contraband uniforms have become something of a fashion statement in a country that has lived with war and violence for decades.        

The authorities have periodically cracked down on the sales, fearing that some of the uniforms would be worn by militants hoping to impersonate security forces. But shopkeepers have generally waited out the crackdown and then returned to hawking an assortment of olive green and camouflage jackets and pants. Whether the latest round of enforcement will have more lasting effect remains to be seen, and government officials acknowledge that it will require stricter regulations that prohibit service members from selling their uniforms.        

While it is not certain that all the recent attacks were carried out by impostors in uniform, rather than Taliban who had covertly joined the security forces, NATO officials say that people pretending to be army and police officers&nbsp;are more of a problem than infiltrators.        

On Saturday, many tailors at the Kohan Froshi market denied that they were selling uniforms, saying that they were merely repairing them. The police crackdown, they said, was robbing them of their livelihoods.        

&ldquo;I had eight pair of military uniforms that soldiers brought to me to be fixed, and the police took them,&rdquo; said Gamaludin, a tailor, who like many Afghans goes by one name.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re all dependent on the soldiers,&rdquo; said another tailor, Ghulam Hassan. &ldquo;There are 50 or 60 shops here and they&rsquo;re all breadwinners for their families, and if they get closed, what are they going to do?&rdquo;        

A casual stroll through the bazaar an hour after the police operation provided ample evidence of the problem faced by the Afghan and coalition forces. At one stall, military badges and insignia hung at the entrance, and a police uniform and military cap were draped along the wall near the rear. When a reporter walked up, the shop owner quickly pulled down the badges, then insisted that the uniform was for display only.        

Around the corner, an Afghan Army lieutenant carrying a crisp new duffle bag filled with military clothing hopped from stall to stall. When a reporter caught up to him, he was handing two new military caps to a tailor, though it was unclear if he was trying to sell or buy them. As a reporter started to ask questions, the nervous-looking shop owner first said he was repairing the hats, then said to the lieutenant in Dari, &ldquo;Tell him you&rsquo;re buying these.&rdquo;        

Asked what he was doing at the market with the duffle bag, the lieutenant said, &ldquo;Just hanging around.&rdquo;        

Several shop owners said soldiers and police officers and even their wives frequently visited the market to sell their new and used uniforms and equipment.        

&ldquo;Just hang out in my shop, you&rsquo;ll see them every day,&rdquo; said Akhtar Gul, a fabric seller. &ldquo;They sell their boots for 300 to 1,000 Afghanis, their A.N.A. uniforms for 500 Afghanis, their government-issued coats for 2,000 Afghanis.&rdquo;        

Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul, Taimoor Shah from Kandahar, Afghanistan, and an employee of The New York Times from Jalalabad, Afghanistan.
