
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; On the bloodiest day of Syria&rsquo;s uprising, Rami Nakhle&rsquo;s fingers drifted over the keyboard in a room silent but for the news bulletins of Al Jazeera, yet filled with the commotion on his computer screen.        

As the events unfolded Friday, user names flashed and faded. Twitter flickered with agitprop and trash talk. And Facebook glided past Gmail and Skype as Mr. Nakhle joined a coterie of exiled Syrians fomenting, reporting and, most remarkably, shaping the greatest challenge to four decades of the Assad family&rsquo;s rule in Syria.        

&ldquo;Can you hear it?&rdquo; Mr. Nakhle cried, showing a video of chants for the government&rsquo;s fall. &ldquo;This is Syria, man! Unbelievable.&rdquo;        

Unlike the revolts in Egypt, Tunisia and even Libya, which were televised to the world, Syria&rsquo;s revolt is distinguished by the power of a self-styled vanguard abroad to ferry out images and news that are anarchic and illuminating, if incomplete.        

For weeks now, the small number of activists, spanning the Middle East, Europe and the United States, have coordinated across almost every time zone and managed to smuggle hundreds of satellite and mobile phones, modems, laptops and cameras into Syria. There, compatriots elude surveillance with e-mailed software and upload videos on dial-up connections.        

Their work has ensured what was once impossible.        

In 1982, Syria&rsquo;s government managed to hide, for a time, its massacre of at least 10,000 people in Hama in a brutal crackdown of an Islamist revolt. But Saturday, the world could witness, in almost real time, the chants of anger and cries for the fallen as security forces fired on the funerals for Friday&rsquo;s dead.        

The activists have staggered the government of President Bashar al-Assad, forcing it to face the reality that it has almost entirely ceded the narrative of the revolt to its opponents at home and abroad.        

&ldquo;The government&rsquo;s paranoid style has become obvious,&rdquo; said Joshua Landis, a professor of Middle East studies at the University of Oklahoma. &ldquo;These activists have completely flipped the balance of power on the regime, and that&rsquo;s all due to social media.&rdquo;        

Still, though few question the breadth of the uprising, there are differences on its depth in towns and cities. Cyberactivists outside of Syria fashion slogans of unity for a revolt that the government insists is inspired by militant Islamists. The voices of protesters smuggled abroad have drowned out the sentiments of the president&rsquo;s supporters, who include the prosperous elite and frightened minorities of Christians and heterodox Muslim sects.        

Mr. Nakhle, 28, finds himself in an unlikely locale to wage that contest. Imbued with youthful idealism, he left his hometown in 2006 for Damascus, where he discovered the Internet.        

&ldquo;A completely new world for me,&rdquo; he called it, and he soon broadened his activism with Internet campaigns to free political prisoners and, more dramatically, end Syria&rsquo;s equivalent of martial law. He came up with a pseudonym, Malath Aumran &mdash; an inside joke based on family nicknames &mdash; and came up with a portrait for Twitter and Facebook that was a composite photograph of 32 men.        

By last December, the secret police were pursuing him. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s all they need &mdash; suspicions,&rdquo; he said.        

In a harrowing journey the next month, smugglers on motorcycles carried him to the border, where he narrowly escaped the police and spent the night in a rocky valley before making his way to a working-class neighborhood here. Frills are few; in a sparse apartment, cigarettes, tea, Nescaf&eacute;, sugar and a drink from boiled leaves of yerba mat&eacute; crowd his coffee table.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m a cyberactivist,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;As long as I have the Internet, that&rsquo;s it.&rdquo;        

Gaunt and with bloodshot blue-green eyes, Mr. Nakhle navigated a cascade of information Friday &mdash; a frenetic conversation on Skype with 15 people in Syria, a snippet of video from Tartus, a phone call from a friend in Damascus, and queries from journalists for contacts in remote towns. Someone he believed to be a secret police officer flashed him a taunting message: &ldquo;There is news that a member of your family has been taken by security services.&rdquo; Mr. Nakhle changed the sim card on his phone and called home, without taking his eyes off his computer screen. The news proved false.        

A message came in via Skype that a protest was dispersed in Aleppo.        

&ldquo;I won&rsquo;t publish this one,&rdquo; he said knowingly.        

Katherine Zoepf contributed reporting from New York, and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria.
