
TOWDABAY KALAY, Afghanistan &mdash; The American soldiers knew little about this farming village in the rugged foothills of Paktika Province in eastern Afghanistan, but they were told the Taliban moved through regularly.        

When the soldiers, part of the First Battalion, 506th Infantry, arrived on foot one morning, hiking along terraced fields carved into the steep hillsides, they found the villagers fearful. Not just of the Taliban, but of NATO forces as well.        

&ldquo;We are scared of both sides,&rdquo; a village elder, Mutayeb Khan, told the soldiers, expressing a litany of concerns shared by many villagers in remote parts of the country.        

They worry that NATO and Afghan forces will confuse them for insurgents while they&rsquo;re tending their fields or collecting wood in the hills; that the Taliban will attack them if they help, or even talk to coalition forces; that government forces will detain their young men, perhaps for years..        

&ldquo;We can&rsquo;t go to the Taliban and complain,&rdquo; Mr. Khan said. &ldquo;We can&rsquo;t go to the government because the Taliban will find out and call us spies and kill us.&rdquo;        

Founded or not, their fears underscore the daunting task that NATO forces face in persuading Afghans that coalition forces and the Afghan government can protect them, especially in areas with little government or NATO military presence.        

Building that trust is a crucial goal as coalition forces lay the groundwork for turning over security to Afghan national forces by the end of 2014. And as coalition forces shift their focus to protecting population centers as part of Gen. David H. Petraeus&rsquo;s counterinsurgency plan, rural hamlets like Towdabay Kalay remain ripe for insurgents looking for recruits, sanctuary and supplies.        

Military officials consider the province along the Pakistan border to be home to a robust insurgency, as well as a strategic crossing ground for militants entering the country from safe havens in North and South Waziristan in Pakistan. Across the province&rsquo;s western border lies Highway 1, providing easy access to Kabul, the capital.        

Of the country&rsquo;s 34 provinces, Paktika has been the fourth-deadliest for coalition soldiers in the nearly decade-long conflict. The tribal system remains strong here, as does support for the militants.        

In an Army survey in February, more than two-thirds of Paktika residents said they sympathized with the Taliban. Many others, like Mr. Khan, a leather-skinned farmer with a henna-dyed orange beard, simply feel helpless to resist them.        

&ldquo;They come down from everywhere, and what are we supposed to fight them with, this?&rdquo; he said, pointing to his cane.        

&ldquo;It would be good for everyone if you could put some A.N.S.F. in here,&rdquo; he added, referring to Afghan national security forces. &ldquo;We would be happy.&rdquo;        

Frontline commanders feel the villagers&rsquo; frustration.        

&ldquo;What I&rsquo;m careful about is coming in here and making a bunch of promises we can&rsquo;t keep,&rdquo; said Lt. Col. David B. Womack, the battalion commander. &ldquo;The most important thing we can do is connect them to Giroa, but there&rsquo;s no Giroa presence here, and there may not be for years,&rdquo; he added, using the acronym for the Afghan government&rsquo;s formal name, the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.        

Mr. Khan said Taliban had recently been arriving in the village wearing Afghan military and police uniforms, in line with recent attacks on government compounds across the country by insurgents disguised as members of the Afghan security forces. Often, he said, they simply send a messenger down from the mountains demanding food and supplies.        

Emphasizing the fear many villagers share, Mr. Khan said militants had kidnapped eight people from his village over the past four years, accusing them of being government spies.        

The militants killed one early on; five others were released. The last two were found dead on the side of the road last year with notes pinned to them warning villagers not to work for the government.        

Two years ago, the Taliban burned down the school, the charred remnants of which still lie in a pile in a corner of the village.        

Closer to the border in the Naka District, a collection of villages tucked in a mountain bowl, the Taliban blew up the district center two years ago. The government has had no presence there since. When soldiers with the Second Battalion, 506th Infantry, arrived there recently, villagers timidly made one point clear: They want government, but do not want the trouble.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;I have never seen the coalition shoot anyone,&rdquo; said Hajji Abdul Kabir, a wood merchant. &ldquo;But if we have contact with coalition or government forces, the Taliban will shoot us.&rdquo;        

Their concern is legitimate, said Capt. Henry Hansen, commander of the battalion&rsquo;s Company E. &ldquo;They think we&rsquo;re going to come in here and leave.&rdquo;        

In this case, though, the battalion was setting up an observation post overlooking the Naka villages, and planned to increase patrols through it.        

The distrust goes both ways. Villagers often provide dubious information, identifying rival tribes as Taliban collaborators while denying there are any militants in their village. One group of villagers recently reported to Colonel Womack that the Taliban had built a road near their village. It turned out another tribe had built the road to harvest timber.        

&ldquo;The other villagers blamed the Taliban to get the coalition to target those guys,&rdquo; Colonel Womack said.        

Efforts to build up the capacity of the Afghan government and trust in it here have increased steadily since August, when the last of the American surge brigades got here. The arrival of the unit, the 101st Airborne Division&rsquo;s Fourth Brigade Combat Team, greatly increased the troop presence in the province, which had been patrolled by a single battalion the previous year.        

The reinforcements have improved security, allowing coalition and civilian aide workers to expand agricultural programs and road projects, using cash-for-work incentives to give unemployed men, desperate to support their families, an alternative to joining the insurgency for pay.        

In the district center of Yahya Khel, which last fall was one of the most troubled areas in the province, dozens of farmers trekked from neighboring villages this spring to attend government-sponsored agricultural training.        

&ldquo;Clearly if I&rsquo;m a local farmer there is some risk involved in going to the district center to receive this kind of training,&rdquo; said Maj. Steve Battle, the brigade&rsquo;s civil affairs officer. &ldquo;And yet they went, voluntarily. To me, that is a big measure of effectiveness.&rdquo;        

Even as security has improved here, civilian casualties are on the rise &mdash; the vast majority caused by the Taliban. In January, 13 civilians died when their bus hit a mine in the Khoshamand District as they headed to a health clinic. Since January, militants have been responsible for at least 48 civilian deaths from attacks and roadside bombs, officials say.        

But if anything, the rising casualty toll has bolstered the belief of many people that the government and coalition forces cannot protect them.        

&ldquo;If there&rsquo;s one thing I&rsquo;m confident about, it&rsquo;s that we are above-board when it comes to civilian casualties, and it&rsquo;s painful when it happens,&rdquo; Colonel Womack said. &ldquo;But we&rsquo;ve had over 60 civilian casualties caused by the Taliban since I&rsquo;ve been here, and where&rsquo;s the uproar?&rdquo;        
