
NOVA FRIBURGO, Brazil &mdash; Dozens of people lined up outside an elementary school here on Thursday, clutching family members under umbrellas, as they braced themselves for news about loved ones feared lost in devastating landslides that have produced Brazil&rsquo;s most deadly natural disaster.        



As flatbed trucks arrived with bodies covered in black plastic, Maria Meirelles emerged sobbing from the makeshift morgue, but still uncertain about the fate of her brother, a sister and four other family members.        

&ldquo;I came to see if their bodies were here,&rdquo; said Ms. Meirelles, 55, holding the side of an abandoned popcorn cart in the town square for support. &ldquo;The highway has been blocked, the cellphones don&rsquo;t work. Maybe they are alive; I just want to know. I can&rsquo;t stand it anymore.&rdquo;        

Rains early Wednesday morning ripped through the hillside neighborhood of Campo de Coelho where Ms. Meirelles&rsquo;s relatives lived, she said.        

The death toll from flash floods and mudslides that struck mountain towns north of the city of Rio de Janeiro rose sharply on Thursday, to at least 476 people, and it was expected to climb as survivors and rescue workers dug through mud and wreckage in search of the missing.        

The Rio State Civil Defense Department said scores of people were still missing and more than 6,000 were left homeless. Residents of the three hardest hit towns worried about how long many other houses could cling to collapsing hillsides.        

This is the fourth consecutive year in which Brazil has endured torrential rains and devastating landslides.        

This year the states of Rio and S&atilde;o Paulo have been the hardest hit, with 21 people dying in S&atilde;o Paulo this month from flooding and landslides. Rio officials said that the rains in the mountain towns were more devastating than the damage caused by rain in 1967 in the city of Rio, which had previously been the worst rain-related event on record.        

Nova Friburgo has already received more than 14 inches of rain since Jan. 1, nearly double the expected amount for the entire month, said Marcelo Pinheiro, a meteorologist,  citing figures from the National Institute of Meteorology. More rain is expected over the next few days.        

&ldquo;This was like a tsunami,&rdquo; Vanda Cortasio, 46, a resident of Petr&oacute;polis, said in a telephone interview. She feared further devastation, saying that &ldquo;people live in shacks on mountains, so many more will die if it continues to rain like this.&rdquo;        

Torrential rains that soaked the hills and mountains outside the city of Rio for days finally pushed massive walls of sodden earth down the hillsides into the towns early Wednesday. Television videos showed devastated neighborhoods filled with rivers of mud that had ripped homes from their foundations and carried them away. Cars were submerged in water, and mud and chunks of concrete made many roads impassable.        

Rescuers struggled to reach the hardest hit areas in the municipality of Teres&oacute;polis, where landslides killed at least 222 people and destroyed hundreds of homes, according to the Rio state Civil Defense Department&rsquo;s Web site. In Petr&oacute;polis, 40 have died since heavy rains began last weekend.        

In Nova Friburgo, about 80 miles from Rio, at least 214 people died, the Civil Defense Department said. In all, the department said, about 14,000 people had been driven from their homes.        

Residents walked dazed through the town on Thursday, stopping to point at parts of a road that had fallen into a river rushing with reddish-brown water. Electric poles hung precariously over the river and some trees whose roots had been ripped from the ground hung dangerously over houses.        

The Rio State governor, S&eacute;rgio Cabral, said that irresponsible local housing policies had made the damage from the natural disaster much worse.        

The population of the three affected towns had quadrupled over the last 40 years, Mr. Cabral said in an interview on Radio CBN. &ldquo;The occupation of the slopes in these cities resulted in this tragedy.&rdquo;        
Myrna Domit contributed reporting from São Paulo, Brazil, Roberta Napolis from Rio de Janeiro and J. David Goodman from New York.
