
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; In a sudden shift after nearly two months of heavy siege, government forces withdrew from the western city of Misurata on Saturday.        

By afternoon, forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi had abandoned all but two buildings, where they were surrounded and under pressure to surrender, rebel spokesmen and independent observers said.        

But there was little celebration in Misurata as government forces on the city&rsquo;s outskirts continued to launch barrages of artillery into the heart of the city, killing 24 people on Saturday alone, local doctors said.        

The departure came so quickly that even rebel leaders puzzled&nbsp;over whether the withdrawal was a true military victory, a subterfuge by pro-Qaddafi forces who might return in plain clothes, or a strategic redeployment to new fronts in the mountains along the western border with Tunisia.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a trick,&rdquo; declared Col. Ahmed Bani,&nbsp;the&nbsp;chief spokesman for the rebel forces at their provisional headquarters in Benghazi. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s playing deadly games. He can&rsquo;t give up Misurata this easily. He knows that if Misurata falls in our hands, it opens the way&nbsp;for Tripoli to fall in our hands.&rdquo;        

After pounding the city with rockets, mortar shells and sniper fire for nearly two months, killing hundreds, the government announced Friday that it would pull back its forces from Misurata to let area tribes move in. In a postmidnight news conference Sunday, Libya&rsquo;s deputy foreign minister, Khalid Kaim, said that the military had not withdrawn from Misurata but merely ceased operations in order to give tribal leaders a chance to negotiate a resolution to the siege.        

Mr. Kaim said leaders of tribes that depend on Misurata&rsquo;s port &mdash; including the Warfalla, the Tarhuna, the Zlitan and the Tawargha &mdash; had asked the government for a chance to try to settle the conflict. But if no deal was reached in 48 hours, Mr. Kaim said, more than 60,000 armed men from the tribes would move in, and the Libyan Army remained in position to attack as well.        

&ldquo;If the tribes move into the city, then I think it will be very, very bloody, and I pray to God we can avoid this,&rdquo; Mr. Kaim said, suggesting Misurata could foreshadow the tribal civil war many Qaddafi supporters foresee if Colonel Qaddafi steps down.        

Some area tribes &mdash; notably the Warfalla, Libya&rsquo;s largest tribe &mdash; have historic rivalries with the people of Misurata. The Warfalla also dominated the armed forces besieging the city, so substituting armed tribe members for uniformed soldiers may amount to little more than discarding the uniforms. That tactic would also help government forces evade NATO attacks by blending in with civilians.        

The Qaddafi troops may also be moving away from Misurata to join an escalating battle on the mountainous western border with Tunisia, where for three days rebels have held control of the strategic crossing of Wazen.        

Those concerns notwithstanding, crowds poured into Victory Square in Misurata on Saturday, and there was a feeling of liberation &mdash; that for now, at least, the siege had been broken.        

Government soldiers captured in Misurata on Saturday said they had been in the process of retreating when they were taken by rebel forces. &ldquo;We have been told to withdraw,&rdquo; a wounded Libyan soldier, Khaled Dorman, told Reuters. &ldquo;We were told to withdraw yesterday.&rdquo;        

NATO said the first airstrike by a Predator drone took place in the Misurata area on Saturday, and rebels said it destroyed government tanks stationed at the city&rsquo;s vegetable market, which had been heavily contested just the day before. NATO said the drone struck a rocket-launching vehicle.        

In Tripoli, a government spokesman said NATO had also struck the capital, as well as the Qaddafi stronghold of Surt, Gharyan and other Western cities.        

In Misurata, the two holdouts by Qaddafi forces were the old Misurata General Hospital, which has been closed for several years, and the Medical Technology Institute, said a rebel spokesman in Misurata, who identified himself only as Mohammed. A photographer who has been accompanying ambulance crews in the city, contacted via Internet phone, confirmed the account.        

&ldquo;Those two places are besieged by our forces and surrounded, and negotiations for their surrender are under way,&rdquo; Mohammed said. &ldquo;If they don&rsquo;t surrender, they will be stormed.&rdquo;        

However, the Misurata airport and other areas surrounding the city were still under government control, rebels and independent observers said.        
Rod Nordland reported from Benghazi, Libya, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Tripoli. Scott Sayare contributed reporting from the Dhiba Border Crossing, Tunisia.
