
WASHINGTON &mdash; A trove of more than 700 classified military documents provides new and detailed accounts of the men who have done time at the Guant&aacute;namo Bay prison in Cuba, and offers new insight into the evidence against the 172 men still locked up there.        

Military intelligence officials, in assessments of detainees written between February 2002 and January 2009, evaluated their histories and provided glimpses of the tensions between captors and captives. What began as a jury-rigged experiment after the 2001 terrorist attacks now seems like an enduring American institution, and the leaked files show why, by laying bare the patchwork and contradictory evidence that in many cases would never have stood up in criminal court or a military tribunal.        

The documents meticulously record the detainees&rsquo; &ldquo;pocket litter&rdquo; when they were captured: a bus ticket to Kabul, a fake passport and forged student ID, a restaurant receipt, even a poem. They list the prisoners&rsquo; illnesses &mdash; hepatitis, gout, tuberculosis, depression. They note their serial interrogations, enumerating &mdash; even after six or more years of relentless questioning &mdash; remaining &ldquo;areas of potential exploitation.&rdquo; They describe inmates&rsquo; infractions &mdash; punching guards, tearing apart shower shoes, shouting across cellblocks. And, as analysts try to bolster the case for continued incarceration, they record years of detainees&rsquo; comments about one another.        

The secret documents, made available to The New York Times and several other news organizations, reveal that most of the 172 remaining prisoners have been rated as a &ldquo;high risk&rdquo; of posing a threat to the United States and its allies if released without adequate rehabilitation and supervision. But they also show that an even larger number of the prisoners who have left Cuba &mdash; about a third of the 600 already transferred to other countries &mdash; were also designated &ldquo;high risk&rdquo; before they were freed or passed to the custody of other governments.        

The documents are largely silent about the use of the harsh interrogation tactics at Guant&aacute;namo &mdash; including sleep deprivation, shackling in stress positions and prolonged exposure to cold temperatures &mdash; that drew global condemnation. Several prisoners, though, are portrayed as making up false stories about being subjected to abuse.        

The government&rsquo;s basic allegations against many detainees have long been public, and have often been challenged by prisoners and their lawyers. But the dossiers, prepared under the Bush administration, provide a deeper look at the frightening, if flawed, intelligence that has persuaded the Obama administration, too, that the prison cannot readily be closed.        

Prisoners who especially worried counterterrorism officials included some accused of being assassins for Al Qaeda, operatives for a canceled suicide mission and detainees who vowed to their interrogators that they would wreak revenge against America.        

The military analysts&rsquo; files provide new details about the most infamous of their prisoners, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the planner of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. Sometime around March 2002, he ordered a former Baltimore resident to don a suicide bomb vest and carry out a &ldquo;martyrdom&rdquo; attack against Pervez Musharraf, then Pakistan&rsquo;s president, according to the documents. But when the man, Majid Khan, got to the Pakistani mosque that he had been told Mr. Musharraf would visit, the assignment turned out to be just a test of his &ldquo;willingness to die for the cause.&rdquo;        

The dossiers also show the seat-of-the-pants intelligence gathering in war zones that led to the incarcerations of innocent men for years in cases of mistaken identity or simple misfortune. In May 2003, for example, Afghan forces captured Prisoner 1051, an Afghan named Sharbat, near the scene of a roadside bomb explosion, the documents show. He denied any involvement, saying he was a shepherd. Guant&aacute;namo debriefers and analysts agreed, citing his consistent story, his knowledge of herding animals and his ignorance of &ldquo;simple military and political concepts,&rdquo; according to his assessment. Yet a military tribunal declared him an &ldquo;enemy combatant&rdquo; anyway, and he was not sent home until 2006.        

Obama administration officials condemned the publication of the classified documents, which were obtained by the anti-secrecy group WikiLeaks last year but provided to The Times by another source. The officials pointed out that an administration task force set up in January 2009 reviewed the information in the prisoner assessments, and in some cases came to different conclusions. Thus, they said, the documents published by The Times may not represent the government&rsquo;s current view of detainees at Guant&aacute;namo.        

Among the findings in the files:        

&para;The 20th hijacker: The best-documented case of an abusive interrogation at Guant&aacute;namo was the coercive questioning, in late 2002 and early 2003, of Mohammed Qahtani. A Saudi believed to have been an intended participant in the Sept. 11 attacks, Mr. Qahtani was leashed like a dog, sexually humiliated and forced to urinate on himself. His file says, &ldquo;Although publicly released records allege detainee was subject to harsh interrogation techniques in the early stages of detention,&rdquo; his confessions &ldquo;appear to be true and are corroborated in reporting from other sources.&rdquo; But claims that he is said to have made about at least 16 other prisoners &mdash; mostly in April and May 2003 &mdash; are cited in their files without any caveat.        
Charlie Savage reported from Washington, and William Glaberson and Andrew W. Lehren from New York. Scott Shane contributed reporting from Washington, and Benjamin Weiser and Andrei Scheinkman from New York.
