
BRISBANE, Australia &mdash; Floodwaters peaked here on Thursday, swamping tens of thousands of homes and businesses as officials began to count the cost of a natural disaster that has inundated vast sections of the country&rsquo;s northeast and killed at least 15 people in the past week.        

The state premier said the vast flood zone could remain under water for days, after which the region&rsquo;s weary residents would have to contend with a cleanup of &ldquo;postwar proportions.&rdquo;        

The Brisbane and Bremer Rivers reached peaks that were well below the worst-case levels that had been predicted by hydrologists. The Brisbane River, which snakes through Brisbane, the capital of the state of Queensland, crested early Thursday at about 15 feet above normal, a few feet lower than some had predicted was possible.        

Nevertheless, officials said that thousands of people could be homeless for months.        

&ldquo;We now face a reconstruction task of postwar proportions,&rdquo; the state premier, Anna Bligh, told reporters, at times choking back tears. &ldquo;That is how we are seeing it, and that is the sort of steely determination we will require.&rdquo;        

The flash floods that slammed into Brisbane, a city of two million people, and other densely populated coastal areas of Queensland on Wednesday have brought the cumulative death toll from flooding since the rains began in late November to at least 25.        

The area is tropical, and some flooding during the rainy season is normal. But this year, the weather pattern known as La Ni&ntilde;a caused abnormal drenchings that saturated the ground, setting off record flooding.        

In Brisbane, more than 25,000 homes and 5,000 businesses were inundated when the two major river systems burst their banks. The torrent damaged roads and highways, and ripped a 960-foot-long concrete boardwalk from its foundations, sending it down the swollen Brisbane River.        

In Ipswich, a city of 150,000 people about 20 miles west of Brisbane, officials estimated that 3,000 homes and businesses were flooded when the Bremer River overflowed.        

As floodwaters diminished later Thursday, many residents got a first look at the damage to homes and businesses. In Rosalie, a Brisbane suburb, people ferried an elderly woman, Barbara Etchison, on an inflatable canoe through brown water filled with garbage to retrieve several bags of sodden clothes.        

Ms. Etchison, who lives alone, said she had been assured by the City Council that her house would not be seriously affected by floods. She was forced to scramble frantically for documents and a few possessions with sentimental value as the water levels surged. Ms. Etchison said she stayed helplessly at a friend&rsquo;s house as shoulder-high water destroyed most of her belongings.        

Like many people in Queensland, Ms. Etchison said that she was not insured for flood damage and that she had no idea how she would rebuild. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m so sick and I&rsquo;m so tired because I&rsquo;ve had such little help,&rdquo; she said, staring back over the water at her house. &ldquo;These boys have come to help today, and it&rsquo;s such a blessing, but it was only by accident. I saw them up the street and asked them if they would be able to do this.&rdquo;        

Ms. Etchison&rsquo;s next-door neighbor Elizabeth Dempsey said she was much luckier. A group of strangers arrived Wednesday and saved everything she owned.        

&ldquo;Unbelievable,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Honestly, there&rsquo;s no words to say thank you.&rdquo;        
Aubrey Belford reported from Brisbane, Australia, and Meraiah Foley from Sydney.
