
PUTTAPARTHI, India (AP) &mdash; Sathya Sai Baba, a Hindu guru revered by millions worldwide, died Sunday near his ashram here. He was 84.        

His death, after nearly a month of hospital treatment, was announced by the ashram, Prasanthi Nilayam, in the south of India.        

Sai Baba had ashrams in more than 126 countries, and his devotees in India included high-level politicians, movie stars, world-class athletes, and industrialists.        

He was said to perform miracles, conjuring Rolex watches and &ldquo;vibhuti&rdquo; &mdash; a sacred ash that his followers applied to their foreheads &mdash; from his halo of frizzy hair.        

Rationalist critics led campaigns against him, calling him a charlatan and his miracles fake. And several news reports accused him of sexually abusing followers &mdash; accusations that he denied, and for which he was never charged.        

Indian television ran nonstop news coverage of his death on Sunday, and officials expressed sadness. &ldquo;Sri Sathya Sai Baba was a spiritual leader who inspired millions to lead a moral and meaningful life, even as they followed the religion of their choice,&rdquo; Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said in a statement.        

The state of Andhra Pradesh, where Puttaparthi is located, declared four days of mourning. Its top official, Chief Minister Nallari Kiran Kumar Reddy, called Sai Baba &ldquo;a symbol of love, affection and passion.&rdquo;        

Born Sathyanarayana Raju on Nov. 23, 1926, Sathya Sai Baba declared in 1940 that he was an avatar, or reincarnation, of another Hindu holy man, the Sai Baba of Shirdi, a town in Maharashtra State, who died in 1918.        

As the young guru attracted followers, his hometown, Puttaparthi, grew from a sleepy village into a vibrant town with a sprawling ashram, built in 1950, as well as a large hospital, a university and schools run by his Sathya Sai Central Trust, set up in 1972 with donations.        

The trust, estimated to be worth at least $8.9 billion, also established spiritual centers in the Indian cities of Mumbai, Hyderabad and Chennai. In addition, it built another hospital in Bangalore, India, where Sai Baba had a summer home, and financed water supply projects in several of the country&rsquo;s southern states.        

Though no successor has been named to run the trust, &ldquo;there is or will be no vacuum,&rdquo; according to a statement released after the guru was hospitalized.        

In recent years health problems had forced Sai Baba to cut down on public appearances. In 2005, he began using a wheelchair, and a year later he fractured his hip when a student fell from a stool onto him. He had survived a stroke and a series of heart attacks in 1963.        

Sai Baba was also mired in controversy. A 2004 BBC television program featured interviews with American men who said he had fondled them and exposed himself to them while asserting that it was part of a healing ritual. Though he denied the accusations and was never charged with any crime, the reports led some followers to break with him.        

The ashram also said Sai Baba had survived an attempt on his life in 1993. It said that six devotees, including the guru&rsquo;s personal assistant, were killed in his bedroom and that they had tried to attack him, although the details of the case remain a mystery.        

Sai Baba never married and had no children.        
