
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; With Hezbollah&rsquo;s toppling of the Lebanese government, the militant Shiite Muslim movement entered what may prove to be one of the most dangerous chapters in a 30-year history that has made it reviled in the West and popular in the Arab world: At the moment seemingly of its greatest power, the path facing it could unveil its most glaring weaknesses.        

Hezbollah and its allies acted on longstanding threats Wednesday to bring down Lebanon&rsquo;s national unity government in a dispute over a United Nations-backed tribunal, which is expected to indict Hezbollah members in the assassination of a former prime minister, Rafik Hariri.        

The result followed a familiar script in Lebanon, where institutions have been paralyzed more often than not since the killing of Mr. Hariri and 22 others in a devastating bombing along Beirut&rsquo;s seafront in February 2005. Lawmakers predicted weeks, perhaps months, of stalemate as the country tries to navigate questions unanswered since the end of its civil war in 1990: the power of Lebanon&rsquo;s largest religious communities, its posture toward Israel, the fate of Hezbollah&rsquo;s arms and the power of foreign patrons.        

Few dispute Hezbollah&rsquo;s prowess in that standoff; it vanquished its foes in just a few days of fighting in May 2008, when it seized part of the capital. But to do so again could further tarnish its reputation here, making it look more and more like a sectarian militia than the resistance movement to Israel it considers itself.        

It would undoubtedly heighten tensions between Sunni and Shiite Muslims, a prospect the movement fears could undermine its stature in the wider, predominantly Sunni Middle East. The paradox is that only that confrontation may deliver it what it wants: a Lebanese government that denounces the indictments and ends cooperation with the tribunal.        

&ldquo;In some ways, they&rsquo;re in a Catch-22,&rdquo; said Robert Malley, the Middle East and North Africa program director for the International Crisis Group. &ldquo;Even as it increases its power in Lebanon, it could be exacerbating its own problems in the country.&rdquo;        

In that, the Hezbollah that entered the crisis may look far different from the group, born in the crucible of the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon, that emerges.        

A day after the collapse of a national unity government led by Rafik Hariri&rsquo;s son, Saad Hariri, the capital was more troubled by traffic jams than the prospect of fighting. Both sides seemed eager not to escalate, and Hezbollah officials refused to make any public pronouncements that might stoke more tensions.        

But no one questioned the depth of the crisis. It could be seen as the worst since the fighting in 2008, though it is probably more accurate to view it as simply another iteration of the crisis that began with the Hariri assassination. His killing soon drew the line between camps in an almost equally divided country and helped end Syria&rsquo;s 29-year military presence and, with Saudi Arabia, its political control here.        

What followed was a string of political assassinations, a devastating war with Israel, sectarian fighting, mass protests downtown and almost two years of government paralysis. After the 2008 fighting, a truce was reached in the Persian Gulf country of Qatar, in which Hezbollah achieved far greater power in the government, effectively enabling it to veto legislation and, in a worst-case situation, bring it down.        

It did that on Wednesday after a Saudi-Syrian attempt at mediation failed.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re facing a crisis that, I think, will be long,&rdquo; said Nabil Haytham, a prominent columnist for As-Safir, a pro-opposition newspaper in Lebanon.        

Neither side seemed to want to reach this point. Weaker and more divided than a few years ago, Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s allies were thought to be buying time until the handing down of the indictments, which would have strengthened their hand in negotiations.        

Hezbollah, analysts say, had hoped for an agreement mediated by Syria &mdash; with Iran, Hezbollah&rsquo;s ally &mdash; and Saudi Arabia, the patron of Mr. Hariri. Having failed, Hezbollah found itself dragged deeper into a political arena that it still, with perhaps a degree of arrogance, views as beneath its calling as a resistance movement, even as it exercises unprecedented power within it.        
Nada Bakri and Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.
