
UNITED NATIONS &mdash; Foreign diplomatic missions here and in Washington face the prospect of stuffing their cash into their mattresses as American laws to combat money laundering and terrorism have prompted banks to refuse their accounts.        

JPMorgan Chase notified more than 150 ambassadors last September that their accounts would be closed as of March 31, but the issue grew into a budding diplomatic crisis this month as embassies scrambling to open accounts elsewhere were turned away.        

&ldquo;It really is a problem,&rdquo; Baso Sangqu, the ambassador from South Africa, said Thursday. &ldquo;We cannot get banking services.&rdquo;        

Chase and other major banks &mdash; including Bank of America, Citibank and HSBC &mdash; refused to comment publicly on changes in their diplomatic banking business. The letter Chase sent in September said its &ldquo;business decision does not reflect on your organization&rdquo; and noted that personal accounts were not affected.        

Privately, banking officials said that the cost of complying with the regulations and the potential large fines if they did not were not matched by the earnings diplomatic accounts generate.        

Efforts to more closely monitor foreign bank transfers to combat money laundering started around 1990, but took on renewed urgency to block terrorism financing after the Sept. 11 attacks.        

Banks must ask customers to specify the sources of large or suspicious transfers from abroad and report them to the government. For now, transfers over $10,000 must be reported, but the Treasury Department has proposed requiring reports on all foreign transfers.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t have an exemption in the United States for foreign governments,&rdquo; said Edwin M. Truman, an international finance expert at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington.        

Several recent events have probably prompted the banks to act. A report by the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations last February criticized Bank of America and HSBC for what it called lax policing on a few African accounts, including some from Angola and Equatorial Guinea. Last fall, the Federal Reserve also singled out HSBC for lack of vigilance.        

The State Department dispatched Ambassador Patrick F. Kennedy, the under secretary for management, as well as a senior Treasury Department official, to the United Nations on Thursday to brief diplomats from about 100 nations on efforts to solve the problem. Mr. Kennedy said the American government had approached Chase about the issue, but stressed that ultimately American banks were private enterprises that made business decisions free of government intervention.        

The envoys left unimpressed. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think it is providing any solution at this time,&rdquo; Mr. Sangqu said.        

Larger countries, like China and France, said they did not anticipate difficulties finding other banks. But smaller countries, or those under sanctions like Iran and Cuba, are expected to face problems.        

Mohammad Khazaee, the ambassador from Iran, said that without bank accounts, the entire business of the United Nations risked grinding to a halt as member states would be unable to make the financial transfers needed to pay for costs ranging from their annual dues to peacekeeping operations. &ldquo;Missions cannot function,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Khazaee suggested that the United Nations retaliate against Chase by closing its substantial accounts there.        

Martin Nesirky, the United Nations spokesman, said the organization had not been approached. With the Secretariat building under renovation, the space that a Chase branch used to occupy was open to negotiation, he noted.        
