
Yemen&rsquo;s government on Tuesday formally agreed to a plan that would pave the way for a peaceful transition of power, saying that a delegation from the governing party planned to travel to Saudi Arabia early next week to seal the deal.        

The governing party, the General People&rsquo;s Congress, known as the G.P.C., gave its official consent even though a coalition of opposition political leaders balked on Monday over one of the proposal&rsquo;s conditions, that protests end immediately.        

&ldquo;The G.P.C. approved,&rdquo; said Mohamed Al-Tayeb, a prominent member of the governing party. &ldquo;Both sides will go on Monday to Riyadh.&rdquo;        

Mr. Tayeb said the parties had received an invitation from the six-nation Persian Gulf bloc that had formulated and promoted the proposal for the transition of power from President Ali Abdullah Saleh.        

&ldquo;So far, so good,&rdquo; Mr. Tayeb said, adding that the governing party and the opposition had each sent letters to the regional bloc, called the Gulf Cooperation Council, agreeing to the initiative.        

But a leading member of Yemen&rsquo;s opposition coalition said that the opposition had given only oral approval to the proposal and that it would not send a delegation to Riyadh, the Saudi capital, until Mr. Saleh formally signed the plan for the transition. Mr. Saleh will not go to Riyadh.        

&ldquo;First, the president, he should officially sign the agreement,&rdquo; the opposition leader, Mohammed Abdulmalik al-Mutawakil, said. &ldquo;Because he is not going to Saudi Arabia, therefore he has to sign it before we leave.&rdquo;        

The back and forth between the two sides has been a trademark of the political impasse over the past few months in Yemen, as tens of thousands of protesters in cities throughout the country have called for Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s ouster.        

Under the proposal, once both sides sign the agreement, a national unity government will be formed and the opposition will select a prime minister, who will govern with Mr. Saleh for 30 days, at which point the president will step down.        

In another development on Tuesday, a protester was shot to death in the central city of Taiz, according to a local doctor. Taiz has endured significant violence between security forces and protesters over the past month. A YouTube video posted online Tuesday from Taiz showed a protester being hit in the head by live gunfire from what appeared to be a military vehicle.        
