
WikiLeaks, the Web site responsible for publicizing millions of state secrets in the last year, has tried to pick its media partners carefully. But the site has become such a large player in journalism that some of its secrets are no longer its own to control.        

WikiLeaks&rsquo; latest release &mdash; files related to the detainees at Guant&aacute;namo Bay, Cuba &mdash; took place Sunday in partnership with eight news organizations in the United States and other countries, including The Washington Post and the McClatchy newspapers and The Telegraph of London. The &ldquo;official&rdquo; release was sped up when WikiLeaks learned that two news organizations that were collaborators with WikiLeaks in the past but were explicitly shut out this time &mdash; The New York Times and The Guardian &mdash; were preparing their own Guant&aacute;namo stories anyway, having obtained the information independently.        

This resulted in a mad scramble to be first online with secrets that would never have leaked so quickly if WikiLeaks had not possessed the documents to begin with. For journalism, it was a recalibration of the traditional relationships among competitors and sources. And for WikiLeaks, it was a lesson in how hard it is to steer news coverage rather than be buffeted by it.        

In its first prominent collaboration with newspapers, last July, WikiLeaks gave exclusive access to a secret archive of Afghan war logs to The Times, The Guardian in Britain, and Der Spiegel in Germany. Now, as it gradually releases 250,000 United States diplomatic cables, WikiLeaks says it has more than 50 local partners, most of them newspapers, from the Daily Taraf in Turkey to Expresso in Portugal to The Hindu in India. Some of those newspapers describe the relationship with WikiLeaks as a contract.        

WikiLeaks&rsquo; intent has always been to maximize its impact, but its media strategy has changed significantly since it began in 2007, with the idea that if it posted important documents to its site &mdash; come one, come all &mdash; journalists would eagerly report the news there. Since then, it has learned the value of an &ldquo;exclusive&rdquo; to journalists, creating partnerships with publishers that impose a collective embargo on when the material can be published in return for privileged access to the material.        

On its Twitter page, WikiLeaks suggested that it did not mind that it had lost control of its cache of secrets, saying it was pleased that its former partner publications had &ldquo;added their weight to increasing our impact.&rdquo;        

Yochai Benkler, the co-director of the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University, said he thought that WikiLeaks&rsquo; anti-secrecy quest was &ldquo;enhanced, not undermined, by the intensification of competition to cover the documents.&rdquo; The Guant&aacute;namo files, he said, confirmed what the earlier releases already suggested: that &ldquo;the future of the networked Fourth Estate will involve a mixture of traditional and online models, cooperating and competing on a global scale in a productive but difficult relationship.&rdquo;        

In an essay this month in the British magazine New Statesman, the founder of WikiLeaks, Julian Assange, explained his reasoning. While he described WikiLeaks as &ldquo;firmly in the tradition of those radical publishers who tried to lay &lsquo;all the mysteries and secrets of government&rsquo; before the public,&rdquo; he added that &ldquo;for reasons of realpolitik, we have worked with some of the largest media groups.&rdquo;        

While the exclusive-access strategy has had obvious advantages in getting the news out, WikiLeaks faced criticism for allowing only a few news organizations to have access to the cables, said Greg Mitchell, a blogger for The Nation who published &ldquo;The Age of WikiLeaks.&rdquo; &ldquo;Now,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;it&rsquo;s busting loose and other people are getting them.&rdquo;        

That owes partly to the falling out between Mr. Assange and The Times and The Guardian.        

Bill Keller, the executive editor of The Times, said Mr. Assange seemed to sour on the newspaper after he read both a front-page profile of himself and an article about the Army intelligence analyst suspected of leaking information to WikiLeaks. The profile he deemed unflattering and the other article inadequate. He also complained to Mr. Keller that the newspaper&rsquo;s Web site had not linked to the WikiLeaks site. &ldquo;Where&rsquo;s the respect?&rdquo; he asked Mr. Keller.        

Mr. Keller said Monday, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s been a long time since I&rsquo;ve had any communication with Julian Assange.&rdquo;        

In essays and interviews Mr. Assange has complained that The Times had worked too closely with the United States government before publishing its material and had a &ldquo;hostile attitude&rdquo; toward WikiLeaks.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Similarly, Mr. Assange&rsquo;s relationship with The Guardian started to fray &ldquo;right at the beginning,&rdquo; said David Leigh, the newspaper&rsquo;s investigations editor. In late July, two days before The Guardian was to publish articles about the Afghan war logs, it learned that WikiLeaks had also shared the material with another British organization, Channel 4.        

&ldquo;Julian had gone behind our backs because he knew that it would upset us,&rdquo; Mr. Leigh said in an interview this week.        

In November, WikiLeaks chose to share the diplomatic cables database with The Guardian but not The Times. When The Times and The Guardian decided to collaborate nonetheless, Mr. Leigh said Mr. Assange &ldquo;burst into our editors&rsquo; office, accompanied by a lawyer, threatening that he was going to sue us.&rdquo;        

He did not sue, but the dissatisfaction cut both ways. Mr. Leigh said he was particularly troubled in December when Mr. Assange tried to suppress the newspaper&rsquo;s coverage of the sexual assault charges against him.        

By then, a competing newspaper, The Telegraph, had started holding meetings with WikiLeaks. It wanted to replace The Guardian as the group&rsquo;s go-to outlet in Britain. &ldquo;We were willing to ensure that their material got a worldwide hearing,&rdquo; said Tony Gallagher, the editor of The Telegraph.        

The Telegraph was looped in on the Guant&aacute;namo Bay file release, but The Guardian was not. Mr. Leigh called WikiLeaks&rsquo; attitude &ldquo;spiteful and petty.&rdquo;        

WikiLeaks&rsquo; other new media partners, including The Post and McClatchy, received the Guant&aacute;namo files several weeks before WikiLeaks lifted its embargo. Unknown, at first, to the WikiLeaks partners, The Times had independently obtained the files from a source Mr. Keller would not name, and shared them with both The Guardian and NPR.        

WikiLeaks itself showed some old-fashioned competitive instinct. Responding to accounts that said its partners had not been first to publish, the organization wrote: &ldquo;Enough. Our first partner, The Telegraph, published the Gitmo Files 1am GMT, long before NYT or Guardian.&rdquo;        

Mr. Benkler, a critic of the Guant&aacute;namo Bay prison, concluded that even the &ldquo;scoop the scoop&rdquo; aspect of the coverage had been productive. What it amounted to, he said, were &ldquo;more sources providing greater attention to what is basically continued indefensible behavior on the part of the U.S. government.&rdquo;        
