
JERUSALEM &mdash; An explosion early Wednesday at a gas pipeline in the northern Sinai Peninsula cut supplies of Egyptian natural gas to Israel for the second time this year in what Israeli and Egyptian officials said was an act of sabotage.        

The blast, caused by a package containing TNT, set ablaze a pipeline terminal near the North Sinai city of El Arish and also forced an interruption in the flow of gas to Jordan and some local disruptions in El Arish, according to Egyptian officials. No one was hurt, and Israel was expected to be able to fill in for the lost supply until the pipeline is repaired.        

The attack comes at a particularly delicate time as the Egyptian public &mdash; freed from restrictions that had been imposed by the government of President Hosni Mubarak &mdash; has aired anger more openly at Israel and at its own government&rsquo;s handling of the original pipeline deal. It also comes as the Egyptian authorities have lost some control over the North Sinai after many police officers pulled back during the political turmoil surrounding the ouster of Mr. Mubarak in February.        

While the details of who carried out the attack remained unclear, Israeli and Egyptian officials said they believed that it was probably the work of restive local Bedouins, who have long felt discriminated against by the Egyptian government, or possibly Palestinian saboteurs.        

The blast prompted renewed calls from some Israeli officials for the country to reduce its dependency on outside sources of energy and speed up development of its own newly found gas fields.        

&ldquo;In light of regional instability, we must accelerate the production of Israeli natural gas in order to reach energy independence,&rdquo; said Danny Ayalon, Israel&rsquo;s deputy foreign minister.        

But others in Israel emphasized the importance of the gas deal for Israeli-Egyptian relations. The gas agreement, signed in 2005, was valued at $2.5 billion over a 15-year period, according to Israel&rsquo;s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which has described it as an &ldquo;important and central element in the bilateral economic relationship.&rdquo;        

The gas deal with Israel has been the object of public scrutiny in Egypt since the pipeline opened in 2008. The price at which Egypt sells gas to Israel has never been officially announced, and there is no global benchmark for the price of natural gas. But speculation is rife in Egypt that it is being sold at a preferential rate, raising suspicions about corruption surrounding the secretive deal negotiated by the Mubarak government.        

Stoking public anger over the deal, the Egyptian government continued to deliver the gas to Israel throughout Israel&rsquo;s three-week offensive in Gaza in 2008-9, which stirred popular outrage. Last week, Egypt&rsquo;s public prosecutor started questioning Mr. Mubarak, along with six other former officials, about the gas deal.        

Uzi Landau, Israel&rsquo;s infrastructure minister, told Army Radio on Wednesday that there was enough gas in the pipeline for the next few days. After that, Israeli officials said, the shortfall in Egyptian gas will be made up by alternate fuels.        

Egypt has supplied almost 40 percent of the natural gas used by the Israel Electricity Corporation for producing electricity in recent years, with the rest coming from Yam Thetis, an Israeli reservoir. But natural gas has accounted for only about a third of the fuel consumed by the corporation, which relies more heavily on coal, and also keeps limited reserves of diesel and fuel oil.        

&ldquo;We will not be left without electricity,&rdquo; said Maya Etzioni, spokeswoman for Israel&rsquo;s Ministry of National Infrastructures.        

Mr. Landau also told Army Radio that Israel had permitted additional Egyptian security forces to enter the Sinai in order to repair the pipeline, beyond the number of forces normally allowed in the area under the terms of the 1979 peace treaty between the two countries.        

The gas supply from Egypt to Israel last shut down for more than a month after four armed men stormed a North Sinai gas terminal on Feb. 5 and set off explosives there. In late March, there was another attempt to sabotage the pipeline but the explosives failed to detonate.        

Wednesday&rsquo;s attack underscored the precarious security situation in the North Sinai, where police officers have only recently begun to return as the military government has established more control over the country. Bedouin tribes clashed with Egyptian security services as mass protests spread earlier this year, bringing down Mr. Mubarak.        

There was also a battle on the Egyptian side of the divided city of Rafah in early February, in which Egyptian security forces faced off against attackers wielding rocket-propelled grenades. The attackers were identified at the time as members of an Islamist group called Takfir wal-Hijra.        

According to Egyptian security officials, the flow of gas from the main terminal in Port Said, on the Mediterranean coast, was shut down Wednesday to stifle flames in El Arish, about 120 miles away, that shot as high as 100 feet.        

Speaking to state television, Abdul-Wahab Mabrouk, the governor of North Sinai, said five men had gotten out of a car and walked toward the gas terminal in El Arish, stopping about 150 yards away. He said three of them then walked in and planted the explosives, which detonated after they drove away. News reports on state television said Wednesday&rsquo;s blast will affect the supply of gas to households and local factories near El Arish.        

Jordan&rsquo;s official news agency, Petra, confirmed that the attack in Egypt had resulted in a second critical interruption to Jordan&rsquo;s gas supply this year, at a cost of more than $4 million a day. Khaled Touqan, Jordan&rsquo;s minister of energy and mineral resources, said there were enough alternate reserves of fuel oil and diesel fuel to generate electricity for &ldquo;at least two weeks,&rdquo; the Jordanian news agency reported Wednesday.        
Isabel Kershner reported from Jerusalem, and Mona El-Naggar from Cairo.
