
JERUSALEM &mdash; A Palestinian woman died Saturday after inhaling tear gas fired by Israeli forces a day earlier at a protest against Israel&rsquo;s separation barrier in a West Bank village.        

A hospital director, Dr. Muhammad Aideh, said the woman had arrived on Friday suffering from tear-gas asphyxiation and died despite hours of treatment.        

The Israeli military described the protest as a &ldquo;violent and illegal riot,&rdquo; and said it had received a report from the Palestinians that a woman who was hospitalized after inhaling tear gas had been released and died later at her home. Dr. Aideh denied that the woman had left the hospital.        

The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, sent condolences to the family  and condemned what he called the Israeli military&rsquo;s latest &ldquo;crime,&rdquo; according to the official Palestinian news agency, Wafa. Relations between the Palestinian and Israeli leadership have grown tense since the breakdown of peace talks in September.        

The woman, Jawaher Abu Rahmah, 36, was the sister of Bassem Abu Rahmah, a well-known activist in the West Bank village of Bilin, who died during a similar protest in 2009 after being struck in the chest by a tear gas canister fired by Israeli forces.        

Local Palestinians, bolstered by international and Israeli supporters, have held weekly protests against Israel&rsquo;s separation barrier in Bilin for the past five years, turning the village into a symbol of Palestinian defiance. Other villages along the barrier route have since joined the protest movement.        

Friday&rsquo;s demonstration was billed as a particularly large one to mark the end of 2010. Hundreds of protesters converged near the barrier, although the Israeli military had declared it a closed military zone, and activists said they managed to cut through the wire fence that makes up the barrier in this area in three places.        

The Palestinians say the protests are meant to be nonviolent, but they inevitably end in clashes, with young Palestinians hurling stones and the Israeli security forces firing tear gas, stun grenades and rubber bullets.        

Palestinian leaders have held Bilin up as a model of legitimate resistance against Israeli occupation. Salam Fayyad, prime minister of the Palestinian Authority, attended the protest Friday.        

Israel started building the barrier in 2002, saying it was necessary to prevent Palestinian suicide bombers from reaching Israeli cities. But the barrier slices through West Bank land in many parts, making large areas inaccessible to local Palestinians, who accuse Israel of a land grab.        

Israel&rsquo;s Supreme Court ruled in 2007 that the barrier at Bilin should be rerouted to take in less of the village&rsquo;s agricultural land. That work has still not been completed.        
Khaled Abu Aker contributed reporting from Ramallah, West Bank.
