
IMJINGAK, SOUTH KOREA &mdash; On a pleasant spring day, with the wind breezing up from the south, the quirky little tourist outpost of Imjingak &mdash; with its Peace Land amusement park, some souvenir sheds and a Popeye&rsquo;s chicken stand &mdash; hardly seemed like a possible flash point for violent hostilities between North and South Korea.        

Imjingak, the site of a ferocious battle during the Korean War, has become a favored launching site for some of the South Korean activists who send propaganda balloons northward. The balloon campaign has so angered North Korea that its military has threatened &mdash; as recently as last Friday &mdash; to &ldquo;mercilessly&rdquo; shell Imjingak and other border towns if the launchings continue. North Korean artillery units are dug in a few kilometers away, just across the world&rsquo;s most heavily militarized border.        

It is flying season now, with robust winds blowing through the Korean Peninsula, and the activists are eager to get their balloons and leaflets in the air. Some of the balloonists are political agitators, others are Christian proselytizers, most are North Korean defectors. If the wind is at their backs, they say, millions of leaflets will be sent aloft in the coming weeks.        

&ldquo;North Korea has said they would fire surgical strikes at those of us sending up balloons, so this highly allergic reaction clearly shows what we&rsquo;re doing is working,&rdquo; said Park Sang-hak, 43, the son of a former North Korean spy who defected along with his family in 1999.        

Mr. Park now heads Fighters for a Free North Korea, a human rights group in Seoul that has become the most aggressive balloon-launching outfit in the South.        

Mr. Park and other balloonists do have their domestic political opponents, principally the organizations that seek a return to South Korea&rsquo;s so-called sunshine policy, which favors a conciliatory approach to the North. Some of these groups occasionally try to sabotage the showier balloon events, and Mr. Park, who has had 24-hour police protection since 2008, once fired a tear gas pistol during a violent melee at Imjingak.        

&ldquo;We get threats against him quite often now,&rdquo; said a plainclothes police officer who was guarding Mr. Park before a recent launching.        

For much of the previous decade, the South Korean government tried to block the balloon launchings, which pushed the activists to work clandestinely. But the policy changed dramatically in the spring of last year after the sinking of a South Korean warship, the Cheonan, and the deaths of 46 sailors. The South has blamed a North Korean torpedo attack; the North says it was not involved.        

&ldquo;Previously we tried to persuade the balloon guys not to do anything because it badly affected inter-Korean relations,&rdquo; said a senior official in the Unification Ministry, speaking anonymously because he was not authorized to comment publicly on the matter. &ldquo;But after the Cheonan, our position changed,&rdquo; the official said. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t block them now. It&rsquo;s a matter we leave to the local police.&rdquo;        

Police officials have allowed the balloon launchings to continue at Imjingak &mdash; no special permit is necessary &mdash; and they intervene only if there is violence.        

Mr. Park, an engaging and energetic man, honed his technique alongside Lee Min-bok, an evangelical Christian and the other leading figure in the balloon campaign. Beginning in 2003, looking for a way to poke the North Korean regime, they started out by tying a few handwritten leaflets to some tiny children&rsquo;s balloons bought at a party store.        

Once devoted colleagues, the men are now bitter rivals.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m the original,&rdquo; said Mr. Lee, who had been an agricultural scientist in North Korea. He said he fled in 1995 after his suggestions about economic reforms were not well received by his superiors.        

His operation is financed by donations from churches and conservative Christians. He said he launched 1,500 balloons a year and accounted for 90 percent of all propaganda leaflets being sent into the North, about 250 million so far.        

Mr. Lee, who uses various covert launching sites along the border, ridiculed Mr. Park&rsquo;s launchings at Imjingak as little more than publicity stunts. He said the wind conditions were so unfavorable that Mr. Park&rsquo;s balloons often ended up floating back into South Korea.        

Mr. Park, for his part, called Mr. Lee &ldquo;a Christian zealot&rdquo; who was voted out of their secular group several years ago because he wanted to emphasize religion in their leaflets.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;He claims he&rsquo;s a revolutionary and the godfather,&rdquo; Mr. Park said. &ldquo;But even among defectors, he&rsquo;s an outsider. He&rsquo;s a religious person with a narrow focus who works on his own.&rdquo;        

Both men use similar balloons and techniques. The tubular balloons, made from a heavy-grade vinyl, are 12 meters long, about 40 feet, and are filled with hydrogen gas. (Helium is safer, the activists said, but more expensive.)        

The leaflets, typically printed on a weatherproof plastic film, are carried aloft in a vinyl sack at the bottom of each balloon, about 60,000 leaflets per balloon. They carry doomsaying messages about the backward North and the corrupt regime of Kim Jong-il. A counterpoint theme &mdash; that South Korea is better in every respect &mdash; includes sunny messages about the material wealth and political freedom in the South.        

The distance the balloons travel depends on wind speed and a wire device that punctures the balloon in flight, a gizmo that Mr. Park calls the &ldquo;time machine.&rdquo; He said it was unlikely that any balloons reached Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, 145 kilometers, or 90 miles, to the northwest.        

The activists sometimes send up USB drives and DVDs as well, but that necessarily means fewer leaflets.        

Each balloon carries a maximum payload of about 8 kilograms, or nearly 17 pounds.        

Mr. Lee occasionally sends small radios, aspirin, pens or indigestion tablets. But he never sends Bibles, saying North Koreans would be severely punished if they were caught with one.        

Mr. Park&rsquo;s messages often contain highly personal attacks on Mr. Kim, the North Korean leader, and the dynastic plan for his youngest son to assume power. A rap video on DVD includes cartoons that lampoon Mr. Kim as a stiletto-heeled transvestite spilling out of a bustier, as an obese Disco Elvis in a white jumpsuit and as a bulbous-nosed drunkard in a New York Yankees cap.        

Another message ridicules Mr. Kim&rsquo;s fashion choices, ending with the phrase: &ldquo;And your jackets are lame!&rdquo;        

The balloon launchings most typically occur at secluded spots near the border, although Mr. Park favors the tourist zone at Imjingak for its publicity potential. Local residents, even if they agree with his politics, do not particularly like to see him coming. For one thing, they would prefer not to be in the cross hairs of North Korean howitzers. Also, because the balloon events here can be confrontational, many South Korean tourists stay away, which has angered many of the local business owners. The tour buses are going elsewhere, the souvenir stands are struggling and the restaurant business is down more than 50 percent.        

Lee Nam-soon, 78, no relation to Lee Min-bok, is among those who disapprove of the balloon launchings as an impediment to peace with the North. She spends most of her mornings at Imjingak, gathering signatures on a petition calling for new international talks on North Korean denuclearization.        

&ldquo;These men with the balloons, they have the right to do this,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;But it&rsquo;s infantile and silly.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;They&rsquo;re like little boys,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Little boys playing with matches.&rdquo;        

Su-hyun Lee contributed reporting from Seoul and Imjingak.        

        

Former leaders visit North         

Former President Jimmy Carter of the United States and other former world leaders began a three-day mission to North Korea on Tuesday to discuss food shortages and stalled nuclear disarmament talks, The Associated Press reported from Pyongyang.        

Mr. Carter; former President Martti Ahtisaari of Finland; former Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland of Norway; and former President Mary Robinson of Ireland said they hoped to have talks with the North Korean leader, Mr. Kim, and his son and heir apparent, Kim Jong-un.        
