
JUBA, Sudan &mdash; Michael Kwol, who said he fought for nearly 40 years through two civil wars only to be shot in the side by bandits, slipped out of the clinic where he undergoes physical therapy, limped through the memorial grounds dedicated to the liberation leader John Garang, threw his crutches to the side and hopped up to the voting booth.        

Because he grew up fighting in the bush and never received a formal education, Mr. Kwol, 56, has trouble reading. No matter. The campaign logo for independence in the referendum here in southern Sudan &mdash; an open hand seemingly waving farewell to the north &mdash; is everywhere, and he knew just which way to vote.        

&ldquo;Bye-bye,&rdquo; said Mr. Kwol, waving his right hand while leaning on his crutches. Like so many of his compatriots, he voted for secession from northern Sudan. &ldquo;I feel good,&rdquo; he said.        

As straightforward as their meanings may seem, the symbols used on the referendum ballots &mdash; the open hand for separation and a pair of clasped hands for unity &mdash; were the fruit of months of tense negotiations between the north and south, underscoring the many challenges that lie ahead for the south if it attains independence, as expected.        

&ldquo;It took a long time to agree,&rdquo; said Beatrice Wani, an officer for the Southern Sudan Referendum Bureau. &ldquo;We went through many rounds.&rdquo;        

In a poor, underdeveloped society where only 15 percent of adults can read and write, using symbols was of paramount importance, but each one seemed to carry its own underlying meaning and subliminal message.         

Among the first options to be proposed was the symbol of a single star &mdash; like the one on the southern Sudanese flag &mdash; to represent separation and a moon to symbolize unity with the largely Muslim north, Ms. Wani said. But that plan was rejected, she said, when the north argued that the star symbolized support for Israel as a Jewish state. Israel took in droves of Sudanese refugees from the war and could establish formal ties with a newly independent southern Sudan.        

Then organizers thought of using a picture of a grass hut  &mdash; like those that dot the landscape &mdash;  but some argued that it would be too ambiguous. Then they thought of using a giraffe. Or a traditional ceramic pot.        

Finally, they settled on the hands.        

Literacy is just one of the hurdles southern Sudan would face upon independence. Comprehensive statistics on the region may be lagging, given its vast distances and decades of civil war, but a common picture is emerging. As one recent study supported by the United States Agency for International Development suggested, &ldquo;There is no other post-conflict reconstruction challenge in modern times that is on par with Southern Sudan.&rdquo;        

The roads disappear during the rainy season. Electricity comes from diesel generators. Offices and hotels are pieced together like Lego blocks of prefabricated container units, imported from abroad. More than half the population lives on less than 75 cents a day, and nearly half of the people here are &ldquo;food deprived,&rdquo; according to the United Nations.        

The referendum has acted as a dress rehearsal for the government, and the task was not easy. Millions of ballots had to be dispersed. Roughly 14,000 electoral officers were trained in electoral law. And important messages had to be communicated to a highly illiterate society.        

But the officials here have excelled where by many traditional indicators they should have failed &mdash; they have gotten out the vote.        

Despite lingering tensions and fighting along the contested border with the north, the voting itself has been orderly, and five days into the referendum, turnout has been astronomical, with observers saying the total numbers will clear the 60 percent mark necessary for the results to be valid. In the process, southern leaders eager for independence have turned the region&rsquo;s largest handicap, illiteracy, into a tool.        

Ms. Wani of the referendum bureau said the symbols held subliminal clues that illiterate voters intuitively recognized: in the unity option, the gripping hands were left hands, a greeting that would be taboo in southern Sudan, while the open palm for separation was the right hand.        

The secession campaign was also highly effective. The open palm is ubiquitous throughout southern Sudan, plastered on shop doors, bumper stickers and little flags,   often with a thumbprint signifying a vote.        

But pictures of the clasped hands of unity are scarce, and where they are present, there is usually a picture of the open palm next to it, with the thumbprint pressed in below.        

While a pro-unity rally has been held in the southern capital, Juba, a church in the state of Western Equatoria was recently burned down after community members were told by its leaders not to vote.        

On Thursday, two ethnic groups that have been skirmishing in the contested Abyei area along the border between north and south signed an agreement meant to reduce conflicts over grazing land that have led to more than 40 deaths.        

At referendum rallies, officials have mixed voter education with political campaigning, swaying an open hand back and forth to the crowds to teach the symbol &mdash; waving farewell.        

The U.S.A.I.D. study says the new country would require decades of foreign aid &ldquo;intervention,&rdquo; including hundreds of millions of dollars, along with thousands of expatriates to staff government offices. One Western diplomat said southern Sudan was set to become &ldquo;the world&rsquo;s next aid darling.&rdquo;        

But the success of the campaign and the voting could cause some to rethink the perception of some of southern Sudan&rsquo;s challenges. Neha Erasmus, who works as an aide to an African Union panel on Sudan, said the success of the referendum so far was an indication that southern Sudan&rsquo;s challenges were misunderstood, and that its strengths had often gone unnoticed.        

&ldquo;By the standard by which we judge progress, southern Sudan falls very short of the mark,&rdquo; Ms. Erasmus said. &ldquo;But the problem&rdquo; with this standard, she said, is that it focuses on &ldquo;what isn&rsquo;t there&rdquo; instead of on &ldquo;strengths &mdash; strengths of values, communities and societies.&rdquo; Indeed, illiteracy has been used as a catalyst for innovation here before. Billboards throughout the country advertise the newest service from Vivacell, the first southern Sudanese-owned cellphone company.        

The service is called Voice SMS; users speak a message into their phone that, in theory, can be delivered as a standard voicemail or translated into text.   Like many African countries, the southern Sudan region has experienced a proliferation of  phones and data networks, despite other stark, more basic, development gaps.        

Below the billboards, and spread around the towns and countryside, is the low-tech campaign message, the open palm.        

&ldquo;Bye-bye,&rdquo; Mr. Kwol said again, emphatically. &ldquo;Bye-bye.&rdquo;        
