
LONDON &mdash; Just 24 hours before the event, Britain said Thursday that it had revoked the Syrian ambassador&rsquo;s invitation to the wedding of Prince William and Kate Middleton, turning the ceremony into an unlikely focus of protest against violent repression in the Arab world.        

The prince and his longtime girlfriend are to marry on Friday at Westminster Abbey before an invited congregation of some 1,900 people ranging from what the British call commoners &mdash; that is, ordinary people without titles &mdash; to crowned heads of old monarchies and a smattering of the newer elite from show business and sport.        

Buried among the official list of those invited was a reference to &ldquo;All Heads of Mission in London representing countries with which the United Kingdom has normal diplomatic relations.&rdquo;        

That included Sami Khiyami, the ambassador from Syria, where Britain, along with other European countries, is pressing for stern diplomatic action to protest a crackdown on dissent that has claimed hundreds of lives as the authorities sent tanks and soldiers into the streets to crush opposition.        

After protests from human rights groups, William Hague, the foreign secretary, said in a statement he had decided that Mr. Khiyami&rsquo;s presence &ldquo;would be unacceptable and that he should not attend&rdquo; because of &ldquo;this week&rsquo;s attacks against civilians by the Syrian security forces, which we have condemned.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Buckingham Palace shares the view of the Foreign Office that it is not considered appropriate for the Syrian Ambassador to attend the wedding,&rdquo; the statement said, denoting royal approval of the decision.        

It noted that only on Wednesday, Mr. Khiyami had been invited to a different encounter with British officialdom when he was summoned to the Foreign Office to receive a formal protest about the use of force against protesters.        

In a radio interview on Thursday, Mr. Khiyami said that he found the British snub &ldquo;a bit embarrassing&rdquo; but that he did not believe it jeopardize other aspects of Syria&rsquo;s relationship with Britain. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not a man who likes to attend events,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;If it wasn&rsquo;t for the importance of&rdquo; the royal wedding, &ldquo;I wouldn&rsquo;t have thought about it,&rdquo; he told the BBC.        

News of the invitation to the Syrian envoy had received a particularly sharp response from members of the opposition Labour Party since two former Labour prime ministers, Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, have not been invited while a former Conservative prime minister, John Major, has accepted an invitation. Margaret Thatcher, another former Conservative prime minister, was reported to have declined an invitation because of poor health.        

The guest list had drawn earlier controversy when the crown prince of Bahrain volunteered not to take up an invitation because of protests in Britain over the harsh treatment of antigovernment demonstrators in his country.        

But some opposition figures on Thursday said Bahrain&rsquo;s ambassador should also be denied an invitation to the wedding. British newspapers have also raised questions about invitations extended to diplomats from other countries where Britain has criticized human rights records, notably Iran, North Korea and Zimbabwe.        

&ldquo;There is blood on the hands of other regimes who want to promote positive media coverage by walking down tomorrow&rsquo;s red carpet,&rdquo; said Denis MacShane, a Labour lawmaker and former Foreign Office minister, adding, &ldquo;we are seeing crass insensitivity in allowing representatives of some of the world&rsquo;s most odious regimes take part in the royal wedding.&rdquo;        

Many other members of royal families &mdash; from lands as disparate as Belgium, Bulgaria and Brunei &mdash; are on the official list of guests, along with Elton John and the soccer player David Beckham and his wife, Victoria.        

Invitations to the wedding rank among the hottest tickets in memory, offering an exalted place inside Westminster Abbey as about 5,000 police officers patrol the city outside and broadcasters send images of the event around the world. Britons have organized about 5,500 officially approved street parties to accompany the event, and the wedding day has been declared a public holiday. Some enthusiasts are already camping out in the streets outside Westminster Abbey to secure a good view.        
Sarah Lyall contributed reporting.
