
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; At least five people were killed early on Thursday when a roadside bomb hit a bus carrying employees of the Pakistani Navy in the southern port city of Karachi, a senior naval officer said.        

The attack came after similar attacks Tuesday in Karachi, considered the financial and commercial capital of the country.        

&ldquo;Four sailors have embraced martyrdom,&rdquo; Commodore Irfan ul-Haq, a spokesman for the Pakistan Navy, said on Thursday.        

The blast also killed 1 civilian and wounded at least 15 others, including 5 naval employees. Commodore Haq declined to comment on why navy personnel were targets.        

&ldquo;It is still very premature to comment,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Investigations are ongoing.&rdquo;        

There was no immediate claim of responsibility for Thursday&rsquo;s bombing, but Taliban insurgents had said they were behind the attacks on Tuesday against two naval buses and warned of more strikes. Insurgents seem to have adopted a different strategy in the latest wave of attacks, since they have generally used suicide bombers to attack civilian and military targets in the past.        

Some analysts have commented that navy buses are a relatively easy and vulnerable target, because they travel on the main roads of the city without any security.        

Police officials said Thursday&rsquo;s bomb was planted by the road in the Karsaaz neighborhood on Shahrah-e-Faisal, the main thoroughfare of the city. It exploded as soon as the navy bus passed by around 8:20 a.m. An initial investigation found that 5 to 11 pounds of explosives were used in the attack.        

Meanwhile, questions are being raised about the ability of law enforcement authorities to thwart the attacks.        

On Tuesday, Qaim Ali Shah, the chief minister of Sindh Province, said there had been warnings of terrorist attacks in Karachi, the provincial capital.        

The Thursday editorial in Dawn, the country&rsquo;s leading English-language daily, read: &ldquo;Whether it is sleeper cells or new recruits, the failure of the security apparatus to keep an eye on militant activity in the city and keep track of militants&rsquo; movements across the country reflects poorly on the state&rsquo;s intelligence-gathering capabilities.&rdquo;        

President Asif Ali Zardari strongly condemned Thursday&rsquo;s attack through a statement released by his office. &ldquo;The President said the nation and the country remain determined to counter threats from the terrorists and vowed not to be deterred by such acts,&rdquo; the statement said.        
