
MOSCOW &mdash; Poland&rsquo;s prime minister said Thursday that a Russian-led investigation of the crash that killed the Polish president and dozens of other top officials in April was &ldquo;incomplete&rdquo; and that his government would not accept a &ldquo;unilateral account of the crash.&rdquo;        

But he tempered his comments, saying that he hoped the recent improvement in relations between the countries would continue.        

The prime minister, Donald Tusk, made his comments a day after the Moscow-based Interstate Aviation Committee, which investigates air disasters in the former Soviet Union, released a report that placed the blame for the crash on both the plane&rsquo;s Polish crew and its high-ranking passengers.        

The crash occurred April 10, 2010, when the pilot tried to land in thick fog about half a mile from the airport in Smolensk in western Russia. The plane slammed into a forest, and everyone on board was killed. Polish leaders say that Russian air traffic controllers could have been more forceful in their warnings, and that infrastructure on the ground might have contributed to the disaster. The report did not find that shortcomings on the Russian side were a factor.        

At the time of the crash, Moscow&rsquo;s response was considered compassionate and sincere, and it led to a reconciliation between Russia and Poland. Mr. Tusk had advocated that course, and the report presents him with the delicate task of sustaining it without alienating Polish voters.        

The most passionate objections to the report were made by Ewa Blasik, the widow of Gen. Andrzej Blasik, commander of the Polish Air Force. The report said that General Blasik was mildly intoxicated, probably from drinks consumed on the flight, when he entered the cockpit two minutes before the crash, and that his presence distracted and put stress on the pilot.        

Mrs. Blasik told Polish Radio the conclusions were &ldquo;a shameful attempt to vilify the memory of my husband.&rdquo; She said that General Blasik could not have been drinking &mdash; the crash occurred around 10:30 a.m. Moscow time &mdash; and that the Polish government had a duty to defend his honor.        

&ldquo;I would like to protest against the passivity of the government of Prime Minister Donald Tusk,&rdquo; she said.        

Russian officials reacted coolly to the Polish complaints. The transport minister, Igor Y. Levitin, said he was &ldquo;a little bit surprised&rdquo; that officials in Warsaw continued to maintain that Russian air traffic controllers should have kept the pilot from landing. He said the controllers cannot issue such orders on international routes.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to enter into a debate, because let me remind you that a criminal investigation is under way,&rdquo; the Interfax news service quoted him as saying.        

Russia&rsquo;s foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, said that his country sympathized with the pain that the Poles were feeling after the report&rsquo;s release. And he endorsed Mr. Tusk&rsquo;s vow not to allow a political rift to open between Moscow and Warsaw.        

&ldquo;No matter how difficult it is &mdash; and that is inevitable because it concerns people&rsquo;s lives,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;we will not allow any deterioration of our relations, which are now normalizing.&rdquo;        
