
JERUSALEM &mdash; Israel said Sunday that it was delaying the transfer of almost $90 million in tax revenue owed to the Palestinian Authority in a move against the emerging reconciliation between Fatah, the party that dominates the authority, and its Islamic rival, Hamas.        

The move came as both sides appealed to international powers to back their positions on the unity deal expected to be signed in Cairo this week, intended to end a four-year schism between the West Bank government led by Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority and Fatah chief, and officials in Gaza, the Palestinian coastal enclave controlled by Hamas.        

The finance minister of Israel, Yuval Steinitz, suspended all money transfers and instructed his staff to postpone meetings with Palestinian Authority officials, his office said Sunday, until there were guarantees that none of the money would end up in Hamas coffers.        

Mr. Steinitz&rsquo;s advisers said that it was the finance minister&rsquo;s prerogative to suspend the tax transfer, but the decision also appeared to have the backing of the Israeli leadership. Officials said that Mr. Steinitz attended discussions on Thursday between the prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, and his top ministers about the implications of Palestinian reconciliation.        

Hamas is sworn to Israel&rsquo;s destruction. Israel, like the United States and the European Union, classifies the group as a terrorist organization and refuses any dealings with it.        

&ldquo;The burden of proof is on the Palestinians,&rdquo; Mr. Steinitz told Israel Radio on Sunday, &ldquo;that the money we pass on, even money that is theirs, will not go to a terror organization, to terror activists, to the purchase of rockets that will later fall on Sderot, Ashkelon or Ashdod.&rdquo;        

Israel collects the equivalent of more than $1 billion annually in customs and other taxes on behalf of the Palestinian Authority and transfers the revenue to the Palestinian side under terms that were part of the Oslo accords. The tax transfers, which make up a significant portion of the authority budget, have been suspended for lengthy periods in the past.        

Palestinian officials denounced Israel for attacking the unity deal before it had been signed and before its details were known.        

&ldquo;These Israeli measures will not deter us from every possible effort to expedite the completion of the file of ending the division and restoring national unity, regardless of such actions, steps or threats,&rdquo; Salam Fayyad, the Palestinian Authority prime minister, said Sunday.        

Mr. Fayyad told the official Palestinian news agency Wafa that Palestinian leaders were in contact with international forces and bodies to try to prevent the Israeli delay in the tax transfers.        

Israeli leaders were also focusing their efforts on persuading the world powers to shun any Palestinian unity government that includes Hamas. Although the Palestinians say they intend to set up an interim unity government made up of independent technocrats, Israeli officials have said they would not accept that distinction, and that it is the politicians who set the government policy who count.        

Mr. Netanyahu said Sunday that the unity deal &ldquo;must concern not only every Israeli, but all those in the world who aspire to see peace between us and our Palestinian neighbors. Peace is possible only with those who want to live in peace alongside us and not with those who want to destroy us.&rdquo; He added that he would deliver this message to European leaders during his visits to London and Paris this week.        
