
PARIS &mdash; French accident investigators said Sunday that they had retrieved a key component from one of the flight recorders of an Air France jet that crashed in the mid-Atlantic almost two years ago, reviving hopes that it could help explain why the plane went down.        

The French Bureau of Investigations and Analysis said the memory unit of the flight data recorder was found early Sunday and brought to the surface, although it will be more than a week before it can be examined.        

Investigators were initially disheartened last week when an underwater drone located the recorder&rsquo;s protective housing without the cylindrical memory module attached.        

But on Sunday, the mood at the bureau&rsquo;s headquarters was charged with anticipation.        

&ldquo;This is a very happy surprise,&rdquo; Jean-Paul Troadec, the bureau&rsquo;s director, said in an interview.        

Investigators had said the memory unit was probably dislodged from the housing when the plane hit the water, making it less likely that it would be found amid the rest of the wreckage, on a sandy plain nearly two and a half miles below the surface. &ldquo;We had been expecting a lengthy search,&rdquo; Mr. Troadec said.        

Photos of the memory module showed that it had suffered little exterior corrosion, he said, though it was not clear whether the memory chip inside had been damaged. If still readable, it could provide crucial information on the plane&rsquo;s position, speed, altitude and direction when it ran into trouble.        

&ldquo;First we need to know if we can read it,&rdquo; Mr. Troadec said.        

The plane&rsquo;s other black box, the cockpit voice recorder, has not been found.        

Because of the remote location of the crash site, 600 miles off the coast of Brazil, transporting the data recorder&rsquo;s memory unit to Paris, where investigators will try to download its contents, will take 8 to 10 days.        

The Air France flight crashed on June 1, 2009, in a heavy, high-altitude thunderstorm en route to Paris from Rio de Janeiro. &nbsp;All 228 passengers and crew members were killed.        

After three failed searches, a team of oceanographers found the wreckage of the Airbus A330-200 last month, six miles from the plane&rsquo;s last known location.        

Finding and decrypting the data on the flight recorders gained new urgency after the decision last month by a French judge to place both Airbus and Air France under formal investigation on allegations of involuntary manslaughter in the case. Under French law, this is one step short of criminal charges but could lead to a trial.        

So far, the only information about what happened to the flight is from automated messages that indicated a malfunction of the plane&rsquo;s airspeed sensors.        
