
MISURATA, Libya &mdash; On the night he would die, Muhammad Abdulhamid Sbikhee, a night watchman at a local school, was at home with his wife and their seven children. They shared a small, ground-floor apartment that opened to a tiny yard that opened in turn to an urban dirt alley.        

Misurata had been shelled for several weeks running, and Mr. Sbikhee, a quiet man with a thick gray beard, was both worried and prepared, a neighbor and his wife said.        

His children&rsquo;s two bedrooms faced the direction from where many of the high-explosive shells and rockets from the forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi had been fired. Around 10:30 p.m. Saturday, when more shells began landing and exploding in his neighborhood, Mr. Sbikhee and his older son sent his children, ages 1 to 17, to the other side of their apartment. He told them to hurry through the kitchen, outside, across the narrow slot of open sky, and to sleep on cushions he had arranged in a storage room near the cement wall beside the alley.        

His instincts were good. It was safer there. Then he returned inside, to the bedroom he shared with his wife, Soad Warayeth. The artillery shell met him there.        

How long this shell had been in flight no one can say for sure. But it was very likely racing through the air over this besieged city as Mr. Sbikhee paced back through the kitchen, crossed the dimly lit corridor, and entered the room where he had slept for years.        

What is known is that he all but collided with it. He had made it to the foot of his bed when it struck the exterior base of his building, squarely in line with the bed&rsquo;s opposite side. There it exploded. In a flash and roar, the shell and a large section of wall were converted into a rush of shrapnel, shattered cinder blocks and bits of flying plaster and concrete. This engulfed Mr. Sbikhee.        

Earlier on Saturday, Colonel Qaddafi, Libya&rsquo;s long-ruling leader, gave a rambling speech on state television in which he insisted, no matter any evidence to the contrary or the impressions in the West, that his forces were not killing Libyan civilians. &ldquo;You lie and say I&rsquo;m killing my own people,&rdquo; the former revolutionary said. &ldquo;Show us the bodies.&rdquo;        

In accordance with Islamic tradition, under which people are buried on the day they die, showing the colonel bodies of all the Libyans killed in recent months, hundreds of them here in Misurata alone, by his military forces and militias was not readily possible. But there was no need to wait long for the colonel&rsquo;s claim to be proved wrong. On Saturday, as on every day, more people were becoming bodies with the passing hours.        

Now it was Mr. Sbikhee&rsquo;s turn.        

As his bedroom wall was blown asunder, covering the double bed with a mound of gray rubble, a wave of shrapnel and debris shot across the room. It blew open the wardrobe, shattered the mirror above the bureau, and popped the light bulb on the wall.        

Several pieces hit Mr. Sbikhee, including one that entered his right side, below the armpit, cutting a deep wound. He collapsed to the floor.        

Mrs. Warayeth, who had been behind him at the doorway, was struck in her lower body. Dust and darkness enveloped her.        

The events of the next several minutes &mdash; shared in the accounts of Mrs. Warayeth and her neighbors, traced in the dark stains left behind, and visible at the desperate struggle in the trauma tent where doctors tried to resuscitate Mr. Sbikhee &mdash; present the chronicle of a family at the hour of its destruction.        

As blood rushed down her legs, and she struggled against disorientation, Mrs. Warayeth heard the voice of Ahmed, her oldest son. &ldquo;My father is dead!&rdquo; he shouted. &ldquo;I want to kill myself! My father is dead.&rdquo;        

The corridor was black. Mrs. Warayeth found a light switch. Unexpectedly, it worked. Now seeing the way, she staggered toward the storeroom where Mr. Sbikhee had put their smaller children.        

Judging from the bloody tableau of handprints she left on the walls against which she leaned, she stopped often. Her bloody footprints show that she pressed on, past the skillet still on the stove in the kitchen, across the tiny bit of open air, toward the storeroom, to the gate, which she opened.        

Looking on the alley, she vented her confusion in a scream, to everyone and to no one at all. &ldquo;My husband is dead!&rdquo; she shouted. &ldquo;I do not know what to do!&rdquo;        

A pickup truck of rebels soon lurched to a stop by the gate. A group of rebels bounded out, put her in the truck&rsquo;s bed and sped toward a clinic, where her bleeding would be stopped.        
(Page 2 of 2)
At about the same time, three men from the neighborhood rushed into the apartment, where they found Mr. Sbikhee on his bedroom floor. &ldquo;We tried to pull him, we tried to walk with him, we tried to carry him,&rdquo; said one of them, Naji Ali.        

They managed to move their friend out of his ruined room, across the corridor and to the entryway to the building, where they rested him on the stoop. The shells had stopped landing, for the moment. In the confusion, no one had the keys to a car.        

One man ran down the alley to find someone who could drive, Mr. Naji said. At the moment he rounded a corner, another artillery shell landed, killing him.        

Ten minutes passed before a car could be found. Mr. Sbikhee was not conscious. Though his wound was large, he barely bled. In all likelihood &mdash; though not yet officially &mdash; he was dead.        

Estimates of the number of Libyans killed since the armed uprising against the colonel and his family began in February have varied widely, from several thousand to more than 30,000. Because of the poor state of communications in wartime Libya, and due to the difficulties of accounting for the dead, the wounded and the missing on several fluid fronts, no fully reliable tallies exist.        

There is no question, beyond the parallel universe of Libyan state television and the official statements that it bullhorns, that the toll is large.        

In Misurata, clinics and hospitals have confirmed at least 530 deaths from war-related trauma. This count does not include many people who did not reach medical care before they died, and were buried by their families, but it does include Mr. Sbikhee.        

At a trauma center a short while after he was carried to the stoop, he was raced into the corner of the triage station where the most gravely wounded patients are treated.        

He was motionless and pale. For a long time several doctors took turns trying to revive him. There was little hope. One doctor watched the others from several yards away. &ldquo;They are trying,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But he has already died.&rdquo;        

A short while later, he was among the numbered, one of many killed in a few bloody hours in Misurata. According to rules of public discourse in the Libyan capital, word of his passing is officially a lie.        
