
ABBOTTABAD, Pakistan &mdash; The sprawling compound where Osama bin Laden sheltered before his death stood out in its middle-class neighborhood on the edges of this scenic city, home to a large Pakistani military base and a military academy.        

The compound is about eight times the size of most homes in the area and was surrounded by high walls topped with barbed wire. Nearby residents noticed that few people ever ventured out of the house, and although a senior Obama administration official said the property was valued at about $1 million, no telephone lines ran into the compound.        

Still, nearby residents in the area called Bilal Town, where many retired and current military officials live, said they had not been suspicious of the house&rsquo;s occupants and had never suspected that a high-level militant leader might be living there.        

Some said they had assumed the occupants mainly kept to themselves because they were religious, although even in most devout Pakistani families, men regularly socialize with other men.        

Jibran Khan, 23, who lives near Bilal Town, said he had seen the huge house several times and had never imagined that Bin Laden would be hiding there. He assumed that a wealthy person had simply decided to settle on the large piece of property, with a view of the hills that surround the town, he said.        

Mr. Khan said that he had never met the people who lived in the house but that he knew others who did. &ldquo;A friend told me that some tall, bearded men lived in the house who said they had come to Abbottabad from Peshawar some years ago due to some enmity,&rdquo; he said.        

But he said his friend, who ran into the men at a local bakery, told him that they appeared to be Pakistanis and that they were always very courteous.        

On Monday, the Pakistani Army put up barricades to block access to all roads and alleys that lead to the house and barred journalists from going near it.        

The proximity of the house to the military academy, which is about a third of a mile away, raised questions about whether Pakistani intelligence agents or military officials knew Bin Laden was there.        

One Pakistani security analyst said Bin Laden might have moved to the unlikely hiding place, only about 35 miles from Islamabad, because foreign spies would have been unlikely to be able to pry in a town with high-level military installations. The site would also have kept Bin Laden out of the range of American drones, which could not venture so far into Pakistan, away from the tribal areas where the armed aircraft patrol, killing many militants.        

The compound is separated from clusters of nearby homes by green fields and poplar trees and is on a dirt road several minutes&rsquo; drive from the main road that leads to the academy.        

Photographs of the white multistory house showed that it had tinted windows on the side nearest the dirt road, appearing to confirm neighbors&rsquo; suspicions that a religious family lived there. Many conservative families tint their windows to keep nonfamily members from seeing the women inside.        

Residents outside the police cordon said they knew something unusual was happening when they heard helicopters hovering overhead just around midnight Sunday and heard gunfire. Several said they had spotted three helicopters.        

After one of the aircraft crashed, they said, another flew close to the hideout just before a huge blast rattled the neighborhood. The blast may have resulted from American efforts to destroy the helicopter so no one could use it to glean sensitive information about the mission.        

A government official who lives in the area said the helicopters had approached without their lights on. &ldquo;It didn&rsquo;t seem they were from Pakistani army,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;One helicopter came so low that it seemed as if it was about to land on the terrace of our house.&rdquo;        

Fahim Hamid, 24, whose house is located on the main street nearby, Kakul Road, and next to an alley that led to the Bin Laden hideout, said he and his friends had rushed from their houses when they heard the helicopters.        

&ldquo;After three explosions and sounds of gunfire, two helicopters left,&rdquo; Mr. Hamid said, adding that the area then went quiet for a while. &ldquo;&ldquo;Within a few minutes, dozens of jeeps emerged from the military academy&rsquo;s direction. Soldiers hopped out of one jeep and asked us, &lsquo;Where did the sounds come from?&rsquo; We pointed to the alley.&rdquo;        

Nearby residents who spoke by phone said that a part of the house had caught fire after the attack and that the wreckage of the helicopter was scattered about.        

&ldquo;We were told by police that a helicopter had crashed and nothing else had happened, said Anas Mushtaq, 24.        

Mr. Hamid said: &ldquo;It seemed very strange and not as simple as it was described. In the morning, we heard the news on TV that Osama bin Laden was killed. It left us terribly shocked.&rdquo;        

By midday, Pakistani troops were busy clearing the rubble and securing the wreckage of the American helicopter. One army truck and a tractor carried away the wreckage hidden under a tarpaulin.        

Abbottabad, known for its educational and medical institutions, remained peaceful and there were no protests. The main shopping areas were open and people seemed to go about their lives as if nothing had happened to warrant global headlines.        

Despite the quiet, one doctor who lives about two miles from the compound and heard the attack said that people in the town were stunned by the news &mdash; and disturbed by the continuing violence in the country.        

Much of the picturesque town was built by the British as a resort, and it remains today a popular destination for tourists looking for a stop on the way north from Islamabad to go hiking in the mountains. The doctor, who like other members of his family spoke on the condition of anonymity, likened his own home to the one in &ldquo;Little House on the Prairie&rdquo; and said many residents of the town were well educated.        

His teenage daughter seemed somewhat nonplussed. &ldquo;This is the last place we thought he&rsquo;d be hiding,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s Abbottabad, for crying out loud. Nothing ever really happens here.&rdquo;        

But her mother was less sanguine, seeing the attack as something of a violation. &ldquo;Literally, this whole nation is terrorized,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;and we cannot put a finger to anyone.&rdquo;        
Ismail Khan contributed reporting from Peshawar, Pakistan, and Adam B. Ellick from New York.
