
Ayman al-Zawahri, long the second-in-command in Al Qaeda and Osama bin Laden&rsquo;s most likely successor, released five recordings between January and April trying to link the uprisings across the Arab world to the jihadist inspiration behind the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.        

&ldquo;Our Islamic nation is engaged in one battle against the contemporary crusader invaders campaign and against their agents, our corrupt and corruptive rulers,&rdquo; he said in the last recording, released in April. &ldquo;America&rsquo;s detachment from its allies one after another is one of the signs of its retreat from its conceit and arrogance ever since it was attacked in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania.&rdquo;        

But the jihadist battle cry has not been particularly relevant to the uprisings, and Mr. Zawahri even apologized in his messages for being behind the curve on developments in the Arab world: a result of being on the run, he said.        

Mr. Zawahri&rsquo;s effort to sell Al Qaeda&rsquo;s ideology as answer to the problems of the Middle East will become even harder with Bin Laden&rsquo;s death.        

If Bin Laden was Al Qaeda&rsquo;s ideological leader, Mr. Zawahri, 59, has been its organizational brains. But he is viewed as something of a professorial scold, more likely to be caught up in local issues and feuds over controversies like the thousands of Muslims killed by Qaeda attacks.        

Bin Laden had an inspirational personal story: he dedicated a fortune inherited from his father, a construction tycoon, to finance a global jihad. Mr. Zawahri, a surgeon, comes from an accomplished Egyptian family, but lacks a similar patina of sacrifice.        

&ldquo;Bin Laden represented a movement, he was almost mythic in his appearances and what he said &mdash; Zawahri cannot equal that,&rdquo; said Richard Barrett, the coordinator for the Qaeda-Taliban monitoring team for the United Nations Security Council.        

John O. Brennan, President Obama&rsquo;s counterterrorism adviser, said at a news conference on Monday that Mr. Zawahri &ldquo;has a lot of detractors within the organization, and I think you&rsquo;re going to see them start eating themselves from within more and more.&rdquo;        

Others, however, believe that Mr. Zawahri&rsquo;s organizational skills will be more necessary than charisma at a time when Al Qaeda&rsquo;s core needs to be held together.        

In a sense, Al Qaeda has already spread its franchise to local groups, and the question will be whether with Mr. Zawahri at its helm it can continue to inspire a new generation of jihadists.        

&ldquo;The transition that the Middle East is going through at the moment will be a testing ground whether these ideas will survive, will come back with a vengeance or will cease to be relevant,&rdquo; said Nelly Lahoud, a senior associate at the Combating Terrorism Center at the United States Military Academy. &ldquo;Will the new emerging regimes deliver something meaningful in the Muslim world?&rdquo;        

The Qaeda narrative will lose adherents if they do, but could return powerfully if they do not, she said.        

But Mr. Zawahri&rsquo;s recent attempts to graft Al Qaeda&rsquo;s message onto the Mideast uprisings showed no signs of winning adherents.        

He called for the establishment of an Islamic caliphate in Egypt based on Shariah or Islamic law. &ldquo;Those who seek to alienate Shariah from governance so America can be content will spread amongst you usury, adultery, insobriety, moral dissolution, familial schisms and all kinds and forms of crimes,&rdquo; he railed in his latest message, which was translated on Jihadology.net.        

Yet the youths who organized the uprisings across the Arab world have emphasized the peaceful, democratic nature of the revolts, and have shown little interest in an Islamic caliphate.        

Thus Mr. Zawahri takes the helm with the jihadi movement on the defensive. &ldquo;The ideology is based on the argument that jihad is the only way to bring change,&rdquo; said Jamal Khashoggi, a Saudi journalist who has tracked extremist Islamic groups for decades. &ldquo;But Facebook did a better job than jihad.&rdquo;        

Al Qaeda under Mr. Zawahri would very likely face other obstacles. Its Persian Gulf Arab supporters might be reluctant to finance a group not run by one of their own. And while Al Qaeda has some younger leaders from across the Muslim world, Islamist organizations tend to be hierarchical, making Mr. Zawahri the clear heir apparent.        

Mr. Zawahri has a long history of unalloyed hatred of the West. He was first arrested for his activism in 1966 at age 15, for joining the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood, the Arab world&rsquo;s oldest Islamic political organization.        

In 1974, he graduated from Cairo University&rsquo;s medical school and obtained a master&rsquo;s degree in surgery four years later. His father, who died in 1995, was a pharmacology professor at the same university. His grandfather, Rabia&rsquo;a al-Zawahri, was the grand imam of Al Azhar in Cairo, the center of mainstream Sunni Muslim teaching, and his great-uncle, Abdel Rahman Azzam, was the first secretary general of the Arab League.        

Finding the Muslim Brotherhood too tame, he helped found Egyptian Islamic Jihad in the late 1970s. Jailed after President Anwar el-Sadat&rsquo;s assassination in 1981, he was released in 1984.        

Tarek al-Zomor, imprisoned until earlier this year for his role in the assassination, on Monday recalled Mr. Zawahri&rsquo;s last jailhouse sermon. &ldquo;He assured us that there would only be more clashes, more violence between the Middle East and the West,&rdquo; Mr. Zomor said. &ldquo;I have no doubt that he will continue, if not escalate Al Qaeda&rsquo;s operations. Especially in light of American policies in the region, I do not expect al-Zawahri to be quiet.&rdquo;        

Fleeing Egypt for Saudi Arabia and eventually Afghanistan, he joined forces with Bin Laden around 1998, when both men signed a fatwa calling for worldwide attacks on American targets. Together they spread the technical know-how to carry out terrorist attacks across borders that has become the trademark of the group. Mr. Zawahri has been indicted for the bombings of the United States Embassies in Tanzania and Kenya the same year, and the United States has long offered a $25 million reward for his capture.        

Mr. Zawahri is believed to be hiding in Pakistan &mdash; although the theory that both leaders were in remote mountainous reaches of the country is now open to question. The United States almost killed him, however, in 2006 with a drone strike in Damadola in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas of Pakistan near Afghanistan, Mr. Barrett noted.        

Even with Mr. Zawahri on the run, experts stressed that killing proponents of jihad is far easier than killing the ideology itself and that Al Qaeda&rsquo;s ideas will persist as long as the dire political and social circumstances that created them persist.        

&ldquo;The question for Zawahri will be: Can Al Qaeda transmit its message in the absence of Bin Laden to the next generation of fighters?&rdquo; said Lt. Col. Reid Sawyer, the director of the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point.        
Lara El Gibaly contributed reporting from Cairo.
