
JERUSALEM &mdash; As millions of Israelis paused in reflection on Monday at the sound of the siren marking Holocaust Remembrance Day, the Internet here was buzzing. The first online database of more than half a million pieces of property lost by Holocaust victims, many in Eastern Europe, had just been uploaded as a first step toward restitution.        

After years of quiet diplomacy that accomplished little, organizers of the new project, financed by the Israeli government, said the idea was to harness technology in the struggle for restitution and to make as much noise as possible.        

&ldquo;This is an activist approach,&rdquo; said Bobby Brown, executive director of the Holocaust Era Asset Restitution Taskforce, known by its acronym, Project Heart. &ldquo;We believe there are no secrets anymore about the Holocaust.&rdquo;        

Pointing to the success of public drives in the past, like the campaign for Soviet Jewry and the settlement of claims of Holocaust victims by Swiss banks, Mr. Brown said the issue of property restitution had to be out there on Twitter and Facebook, although negotiations with countries where properties were located &ldquo;do not have to be made public right away.&rdquo;        

The project, a nonprofit global campaign of the Jewish Agency for Israel, a quasi-governmental body, has set up offices in Milwaukee and Brussels. It was announced at a news conference in Jerusalem on Sunday, and another news conference is planned for Wednesday in New York City. In line with the open approach, donors are paying for advertisements for Project Heart over the next six weeks in Times Square.        

This is the first worldwide list of property confiscated, looted or forcibly sold during the Holocaust era to be made available to survivors and their heirs. Compiled from hundreds of European archives, including tax records and voter registries, it includes real estate and land, movable property like art and jewelry, and intangible personal property like stocks, bonds and savings accounts.        

The project has already invited potential claimants to submit their details to the Web site, which is in 13 languages. Many of the properties in the database are listed with the names of the original owners, and sometimes their professions, information culled from the public records to help potential claimants find a match. Some 650,000 pieces of property were uploaded this week, and Mr. Brown hopes that the list will grow to a million by the end of the year. About 3.3 million Jews lived in Poland alone, he noted.        

Other Jewish organizations have dealt with restitution for decades. The Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany has focused on Germany and Austria. The World Jewish Restitution Organization was established in 1993 to focus on Eastern Europe after the collapse of the Communist governments. There has been some progress in the issue of community-owned property, but none on personal property, according to Mr. Brown.        

The subject of restitution has long been a delicate one between governments, and this is the first time that the Israeli government has become involved, providing Project Heart with an annual budget of more than $2.5 million for three years.        

About a third of the 750,000 Israelis who are above retirement age are Holocaust survivors, and many live in poverty.        

Once the information-gathering phase is completed, the project plans to move on to a more aggressive stage of legal and public action to try to get the cooperation of governments that have not cooperated so far. This will involve lobbying politicians and possibly helping with class-action lawsuits.        

Lea Nass, the deputy minister for senior citizens, said the official stamp of the government on the project should help advance the cause.        

Even if agreements are reached with countries, myriad questions will remain. Each country would have to establish criteria for verifying claims, evaluating the property and working out timelines for any payout.        

At the news conference in Jerusalem, Natan Sharansky, the chairman of the Jewish Agency for Israel, said the Holocaust &ldquo;was not only genocide, but it was also the greatest theft in history.&rdquo;        

Yet there were also moments of kindness and heroism, one of which has recently come to light. The granddaughter of a Polish woman who lived just outside the Auschwitz concentration camp during World War II presented Mr. Brown with his first piece of recovered property this week. She said her grandmother used to leave food for the forced laborers outside the camp in pots hidden in the bushes. One night, when she came to collect the empty pots, she found a jeweled necklace that had been placed in one of them.        

The granddaughter, Magdalena Wojciechowska, 40, of Lodz, Poland, returned the necklace to Mr. Brown, saying it was &ldquo;Jewish property.&rdquo; After taking the necklace to New York for the news conference, Mr. Brown said he would hand it over for safekeeping to Yad Vashem, the Holocaust Martyrs&rsquo; and Heroes&rsquo; Remembrance Authority in Jerusalem.        
