
A reporter for Al Jazeera&rsquo;s English-language channel disappeared in Syria on Friday, the network announced Monday, saying it was demanding immediate information from the Syrian government about her whereabouts.        

The network said in a brief statement that it had not had contact with the journalist, Dorothy Parvaz, since she arrived in Damascus on a Qatar Airways flight.        

Ms. Parvaz, who holds American, Canadian and Iranian citizenship, has been based in Doha, Qatar, for Al Jazeera since August 2010 and was sent to Syria to report on antigovernment demonstrations there. Her fianc&eacute;, Todd Barker, said the American, Canadian and Iranian Embassies in Damascus had all requested information about her whereabouts from the Syrian government.        

&ldquo;I spoke to her on Thursday night,&rdquo; Mr. Barker, a lawyer who lives in Luxembourg, said in a phone interview. &ldquo;And she informed me that she was going to Syria the next day at noon.&rdquo;        

Ms. Parvaz, he said, had not had time to get a Syrian visa and so had probably been traveling on her Iranian passport.        

The Syrian government has not said if Ms. Parvaz was arrested, but Mohamed Abdel Dayem of the Committee to Protect Journalists said there was &ldquo;strong evidence that she is almost certainly in the Syrian government&rsquo;s hands.&rdquo; He said the Syrian government did not typically acknowledge that it had journalists in custody until they were released.        

Mr. Abdel Dayem said dozens of journalists had been arrested in Syria since antigovernment demonstrations began there in mid-March. &ldquo;The numbers fluctuate,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Almost every day someone is being detained and someone else is being released.&rdquo;        

Al Jazeera has reported intensely on the so-called Arab Spring, earning it the enmity of some governments and Western-aligned political factions that accuse the network of helping foment the unrest.        

Syria has been refusing to issue journalists&rsquo; visas to most foreign reporters since the upheaval began.        
