
Moshe Landau, the presiding judge in the war-crimes trial of Adolf Eichmann, died at his home in Jerusalem on Sunday, the eve of Israel&rsquo;s Holocaust Remembrance Day. He was 99.        

The Israeli government announced the death, which occurred nearly 50 years after Justice Landau read out the verdict in the trial, bluntly telling Eichmann in December 1961, &ldquo;The court finds you guilty.&rdquo;        

Eichmann, who had carried out the Final Solution, devised to exterminate European Jewry, was hanged the next year.        

A refugee from Nazi Germany, Justice Landau was the head of a three-judge panel overseeing the Eichmann trial, which ran from April through August 1961. The panel also included Benjamin Halevy and Yitzhak Raveh.        

In later years Justice Landau was involved in several high-profile judicial inquiries, including investigations into Israel&rsquo;s preparedness for the Yom Kippur War and the use of excessive physical force by Shin Bet, the country&rsquo;s internal security agency.        

On Sunday, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said of Justice Landau, &ldquo;The people bow their heads in expressing honor and deep appreciation for his life works and character.&rdquo;        

When the Eichmann trial opened on April 11, 1961, Justice Landau read the 15-count indictment aloud in Hebrew, pausing as each charge was translated into German. The charges included &ldquo;causing the killing of millions of Jews,&rdquo; &ldquo;torture&rdquo; and placing &ldquo;many millions of Jews in living conditions that were calculated to bring about their physical destruction.&rdquo;        

Eichmann, who had been captured by Mossad agents in Argentina in 1960, followed the proceedings from inside a bulletproof glass box in the courtroom.        

As the trial unfolded, the news media (there were about 750 journalists present) regularly cited Justice Landau&rsquo;s strong, sober leadership over four months and 1,350,000 words of testimony.        

The press also took note of his sometimes terse exchanges both with the prosecution and with Eichmann, who testified that he was merely a tiny cog in the vast Nazi machine.        

On one occasion, as The New York Times reported, Justice Landau became impatient with the chief prosecutor, Gideon Hausner, after Mr. Hausner called witnesses who testified about horrors in Polish and Lithuanian ghettos. According to the parameters set by the indictment, these narratives were not strictly germane to the case.        

&ldquo;I know it is difficult to cut short such testimony,&rdquo; Justice Landau told Mr. Hausner in open court. &ldquo;But it is your duty, Sir, to brief the witness, to explain to him that all external elements must be removed that do not pertain to this trial.&rdquo;        

On another occasion, as Time magazine reported: &ldquo;Eichmann was so wrapped up in his notes and papers that Judge Landau coldly had to remind him to stand when addressed by the court. Eichmann&rsquo;s face flushed with momentary anger as he looked up; then, realizing where he was, he jumped up, apologizing.&rdquo;        

Moshe Landau was born in 1912 in what was then Danzig, Germany, and is now Gdansk, Poland. He went to England for his studies, earning a law degree from the University of London. By then Hitler had come to power, and the young Mr. Landau did not return home.        

After making his way to Palestine in 1933, he practiced law before being appointed to the bench in Haifa in 1940. At the time of the Eichmann trial, Justice Landau was a member of the Israeli Supreme Court, where he served from 1953 until his retirement in 1982.        

In the mid-1970s, Justice Landau served on the Agranat Commission, convened to determine responsibility for what was seen as Israel&rsquo;s lack of preparedness for the 1973 Arab-Israeli war, known as the Yom Kippur War.        

The commission&rsquo;s report blamed Israeli military leadership while exonerating its political leadership &mdash; including Prime Minister Golda Meir and Defense Minister Moshe Dayan &mdash; triggering accusations in the Israeli news media that the report was a whitewash.        

In the 1980s, Justice Landau was the head of a judicial commission investigating Shin Bet, whose agents had been charged with using force when interrogating prisoners and lying about it in court for more than a decade afterward.        

In its report, released in 1987, the Landau Commission criticized the agents but declined to prosecute them, saying that a &ldquo;moderate measure of physical pressure&rdquo; was permissible during certain interrogations.        

The commission&rsquo;s findings, which were adopted by the Israeli cabinet, drew international condemnation; they were overturned by the Israeli Supreme Court in 1999.        

Justice Landau, who was president of Israel&rsquo;s Supreme Court from 1980 to 1982, received the Israel Prize, the country&rsquo;s most prestigious award, in 1991.        

Information on survivors was not available.        

On Dec. 11, 1961, after four months of deliberation, the three judges entered the courtroom to deliver their verdict in the Eichmann trial. Their opinion, 100,000 words, took them two days to read aloud. They found Eichmann guilty on all counts.        

On Dec. 15, at 9:20 a.m. local time, Justice Landau read aloud Eichmann&rsquo;s sentence.        

In condemning Eichmann to death, he said: &ldquo;The dispatch by the accused of every train carrying 1,000 souls to Auschwitz or to any of the places of extermination amounted to direct participation by the accused in 1,000 acts of premeditated murder.&rdquo;        

Justice Landau continued: &ldquo;Even had we found that the accused acted out of blind obedience, as he alleges, yet we would have said that one who had participated in crimes of such dimensions for years on end has to undergo the greatest punishment known to the law.&rdquo;        
