
The Crown Prosecution Service said Friday that it would reopen the investigation into allegations of phone hacking by the newspaper The News of the World.        

The prosecutors said they would &ldquo;conduct a comprehensive assessment&rdquo; of all evidence turned up by Scotland Yard during its original criminal investigation into phone hacking at the newspaper in 2006 and any material that had come to light since then.        

&ldquo;The purpose of this assessment is to ascertain whether there is any material which could now form evidence in any future criminal prosecution relating to phone hacking,&rdquo; the prosecutors said in a statement.        

It said the move was prompted by developments in the civil courts in Britain, where several people whose phones were hacked have filed lawsuits against The News of the World&rsquo;s parent company.        

The newspaper, one of Britain&rsquo;s largest circulation publications, is owned by News International, part of Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s media empire.        

Evidence has emerged in those cases suggesting that the phone hacking may have been more widespread than The News of the World had admitted.        

In 2007, a News of the World editor, Clive Goodman, and an investigator employed by the newspaper, Glenn Mulcaire, were jailed after pleading guilty to having illegally intercepted voice-mail messages of Prince William, Prince Harry and their chief aides.        

The case was reopened by Scotland Yard in September after The New York Times Magazine published an article quoting former employees as saying that the phone hacking went beyond Mr. Goodman and Mr. Mulcaire and was condoned by the newspaper&rsquo;s top editors. The article also raised questions about whether the police had fully investigated evidence pointing to widespread hacking at the paper.        

Last month, the prosecution service said that there was not enough evidence to bring charges against Andy Coulson, the newspaper&rsquo;s former editor. Mr. Coulson, who is now Prime Minister David Cameron&rsquo;s communications director, has denied any knowledge of phone hacking.        

Scotland Yard has defended its original inquiry and has said there is no need to reopen the case.  But in a letter made public by the prosecution service on Friday, Assistant Police Commissioner John Yates said that &ldquo;there remain outstanding public, legal and political concerns.&rdquo;        

In a statement, The News of the World promised to &ldquo;cooperate fully&rdquo; with prosecutors, The Associated Press reported.        
