
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; Turkey closed its embassy in Tripoli, Libya, on Monday, apparently worried about the angry crowds that had attacked the missions of NATO countries after the airstrike that the Libyan government said killed a son of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and three of his grandchildren.        

Since the bombing raid on Saturday night, Col. Qaddafi&rsquo;s supporters have vandalized or set fire to the Italian, British and American Embassies, which were already closed, and ransacked United Nations buildings, forcing the diplomats to flee.        

&ldquo;In light of recent changes in the security conditions in Libya and emergence of the potential security risks, we took an important decision last night to temporarily evacuate our embassy in Tripoli,&rdquo; Ahmet Davutoglu, the Turkish foreign minister, told reporters in a live broadcast from Ankara, Turkey.        

&ldquo;Of course, this does not mean Turkey will cease its activity in this country,&rdquo; he said.        

Even so, the announcement was considered a blow to the efforts to mediate an end to the conflict, and it reflected Turkey&rsquo;s difficult position. With historic and business ties to Libya, Turkey has tried to act as an intermediary between Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government and the rebels, who do not seem interested in reconciliation. As a result, each side has accused Turkey of favoring one or the other, or of hedging its bets.        

Turkish diplomats have also played a crucial role in negotiating the release of imprisoned journalists, including four from The New York Times who were captured by Col. Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces in March. The withdrawal of the Turkish diplomats on Monday cast uncertainty on the fate of other imprisoned journalists, including four from the West who have been held by the Qaddafi government since early April.        

Three of those journalists &mdash; James Foley, a contributing reporter at GlobalPost; Clare Morgana Gillis, a freelancer who contributes to The Atlantic and USA Today; and Manu Brabo, a Spanish photographer &mdash; were captured together on the outskirts of the eastern city of Brega on April 5.        

&ldquo;They&rsquo;ve been able to call out and contact their families,&rdquo; said James Bennet, the editor in chief of The Atlantic. &ldquo;We haven&rsquo;t succeeded in getting any independent observers of any sort in to see them.&rdquo;        

The Austrian government is negotiating the release of a fourth journalist, Anton Hammerl, a photographer who was detained about the same time, according to Reporters Sans Frontieres, which advocates for press freedoms. The group said that at least 10 other journalists were being held by the government, including six Libyans and Kamel Atalua, a photojournalist for Al Jazeera who has been held since early March.        

Philip S. Balboni, the president of GlobalPost said he was concerned about the loss of Turkey as a mediator. &ldquo;We have asked the State Department to clarify what diplomatic channel the U.S. government intends to use to replace the role played by Turkey, which has been tremendously helpful to us during the past weeks.&rdquo;        

The NATO airstrike that led to Turkey&rsquo;s announcement remained clouded in mystery. The Libyan government has said that one of Col. Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons, Seif al-Arab el-Qaddafi, 29, and three of the Libyan leader&rsquo;s grandchildren &mdash; two boys and a girl &mdash; were killed in an attack on the son&rsquo;s house on Saturday. Colonel Qaddafi, the government said, narrowly escaped injured.        

NATO officials denied that they were trying to kill Colonel Qaddafi or any of his family members, and they said the house, which contained a bunker complex and basement command center, was a legitimate military target.        

Rebel leaders continued to insist that Colonel Qaddafi had lied about the deaths to undermine the NATO campaign and to garner international sympathy.        

Hundreds of people flocked to funerals for the four Qaddafis at a Tripoli cemetery on Monday. Footage on Libyan state television showed Seif Qaddafi&rsquo;s coffin, draped in a green flag and topped with a bouquet of flowers, carried through the crowd to the gravesite. His brother, Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi, was seen praying next to the site.        

In Benghazi, Libya, the chief rebel spokesman, Abdul Hafidh Ghoga, was unequivocal: &ldquo;We do not believe it.&rdquo;        

He also said that he would support any attempt by NATO to assassinate Colonel Qaddafi because, he said, that goal would be in keeping with the aim of protecting civilians.        

Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces continued to attack the besieged city of Misurata, Libya, with artillery shells and ground-to-ground rockets, and several people were being treated at trauma centers in the city.        

Misurata itself remained almost entirely in the hands of the rebels, who have been hoping to retake the airport in the southwest part of the city.        

The rebels claimed by nightfall to have made advances, and to have captured at least one piece of artillery that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces had been using to fire on Misurata&rsquo;s neighborhoods.        

But the government forces appeared to have won a potentially important tactical victory by keeping aid and resupply ships from reaching the city&rsquo;s port.        

The loyalists struck the port late Sunday with a barrage of Grad rockets, killing two men and demonstrating that they can, with evident ease, pound the entrance to the harbor.        

Almost simultaneously, a mortar or artillery crew fired shell after shell at a fleeing Turkish aid vessel. The munitions exploded on the jetty and in the water near the ship. The vessel was not hit, but no ship has since dared enter the port, the city&rsquo;s only lifeline to the outside world.        

The city&rsquo;s residents and urged NATO on Monday to do more to keep the port open. Rumors swept Misurata that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces were preparing another ground assault, perhaps to occupy the port and cut off the rebels&rsquo; supply line.        

With the situation uncertain, the representative of at least one international aid organization &mdash; Mercy Corps &mdash; said it was closing its office in Misurata and evacuating its staff.        
Kareem Fahim reported from Benghazi, and C. J. Chivers from Misurata, Libya. Sebnem Arsu contributed reporting from Turkey.
