
LONDON &mdash; The first electoral test for Britain&rsquo;s coalition government since it took office eight months ago produced a clear-cut win on Friday for the opposition Labour Party and a collapse in the vote for the Conservatives.        

But the result in the parliamentary by-election, for a seat in Oldham in the industrial heartland of Britain&rsquo;s northwest, may have meant less for Labour&rsquo;s hopes for a resurgence than the vote count suggested &mdash; and not only because by-election results have often proved an unreliable measure of the national mood.        

One interpretation of the result was that the Conservative collapse, down to 13 percent of the votes, half what the Conservatives took in Oldham in the May general election, reflected widespread &ldquo;tactical voting&rdquo; among traditional voters for the party.        

Local politicians said there was evidence that significant numbers of Conservatives had voted for the Liberal Democrats&rsquo; candidate as a way of bolstering the Liberal Democrats&rsquo; resolve to remain in the governing coalition with the Conservatives despite public discontent with the government&rsquo;s harsh cost-cutting measures.        

The Liberal Democrats performed better than expected in the vote.        

The winner of the seat was Labour&rsquo;s candidate, Debbie Abrahams, who took the position that had been held by a Labour lawmaker who was ousted after a court ruling in November.        

The court ruled that the former lawmaker, Phil Woolas, who won in May, had knowingly misled Oldham voters by claiming that his Liberal Democrat opponent, Elwyn Watkins, had &ldquo;wooed&rdquo; Islamic extremists in Oldham. The judges found his actions to have amounted to stirring religious tensions.        

Mr. Woolas was also barred from running for Parliament for three years, forcing the by-election.        

Mr. Watkins ran for the seat again in the by-election. Many of Britain&rsquo;s political commentators saw it as a tough test for Labour in the wake of Mr. Woolas&rsquo;s conviction, the first of its kind in Britain for nearly 100 years. Labour also faced widespread uncertainty over the party&rsquo;s new leader, Ed Miliband, who won a party ballot in September to pick the successor to Gordon Brown, the former prime minister.        

Many political commentators have been critical of Mr. Miliband&rsquo;s start as leader, saying he has been indecisive in drawing up policies to challenge the coalition government. He was particularly criticized for failing to specify how Labour &mdash; bitingly critical of the coalition&rsquo;s tough austerity measures &mdash; would make the spending cuts it had  acknowledged were necessary.        

In the end, Labour easily retained the seat, with Ms. Abrahams taking nearly 15,000 votes, 42 percent of the total. Mr. Watkins of the Liberal Democrats took 32 percent, and the Conservative candidate was a distant third. Turnout in the voting, at 48 percent, was sharply off from May&rsquo;s totals.        

The Liberal Democrats had feared that they might suffer because of widespread disaffection among Liberal Democrats nationally over the role the party had played as junior coalition partner to the Conservatives, particularly in the coalition&rsquo;s decision to force an across-the-board 20 percent cut over four years in the budgets of most government departments, and in the decision to impose sharp increases in college tuition fees.        

Grass-roots supporters of the party and a powerful bloc among its 57 members of Parliament have condemned these and other coalition measures as a repudiation of promises the party made in the May election.        
