
MISURATA, Libya &mdash; When the bloody siege of this isolated city began, the rebels who rose against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s conventional army had almost no firearms. Many of them relied on hands, knives and stones.        

Now they roam the streets as a paramilitary force built around hastily armored trucks that have been fitted with captured machine guns set on crude turrets and mounts.        

The transformation, evident in an offensive late last month that chased many of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces from Misurata&rsquo;s center to its outskirts, is in part the result of a hidden side of this lopsided ground war: a clandestine network of rebel workshops, where these makeshift weapons have been designed, assembled and pushed out.        

The workshops are officially a rebel secret. But for three days journalists for The New York Times were granted access to two of them, on the condition that their exact locations not be disclosed and that no photographs be taken of their entrances.        

On display inside were both the logistics and the mentality of the seesaw fight for Libya&rsquo;s third-largest city. In Misurata, an almost spontaneously assembled civilian force has managed, alone along Libya&rsquo;s central and western stretch of Mediterranean coast, to withstand a sustained conventional attack from an army with all the arms and munitions an oil state can buy.        

In these places &mdash; the fledgling war industry for a force that regards itself as a democratic insurgency &mdash; weapons manufactured in cold war-era factories to be operated remotely on aircraft and tanks have been modified for manual use.        

Four-door civilian pickup trucks have been converted to sinister-appearing armored vehicles. And conventional munitions designed for one thing &mdash; land mines and tank shells, for which the rebels have little use &mdash; have been converted to other types of lethal arms.        

The rebels remain ill equipped and materially outmatched. Some of their production is of questionable value. But they have acquired a collective sense that, to drive back the Qaddafi troops, any contribution matters.        

And there is no question that their fighting power has grown. For the beleaguered residents, just as war can be fought with rifles, it can be waged with hammers, grinders and lathes.        

&ldquo;If we had enough weapons, I would not be here,&rdquo; said Ahmed Shirksy, a welder fitting an armored plate to a pickup truck&rsquo;s bed on Monday morning, as shells fell in neighborhoods nearby. &ldquo;I would be fighting at the front lines, with two of my sons.&rdquo;        

Around Mr. Shirksy were the assignments of the day &mdash; four civilian pickup trucks in various states of conversion to fighting machines. There was also a pair of long sawhorses serving as a workstation for modifying heavy machine guns.        

Here Omar el-Saghier, 30, puzzled over a .50-caliber machine gun that had no manual trigger. Asked what kind of machine gun he was working on (it appeared to be an FN Herstal M3M, designed for aircraft), he allowed himself a smile and answered in English.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know, exactly,&rdquo; he said.        

But Mr. Saghier had figured out how to make it work. And by using a set of machinist&rsquo;s tools and scraps and sheets of steel, he was midway through designing and creating a custom trigger, so that this weapon might be fired by a man standing at a turret in the back of a pickup truck.        

Another team beside him was making a rotating pedestal mount for the weapon. A third team was fitting a set of metal plates to the truck that would, before the day&rsquo;s end, become part of the rebels&rsquo; fleet.        

These armor-clad gun trucks, typically painted black and often with their taillights and turn signals removed or painted over so they are more difficult to spot, are the signature weapon of the Misurata rebels.        

The exact quantity that have been made is not known, said Bashir el-Zargani, who supervises the workshops.        

&ldquo;We have been too busy to count them,&rdquo; he said.        

But judging from the number seen racing through the city each day, and at Misurata&rsquo;s many fronts, the total easily exceeds 100, and might be more than twice that.        

The pickup trucks are only one of the workshops&rsquo; products.        
(Page 2 of 2)
In many places along the ruins of Tripoli Street, where the rebels and loyalists engaged in a ferocious battle for weeks, the roads are littered with four-sided metal spikes. Each is about the diameter of a baseball.        

The rebels have a word for them &mdash; &ldquo;henzab,&rdquo; local Arabic slang for the spike-sided seed pods of a nuisance weed.        

In fact, they are homemade caltrops, designed to puncture the boots of infantrymen and the tires of their vehicles, and were made, by the bucketful, by welders in the same shops.        

As the rebels crept around and encircled the loyalist forces in and near Tripoli Street&rsquo;s buildings, these were used to deny roads and alleys to the Qaddafi forces, making it harder for them to advance further into the city &mdash; or to retreat.        

At another plant in another neighborhood last weekend, a machinist at a lathe put the finishing touches on a supplemental explosive charge he had designed for the warhead of the most abundant rocket-propelled grenade here, the RPG-7.        

The rebels have captured large numbers of PG-7V warheads, designed to penetrate armor. But because so many Qaddafi soldiers have occupied buildings, rebels wanted a weapon that caused more fragmentation, to wound Qaddafi soldiers, or one to deliver a concussive effect against concrete walls.        

To answer this request, the machinist, Ali Ramadan Algaraby, had worked with other tradesmen and developed a thick aluminum sleeve that fits within the PG-7V warhead.        

&ldquo;I can deliver 30 or 40 pieces like this each day,&rdquo; Mr. Algaraby said.        

Like the laborers in the other workshop, Mr. Algaraby said he had no previous experience in arms or munitions.        

To acquire explosives for his modified arms, Mr. Algaraby scrapes combustible materials out of unexploded shells with metal tools &mdash; a risky practice, and something that would be more safely done with wooden rods or spoons.        

The accuracy of a rocket-propelled grenade modified in such a fashion &mdash; with weight and length added &mdash; would be poor, and perhaps dangerous. This would be especially so for a force that carries many grenade launchers without their optical sights.        

A private-sector munitions specialist in the United States, e-mailed a photograph of the modified munitions, agreed that they were less than ideal.        

&ldquo;Nice initiative on his part, but I think they&rsquo;ll be nose-heavy and will literally nose-dive into the ground,&rdquo; the specialist wrote back.        

He added, upon seeing images of the explosives taken from captured shells, that visitors should &ldquo;steer clear of this dude&rsquo;s shop.&rdquo;        

Most of the rebels and metal workers readily admitted to having started with almost no idea what they were doing.        

But they said they had no alternative. They received requests and suggestions for improvement almost daily from the front, where civilians are learning to fight by fighting.        

The shopwork, they added, has become smarter each week.        

&ldquo;Everybody is at home at night, thinking all the time, &lsquo;How can we do it better,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said Mr. Zargani, the supervisor. &ldquo;This is because we have to do this with quality, because our city is under attack and we have no time.&rdquo;        
