
PARIS &mdash; French investigators said on Tuesday that they had recovered the cockpit voice recorder from the Air France jet that crashed in the Atlantic almost two years ago en route to Paris from Rio de Janeiro.        

After three failed searches and expenditures nearing $30 million, both so-called black boxes are now in hand, giving investigators renewed hope of unraveling the mystery of what caused Flight 447 to go down in a heavy thunderstorm on June 1, 2009. All 228 passengers and crew members were killed.        

The two units have been placed under seal and are to be ferried aboard a French Navy ship that set out for the salvage site on Monday from Cayenne, French Guiana. Because of the remote location of the crash site &mdash; some 600 miles off the coast of Brazil &mdash; transporting the recorders to Paris will take 8 to 10 days. Once they are there, investigators will assess the damage and try to download their stored data.        

Nathalie Kosciusko-Morizet, a French minister who oversees transport issues, welcomed the find as a &ldquo;major breakthrough&rdquo; in the investigation.        

So far, the only information about what happened to the flight is from automated messages that indicated a malfunction of the plane&rsquo;s airspeed sensors. An analysis of debris recovered in the days after the crash suggested that the plane did not break up in flight, but was in one piece when it hit the ocean surface.        

The voice recorder could reveal the pilots&rsquo; final conversations and other cockpit sounds, including any alarms from failing flight systems. Martine del Bono, a spokeswoman for the French investigation bureau, said photos of the recorder showed limited damage to its exterior. She said its cylindrical memory unit had been found still attached to its protective chassis and connected to its audio beacon.        

The flight data recorder&rsquo;s memory unit, discovered on Sunday, had been dislodged, raising concerns over retrieving the trove of data it was designed to collect: up to roughly 1,300 different statistics, including the plane&rsquo;s position, speed, altitude and direction when it began to experience difficulties.        

Finding the flight recorders gained new urgency after a French judge in March placed both Airbus and Air France under investigation for involuntary manslaughter. In addition, an unsolved crash casts a pall on a manufacturer and an airline, because there is no assurance that they have taken the steps needed to prevent recurrence.        

A team of oceanographers found the wreckage of the Airbus A330-200 last month, on a sandy plain about two and a half miles under the ocean&rsquo;s surface and just about six miles laterally from the plane&rsquo;s last known location. The three previous searches covered a vast section of seabed to the northwest, based on computer models of currents and wind direction. This search, by contrast, focused on a much smaller area to the north.        

Retrieving the flight recorders was the salvage operation&rsquo;s first priority, along with finding certain important components of plane, like its auxiliary power unit.        

French officials have said they would also try to recover the remains of at least 50 passengers discovered amid the wreckage.        

&ldquo;We have been told that an attempt will be made in the coming days,&rdquo; said Jean-Baptiste Audousset, the president of a victims&rsquo; association who lost his partner in the crash.        
