
BAGHDAD &mdash; Under pressure to respond to a public unnerved by a wave of assassinations, one of the top security officials in Baghdad held an unusual news conference on Wednesday to play video confessions from three suspects from what he said was a cell of Al Qaeda.        

The videos and statements played by the security official, Maj. Gen. Qassim Atta, the military spokesman for the Baghdad Operations Command, provided a rare view of the almost businesslike violence that persists here, though at drastically lower levels than in the years of sectarian conflict before 2007. But they also raise questions, not at all unusual for news conferences of this sort in Baghdad, about how much credence to place in the confessions.        

The target of the assassination highlighted Wednesday, the manager of a television station, was a ranking member of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki&rsquo;s Dawa Party. Another high-ranking government official and Dawa Party member, who was driving the station manager to a party meeting, was also killed in the attack.        

On the videos, the suspects described a chain of command that delivered the assassination order through four people, preserving deniability for whoever issued it. One of the men said he did not even know the target&rsquo;s name.        

General Atta said that a woman had delivered guns equipped with silencers to the men days before the attack and that she returned a day after the shooting to pick them up.        

&ldquo;These people in the cells know nobody else but this one person,&rdquo; General Atta said. &ldquo;They are told, &lsquo;This is the time, place to do the killing,&rsquo; and given their photo.&rdquo;        

In this instance, he added, the supposed assassins were told where the targeted men would be at the time of the killing, meaning &ldquo;there has been a security breach in part of our government.&rdquo;        

Whether the killers were members of Al Qaeda was a far murkier issue.        

When the insurgency was at its strongest, from 2005 to 2007, the largest insurgent group went by the name Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, though its ranks were filled with homegrown militants, with a small foreign leadership. It was responsible for many of the major attacks of that era, like the bombing of the golden-domed mosque in Samarra.        

Since then, Iraqi officials have taken to calling almost all insurgents Al Qaeda, without regard to their actual affiliation.        

After declaring loudly that the men had admitted a tie to Al Qaeda, General Atta did not provide any evidence to verify the claim.        

&ldquo;The Iraqis like to pin everything on Al Qaeda because it&rsquo;s much easier that way and a convenient scapegoat,&rdquo; said Ken Pollack, a national security expert for the Brookings Institution.        

&ldquo;They can just blame it on Al Qaeda, and even then they use Al Qaeda as a blanket term for any Sunni extremist group, so they don&rsquo;t have to explain who may really be behind the attacks,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Al Qaeda is out there and responsible for many of them, but they are not responsible for every attack.&rdquo;        

Whatever his intentions, General Atta was indisputably highlighting a growing danger for Baghdad residents. In recent months, insurgents seem to have shifted tactics, now preferring quiet assassinations to the car bombs that killed scores of civilians but incurred the wrath of all Iraqis.        

There were 44 assassinations in Baghdad in April, compared with 31 in March and 12 in February. There were three more Wednesday.        

Meanwhile, Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s cabinet approved legislation that would dissolve the tribunal in which Saddam Hussein and many of his deputies were tried. The court, created in December 2003, was widely criticized for what some called the arbitrariness of its trials and sentences.        
Omar al-Jawoshy contributed reporting.
