
Ren&eacute; Emilio Ponce, a Salvadoran military leader accused of ordering one of the most shocking atrocities of El Salvador&rsquo;s civil war, the killing of six Jesuit priests in 1989, died on Monday at a military hospital in San Salvador. He was 64.        

In a statement, El Salvador&rsquo;s Defense Ministry said he had been admitted to the hospital last week in critical condition with heart trouble.        

Colonel Ponce was head of the army&rsquo;s joint chiefs of staff on Nov. 15, 1989, when he presided over a meeting of top military officials determined to strike a blow against the forces of the Farabundo Mart&iacute; National Liberation Front, or FMLN, which had mounted a surprisingly strong offensive four days earlier.        

The target was the Rev. Ignacio Ellacur&iacute;a, the Spanish-born rector of Jos&eacute; Sime&oacute;n Ca&ntilde;as University of Central America in San Salvador. Father Ellacur&iacute;a, a prominent theologian and intellectual, was despised by right-wingers for being sympathetic to the rebels, many of whom he had taught, and for trying to broker a peace between rebel forces and the government.        

Colonel Ponce is said to have ordered Col. Guillermo Benavides, the head of El Salvador&rsquo;s military academy, to lead troops to carry out an assassination and leave no witnesses.        

The next day, striking before dawn, Colonel Benavides and his men entered the Pastoral Center at the university, where Father Ellacur&iacute;a and five other Jesuit teachers lived, along with a housekeeper and her 16-year-old daughter.        

All were led into a back garden, ordered to lie face down and executed. Before leaving, the soldiers fired a machine gun at the facade of the residence and left a piece of cardboard with a message intended to implicate the rebels: &ldquo;FMLN executed those who informed on it. Victory or death, FMLN.&rdquo;        

Almost immediately, suspicion fell on the Salvadoran military. Under intense pressure from church groups and human rights organizations, the United States government, although a staunch supporter of the government in its struggle against the rebels, demanded a full accounting.        

Gen. Maxwell R. Thurman, the head of the United States Southern Command, was sent by the State Department to deliver a message to El Salvador&rsquo;s top military leaders: &ldquo;There is only one way out. If some of your people were involved in the Jesuit murders, cough them up.&rdquo;        

Colonel Ponce, who became a general and the minister of defense in 1990, managed to float above the fray, protected by President Alfredo Cristiani, even after Mr. Cristiani agreed to purge the armed forces as part of a peace settlement between the FMLN and the government.        

In 1992, however, the United Nations commissioned an inquiry into human rights abuses during El Salvador&rsquo;s civil war. Its report, &ldquo;From Madness to Hope: The 12-Year War in El Salvador,&rdquo; was released in March 1993 and identified General Ponce as the man who approved the assassination. It also concluded that he furnished the commando troops, destroyed evidence and pressured officers to remain mute about higher-level involvement.        

Just days before the report&rsquo;s release, General Ponce resigned as defense minister but denied responsibility for the killings. In a defiant television address, surrounded by fellow officers, he branded the United Nations report and proposals for overhauling the Salvadoran military &ldquo;unjust, incomplete and illegal.&rdquo;        

Five days after the United Nations issued its report, amid rumors of an impending military coup, the Salvadoran Legislature passed a general amnesty law covering all crimes committed during the civil war. In 1999, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, part of the Organization of American States, declared the law a violation of international law.        

General Ponce was never charged with any crimes, however, and the two men convicted in the killings, Colonel Benavides and one of his lieutenants, were released from prison.        

Ren&eacute; Emilio Ponce was born in 1947 in Sensuntepeque in central El Salvador. He trained at the Capit&aacute;n General Gerardo Barrios military school, graduating at the top of the class of 1966, whose members became dominant in El Salvador&rsquo;s military.        

After serving as a military attach&eacute; in Mexico, he trained at the United States Army&rsquo;s School of the Americas.        

As the commander of the Treasury Police and the Third Brigade in San Miguel, he was linked to several atrocities carried out against civilians. In 1988 he became head of the joint chiefs of staff.        

After being forced into retirement, General Ponce became president of the Association of Military Veterans.        

In 2008, human rights lawyers, following the precedent established when Spain indicted Augusto Pinochet of Chile for human-rights violations in 1998, filed a lawsuit in Spain&rsquo;s high court against Mr. Cristiani and 14 former members of the Salvadoran military for the 1989 killings and their cover-up.        

General Ponce and his fellow officers were accused of crimes against humanity, murder and state-sponsored terrorism. In January 2009, Judge Eloy Velasco agreed to prosecute the 14 officers. An indictment has not yet been handed down.        
