
PARIS &mdash; An underwater salvage team on Thursday began the grisly task of recovering the remains of the victims of an Air France jet that crashed in the Atlantic two years ago, retrieving the first of possibly dozens of bodies from the wreckage as experts gather evidence that they hope will shed more light on what happened in the flight&rsquo;s final moments.        

The body, which was still strapped into its seat, was raised early Thursday from a debris field 3,900 meters, or about two and a half miles, below the surface, France&rsquo;s national police agency said. Officers aboard the salvage boat, the &Icirc;le de Sein, took DNA samples, which are expected to arrive next week at a laboratory in Paris, where an attempt will be made to identify the victim, the police said. It is not yet known whether the victim, an adult, was male or female.        

A police spokesman in Paris said &ldquo;great uncertainty&rdquo; remained about whether it would be technically possible to retrieve all the victims entombed with the wreckage of Flight 447, given the &ldquo;degraded&rdquo; condition of the corpse that was raised Thursday.        

&ldquo;We are still in an experimentation phase,&rdquo; said the spokesman, who asked not to be identified under police policy. Further attempts will be made in the coming days and weeks to recover as many bodies as was feasible, he said, &ldquo;but there is no certitude that we will be able to raise them all.&rdquo;        

In the nearly frozen water on the ocean floor, protected from light, oxygen and microorganisms, forensic experts said, the bodies are likely to be relatively well preserved but extremely fragile.        

Nathalie Kosciusko-Morizet, a French government minister who oversees transportation issues, has vowed to recover and identify all the victims entombed in the plane. But the question of bringing up the dead has divided relatives and friends of the victims, many of whom have said they would prefer that they be left undisturbed.        

All 228 passengers and crew members were killed when Flight 447 went down on June 1, 2009, in a heavy high-altitude thunderstorm en route to Paris from Rio de Janeiro. The bodies of 45 passengers and 5 crew members, including the captain of the plane, were recovered amid 600 pieces of floating debris in the weeks following the crash.        

After three failed searches and expenditures nearing $30 million, oceanographers found the wreckage last month, roughly 10 kilometers laterally from the plane&rsquo;s last known location.        

Searchers recovered the two so-called black boxes of the Airbus A330-200 this week, giving investigators renewed hope of unraveling the mystery of what caused the crash. Finding the flight recorders gained new urgency after a French judge in March placed both Airbus and Air France under investigation for involuntary manslaughter.        
