
LONDON &mdash; Britons went to the polls on Thursday to vote on a proposal that would change how members of Parliament are elected, potentially increasing the electoral chances of parties that are now perpetually in the minority.        

The measure has been championed by the governing coalition&rsquo;s junior partner, the Liberal Democrats, who until last year had spent a lifetime out of power, chafing at rules seemingly designed to keep them there.        

Pre-election polls predict a resounding defeat for the proposal, which would do away with the current system, in which the candidate with the most votes wins the seat &mdash; even if the candidate fails to win a majority of the votes. Under the proposed system, voters would rank the candidates for a seat in order of preference, setting off a rolling recount until one candidate wins more than 50 percent of the vote.        

The proposal has divided the fractious governing coalition, with the ruling Conservatives, led by Prime Minister David Cameron, vociferously opposing the measure, and the Liberal Democrats, led by Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, betting their political future on its passage. One of the reasons Mr. Clegg gave for joining a Conservative-led government was to put electoral reform, long a cherished notion of his party, before the voters.        

In angry scenes in cabinet meetings, prominent Liberal Democrats have accused the Conservatives of scaremongering and misleading the public. And speaking to the BBC, one Liberal Democrat cabinet minister, Chris Huhne, said: &ldquo;It is frankly worrying if you have colleagues, who you have respected and who you have worked well with, who are making claims which have no foundation in truth whatsoever. If they don&rsquo;t come clean on this, I am sure the law courts will.&rdquo;        

The &ldquo;alternative vote,&rdquo; or A.V., is already used in Australia and some other places. Its proponents argue that it would make voting much fairer, giving parties whose support is widespread but not concentrated in particular areas a better chance of winning more seats while making it harder for big parties to achieve clear-majority victories that usually allow them to govern without partners.        

Opponents of the alternative vote maintain that it is expensive, confusing and inclined to lead to coalition governments paralyzed by policy divisions. They also say it would give extremist parties, like the right-wing British National Party, the chance to gain footholds in Parliament.        

&ldquo;&rdquo; The electorate in general has not become particularly exercised about A.V.; it is hard to muster a case for voting reform when people are weary of government in the first place and when the last national election was just a year ago.        

The results will not be known until Saturday. But the vote will have huge political repercussions. The most serious are likely to be for Mr. Clegg, who has been accused among other things of political miscalculation by insisting that the referendum take place on Thursday, while Britons are voting in local government elections and in elections to the Scottish Parliament and the Welsh Assembly.        

Critics of Mr. Clegg&rsquo;s timing say that the party should have anticipated that its approval rating would be flagging at this point in the electoral cycle, as it is, and that it should have scheduled the vote for another time.        

But the complaints go deeper than that. Mr. Clegg last year justified joining a government run by the Conservatives, whose policies are anathema to his own party&rsquo;s in many areas, in part by vowing to enact voting reform. The change, he promised, would allow the Liberal Democrats to win more seats in future elections.        

In the past year, the government has imposed steep budget cuts and embarked on a series of unpopular measures like raising university tuition, reorganizing the National Health Service and making it harder for people to get welfare benefits. At each stage, Mr. Clegg and the Liberal Democrats have come under attack, with party members accusing them of selling out and threatening to defect at the next election.        

Much of that would be forgiven, the feeling was, if the party could get its electoral reform proposal accepted.        

But that has looked increasingly unlikely as the campaign has gone on. In an ICM poll for the Guardian newspaper, whose results were published on Thursday, 68 percent of those responding said they would vote no on the referendum. Just 32 percent said they would vote yes.        
