
CAIRO &mdash; An Egyptian court sentenced the once feared former interior minister, Habib el-Adly, to 12 years in prison on Thursday and fined him about $4 million, setting a template for a series of high-profile corruption trials of senior figures in the government of the ousted president, Hosni Mubarak, that could include Mr. Mubarak himself.        

Egyptians celebrated the sentence as a triumph for the rule of law and a vindication of the revolution that defined the Arab Spring. &ldquo;This marks a new beginning,&rdquo; said Salama Ahmed Salama, head of the editorial board of the independent newspaper El Shorouk. &ldquo;For the first time, someone who represented such a brutal force is questioned, interrogated and held accountable. This is something new for Egyptian politics, and it is new for Egyptian justice.&rdquo;        

Mr. Adly&rsquo;s lawyer could not be reached for comment. But Gameel Said, a lawyer representing half a dozen other former government officials, called the trial fair. &ldquo;There was no animosity between the judge and the defendants,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The requirements of justice were considered in this case like any other case.&rdquo;        

Arguably the most powerful cabinet minister under Mr. Mubarak, Mr. Adly, 73, personified the government&rsquo;s repressive tactics. He presided for 14 years over a central security force of nearly 400,000 &mdash; roughly the size of the Egyptian Army and widely considered more important to the Mubarak government. The security police focused exclusively on suppressing domestic dissent and unrest, specializing in torture and detention without trial. Among the force&rsquo;s most common targets were Egyptians who sought to apply the teachings of Islam to political life, whether through violence or the ballot box.        

Mr. Adly was convicted of profiting illegally from his office and laundering money; the charges involved about $1.2 million. Now he will return to the Tora prison here in Cairo to await a second trial on charges relating to his role overseeing the attacks on protesters demonstrating against the Mubarak government in January and February. About 800 people died during the 18-day uprising.        

When the security forces failed to break the protests, Mr. Adly was widely blamed for the sudden disappearance of police officers from Cairo&rsquo;s streets, which set off a wave of looting before civilians organized in their neighborhoods to restore security.        

After Mr. Mubarak stepped down on Feb. 11, Mr. Adly was among the first former officials who were arrested and charged in a crackdown on corruption. No longer commanding fear, Mr. Adly watched the court proceedings dressed in a white prison uniform with a white cap, standing in the heavy metal cage that serves as the docket in Egyptian courts.        

Corruption was endemic in the Egyptian government for decades under Mr. Mubarak &mdash; from the highest officials to the lowliest traffic officers, and the vow of the Tahrir Square protesters to cleanse the political system remains an ambitious goal.        

Under the interim military government ushered in by the revolution, Egyptian prosecutors have shown great zeal for pursuing former Mubarak government officials in a public house cleaning. As many as a dozen senior officials await trial alongside Mr. Adly in the Tora prison, including Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s two sons, Alaa and Gamal. Neither has been charged with a crime. Mr. Mubarak, who turned 83 on Wednesday, is also under interrogation, but he remains in a hospital near his home in Sharm el Sheik after a recent heart attack.        

Mr. Salama of the Shorouk newspaper, a vocal critic of the Mubarak government, contended that even a sentence of 12 years and a $4 million fine &ldquo;will not compensate for the bitterness of those who spent years in prison without ever being tried or sentenced.&rdquo; But, he said, far more crucial was the rendering of a verdict by an impartial court.        

&ldquo;It is very important,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;for a ruling like this not to take on the color of revenge.&rdquo;        
Mona El-Naggar contributed reporting.
