
TOKYO &mdash; Workers entered a damaged reactor building at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant on Thursday for the first time since explosions crippled the Japanese power plant two months ago.        

The plant&rsquo;s operator, the Tokyo Electric Power Company, said the workers were trying to install a ventilator to help lower radiation levels in the reactor building.        

If all goes according to plan, the reduced radiation should allow workers to enter the plant for short periods to begin the critical task of installing a new cooling system. It will also reduce the chance that radiation will be released into the environment, said Michael Friedlander, a former senior nuclear power plant operator in the United States.        

&ldquo;In general, it&rsquo;s all positive,&rdquo; he said.        

The power company said a dozen workers in antiradiation suits entered the outer rooms of Unit 1 to begin installing the system for filtering out radioactive particles in the air. Last month, robots found dangerously high radiation levels in the building, which was damaged by a hydrogen explosion after the March 11 earthquake and tsunami in northeastern Japan.        

The filter will act like a vacuum cleaner, absorbing radioactive particles from the building&rsquo;s air.        

Tokyo Electric officials said the ventilator should lower radiation levels enough that workers would be able to enter the rest of the building within three days.        

The company can then begin replacing the cooling system to regain control of the overheated reactor, which has partly melted down.        

Tokyo Electric must install cooling systems at three of the Fukushima plant&rsquo;s six reactors to stay on its current timetable of stabilizing the plant within six to nine months.        

The cooling systems were knocked out, and storage pools for spent fuel rods compromised, by the earthquake and tsunami.        

The workers were sent into the plant after robots found that radiation levels in the building had dropped from last month, though they are still high.        

To limit exposure, the workers were split into four groups of three. Each group entered in 10-minute shifts, the company said. The workers also carried their own oxygen tanks to reduce risk, the company said.        

The workers are installing large ducts that will be used to filter the air inside the building.        

If the air purification system is properly set up and running, it is reasonable to assume that workers can move to the next step of installing a cooling system by early next week, Mr. Friedlander said.        
Kevin Drew contributed reporting from Hong Kong.
