
MEXICO CITY &mdash; The political crisis in Haiti showed little sign of easing on Friday as the country&rsquo;s president, Ren&eacute; Pr&eacute;val, weighed a report from international observers rejecting the results of the presidential election in November and a protest ended with one person dead and several under arrest.        

The November balloting was marred by disarray and violence at polling stations, and the report, presented to Mr. Pr&eacute;val on Thursday night by the Organization of American States, said widespread fraud had invalidated the preliminary results announced in December by Haiti&rsquo;s election commission. The report did not dispute some of the initial results, which placed Mirlande Manigat, a former first lady, in the lead  by a  margin that would still require  a runoff.        

But it said that the second-place finisher, by a narrow margin, was Michel Martelly, a popular singer whose supporters led violent street protests in early December when they learned he had lost to Mr. Pr&eacute;val&rsquo;s handpicked successor, Jude C&eacute;lestin, a state public works official.        

Mr. C&eacute;lestin, who was declared the second-place finisher by the election commission, was in fact in third place, behind Mr. Martelly by 0.3 percentage points, the report said.        

Mr. Pr&eacute;val, who was constitutionally barred from another term, has made no public comment,  and his advisers did not respond to requests for interviews. Local news reports said officials in his administration huddled behind closed doors on Friday with O.A.S. representatives, who also declined interview requests.        

It was unclear when a presidential runoff would be held, leaving the leadership of Haiti in limbo. Reconstruction after the earthquake last January is far behind, a festering cholera epidemic has killed 3,400 people and billions of dollars of foreign relief aid are at stake.        

Election officials have postponed the runoff, originally scheduled for Jan. 16, and said that the next round might not be possible until February.        

According to a revised government estimate released Wednesday, the one-year anniversary of the earthquake,  316,000 people were killed in the disaster and hundreds of thousands were left homeless. The casualty figure is substantially higher than the 250,000 deaths previously reported.        

The recent election set off civil unrest, and Haiti has been on edge ever since. On Friday, gunmen and police officers exchanged fire in a street demonstration south of Port-au-Prince, the capital, leaving one person dead and about a dozen under arrest, according to news reports. Protesters used burning tires as barricades there and in several other spots in the city itself.        

The O.A.S. report is something of a reversal of the group&rsquo;s stance after the initial voting. Colin Granderson, who led a team of more than 100 observers from the O.A.S. and the Caribbean Community, had conceded &ldquo;irregularities&rdquo; after the initial balloting but said they were not severe enough to reject the results outright, as several candidates had demanded.        

But after the rioting, the Haitian government, under pressure from foreign governments, agreed to allow international elections experts to review the ballots and the methods used to count them.        

&ldquo;The expert mission has determined that it cannot support the preliminary results of the presidential elections,&rdquo; the report said.        

It said the experts  had found, among other irregularities, that 9.3 percent of polling station result sheets never arrived at the central tabulation center and that tens of thousands of votes should be thrown out because they were tampered with or incorrectly counted.        

It used statistical analyses and other procedures to determine what the true result might have been and issued a series of recommendations to improve the tabulations and &ldquo;ensure that the preliminary results better reflect the will of the people.&rdquo;        
