
British voters redrew areas of the country&rsquo;s political landscape on Friday with a series of local, regional and national votes that punished the Liberal Democratic junior coalition partner for the government&rsquo;s tough austerity measures and emboldened Scots seeking a ballot on the future of their centuries-old union with England.        

But, in a humiliating defeat for the Liberal Democratic leader, Nick Clegg, voters rejected his proposal to reform the electoral system &mdash; a flagship policy whose support among Britons had become interwoven with his own.        

With most votes counted, the results suggested that, one year after Britain embarked on its first experiment in rule by coalition since World War II, the fraying alliance between the Liberal Democrats and the dominant Conservatives would survive &mdash; just &mdash; but that its tone would be markedly more combative.        

&ldquo;It has so far been a relationship lubricated by collegiality, congeniality and trust,&rdquo; said Paddy Ashdown, a former Liberal Democratic leader. &ldquo;There will be less of that now. The thing is going to be more businesslike. It&rsquo;s going to be more transactional.&rdquo;        

The outcome of the voting, in which the Liberal Democrats also lost their strong standing in key local councils &mdash; raised questions among party members about Mr. Clegg&rsquo;s political future.        

&ldquo;In my view he should resign immediately,&rdquo; said Gary Long, a party official in Nottingham.        

But senior party figures seemed to shy from embarking on a damaging leadership battle, while the Conservative prime minister, David Cameron, said on Friday that he was &ldquo;absolutely committed to make this coalition government work for the full five years of this term.&rdquo;        

The Liberal Democrats had blamed the Conservatives for conducting a bruising, personalized and alarmist campaign against them over their proposal to change the way members of Parliament are elected.        

Under the current system, which will not change, the candidate with the most votes wins the seat &mdash; even if the candidate fails to win a majority of votes. Under the system championed by the Liberal Democrats, voters would have ranked the candidates for a seat in order of preference, setting off a rolling recount until one candidate won more than 50 percent. The change was seen as enhancing the electoral prospects of smaller parties, like the Liberal Democrats.        

The battle over the voting system became a test of Mr. Clegg&rsquo;s personal credibility and judgment. Some party officials criticized him for allowing the referendum to take place at a predictably low point in the electoral cycle, when the Liberal Democrats had nothing to show for abandoning their high-minded outsider status, cultivated over decades out of office, to join the political fray in government one year ago.        

The final results of the referendum were expected late Friday night, but, with almost all the votes tallied, the &lsquo;no&rsquo; votes had overtaken the &lsquo;yes&rsquo; ballot, by a margin of some 12 million to fewer than 6 million, guaranteeing defeat for Mr. Clegg&rsquo;s proposal.        

In results for local council elections across the country the Liberal Democrats also appeared to have lost hundreds of seats, according to figures compiled by the Press Association.        

Mr. Clegg and his followers entered into a coalition with the Conservatives after a national election that gave them enough seats in the House of Commons to act as kingmakers.        

In the early days, Mr. Clegg and Mr. Cameron appeared side by side in the rose garden of 10 Downing Street, smiling, joking and exuding equal dollops of youthful optimism. But the alliance has soured progressively as the Liberal Democrats have been forced into one compromise after another on what they had cast as core values.        

The junior coalition partners came to office having made ambitious promises, notably to reduce the cost of higher education. Many of their followers came to believe that those promises were too easily broken, as the Conservatives bulldozed some of the country&rsquo;s toughest austerity measures past them, including a threefold increase in college tuition fees and greater restrictions on access to welfare payments.        

&ldquo;We are clearly getting the brunt of the blame,&rdquo; Mr. Clegg said on Friday.        

The Conservatives emerged from the voting on Thursday with no major setbacks. The opposition Labour Party, which had supported the proposal for electoral reform, lost ground in Scotland but gained in Wales. Results from Northern Ireland are expected on Saturday.        

The confused results were hardly surprising, since the elections were driven by political crosscurrents churning local, regional and national issues.        

With the final results tallied, according to the BBC, the Scottish National Party had won 69 of the 129 seats in Scotland&rsquo;s regional Parliament. The result gave the nationalists a majority there for the first time since the assembly was created in 1999 &mdash; a triumph that resounded loudly some 77 years after the party was founded as a minority group promising to reverse the three-centuries-old Act of Union between England and Scotland.        

The nationalists&rsquo; victory was seen by analysts partly as a reward for its track record in a regional government that, in marked contrast to the English authorities, maintained Scots&rsquo; free access to university education and to broad social benefits, even in hard economic times.        

Alex Salmond, the party leader, said he would introduce a referendum on independence &ldquo;to increase the powers of our Parliament.&rdquo;        

Mr. Cameron promised a fight against Scottish separatism, saying, &ldquo;I will campaign to keep our United Kingdom together with every single fiber I have.&rdquo;        
