
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates met with President Lee Myung-bak and South Korea&rsquo;s defense minister here on Friday as South Korea and the United States again declared solidarity against North Korean aggression.        

In comments to reporters at the start of a meeting with the defense minister, Kim Kwan-jin, Mr. Gates reiterated that the United States was concerned that &ldquo;North Korea&rsquo;s continued belligerence and repeated provocations&rdquo; had raised tensions on the Korean Peninsula.        

He said he and Mr. Kim would talk about coordinating their militaries to try to stop future provocations from North Korea, which Mr. Kim predicted were likely to occur this year. Mr. Gates also held out the possibility of direct talks between the South and the North as a precursor to the resumption of multiparty talks to end the crisis on the peninsula. The Obama administration has been trying to choreograph a resumption of the talks with the North that include China, South Korea, Japan and Russia.        

But a senior South Korean government official said that no bilateral talks were possible until the North agreed to preconditions from the government in Seoul about the agenda, which would include a discussion of the sinking of a South Korean warship last March, the North&rsquo;s shelling of Yeonpyeong Island in November and North Korean nuclear activities. He spoke privately because of the delicate nature of the issue during Mr. Gates&rsquo;s visit.        

The official, who has close knowledge of the so-called six-party talks aimed at dismantling the North Korean nuclear programs, suggested that the recent revelation of a new uranium enrichment facility in the North was &ldquo;a very, very serious challenge and a real provocation.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;They must stop it immediately,&rdquo; he said of the facility, which North Korean officials have said is operational.        

The official said the United States was not pressing South Korea to resume the six-party process, which ended in 2009 when North Korea withdrew. Nor did he expect that any significant announcements about a resumption of the talks would come from the trip by President Hu Jintao of China to Washington next week.        

An inter-Korean summit between Mr. Lee and the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-il, also seemed unlikely.        

&ldquo;I wouldn&rsquo;t rule it out categorically,&rdquo; the senior official said, &ldquo;but in this current climate it seems like a bridge too far.&rdquo;        

On Tuesday, during a visit to Beijing, Mr. Gates stepped up recent warnings about North Korea and said that the government in Pyongyang was within five years of being able to strike the continental United States with an intercontinental ballistic missile, and that, combined with its expanding nuclear program, the country &ldquo;is becoming a direct threat to the United States.&rdquo;        

In his comments to reporters, Mr. Kim said that the South Korean public had grown increasingly fearful of a North Korean attack. &ldquo;They feel that month to month, they are in the midst of the largest security threat,&rdquo; he said.        
