
Ronald D. Asmus, an early proponent of expanding the Atlantic alliance to include Eastern European nations and a key figure in the Clinton administration&rsquo;s realization of that vision, died April 30 in Belgium. He was 53.        

The cause was complications of leukemia, said the German Marshall Fund of the United States, where Mr. Asmus had worked since 2002, most recently as executive director of its Brussels office.        

Mr. Asmus made his name in a 1993 article published by Foreign Affairs that was among the first public calls for an expansion of NATO in the wake of the cold war. He and the article&rsquo;s two other authors, all employees of the RAND Corporation, argued that the United States should embrace the inclusion in the alliance of Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary &mdash; and potentially other countries &mdash; as the best way to make Europe &ldquo;whole, free and at peace.&rdquo;        

It was a controversial position at the time. Many Americans viewed the collapse of the Soviet empire as an opportunity to pull back from international obligations. Others believed that the United States should focus on engaging Russia, which viewed an expansion of the alliance as an affront and a direct threat.        

Mr. Asmus argued that America&rsquo;s focus should be on Europe&rsquo;s stability, which at the time seemed something of a question mark. Later, he and others increasingly made a broader argument: that a strong, stable Europe was the natural and crucial partner for the United States in dealing with new problems in other places.        

In 1997 Mr. Asmus joined the State Department as a deputy assistant secretary in the European bureau, where he played a leading role in making that expansion a reality.        

&ldquo;He was an intellectual progenitor, a godfather of an exceedingly important series of decisions and policies,&rdquo; said Strobe Talbott, the former deputy secretary of state who oversaw Mr. Asmus&rsquo;s work on NATO expansion.        

Mr. Asmus traveled with Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright to Independence, Mo., in 1999 for the ceremonies marking the official entry of Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary into NATO. Ms. Albright greeted him with a hug, he later recalled, telling him: &ldquo;Ron, it&rsquo;s doesn&rsquo;t get any better than this. We are making history.&rdquo;        

Ronald Dietrich Asmus was born in Milwaukee on June 29, 1957, the child of German immigrants whom he later described as fleeing &ldquo;the aftermath of war and destruction.&rdquo;        

While an undergraduate studying engineering at the University of Wisconsin, he visited Berlin to look for the house where his grandmother had lived during the 1930s, and found a city still in the grip of conflict.        

Upon returning home, he studied political science, earning a master&rsquo;s degree in Soviet and Eastern European studies and a doctorate in European studies from Johns Hopkins University.        

In recent years, Mr. Asmus kept working to strengthen ties between America and Central Europe as head of the Brussels office of the German Marshall Fund, a Washington-based think tank endowed by the German government in 1972 to foster trans-Atlantic cooperation.        

He is survived by his wife, Barbara Wilkinson; his son, Erik Asmus; his mother; and two brothers.        
