
BANGKOK &mdash; Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva said Friday that he would ask the king to dissolve Parliament, making way for an early election.        

The step would be the next stage in a long political struggle in Thailand that has included a coup, violent demonstrations and a military assault in the heart of the commercial center here in Thailand&rsquo;s capital. The election, which will take place 45 to 60 days after it is approved by King Bhumibol Adulyadej, has been a key demand of the political opposition since the mass demonstrations a year ago that ended in bloodshed, deepening the country&rsquo;s political crisis.        

&ldquo;I am confident that this is the way to make the country move forward,&rdquo; the prime minister said as he announced his call to dissolve Parliament seven months ahead of the end of his term. &ldquo;While the process is under way, I&rsquo;d like to insist that there&rsquo;s no necessity to criticize this matter.&rdquo;        

Mr. Abhisit said he would hold a news conference when he returned on Monday from a meeting in Jakarta, Indonesia, of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.        

Thailand has been unstable since a military coup in 2006, with protests and violence on both sides of a deep political and social divide. Political analysts said that a new election was unlikely to resolve the conflicts, warning that it could touch off more unrest.        

The main contest will pit Mr. Abhisit&rsquo;s governing Democratic Party against the Pheu Thai Party, which is backed by Thaksin Shinawatra, who was prime minister before the 2006 coup. Mr. Thaksin remains a political force in Thailand even though he fled the country to avoid prison after being convicted for corruption, and has taken refuge in Dubai in the United Arab Emirates.        

Mr. Thaksin enjoys the loyalty of many people in the poor but populous north and northeast of the country, the home of many of the &ldquo;red-shirt&rdquo; protesters who besieged Bangkok in April and May 2010 and who form the largest regional bloc of voters.        

Clashes between troops and protesters paralyzed parts of Bangkok and led to the deaths of about 90 people.        

If neither of the major parties wins a majority in the election, the outcome will depend on a competition for coalition partners from smaller parties whose allegiances are driven by political calculation and personal ambition rather than policy.        

Mr. Abhisit&rsquo;s Democratic Party now holds office in a coalition with smaller parties, and analysts say that it will need a coalition if it is to retain power. Mr. Thaksin&rsquo;s allies dominate the red-shirt regions and in the past have won the most votes.        

Many analysts expect instability after the new election, with renewed demonstrations by the red shirts if they are excluded from the government. If they win, the military and the establishment could act to overturn the result with a coup or an intervention by the courts, experts say.        

&ldquo;If we are talking free and fair elections, I think the pro-Thaksin red-shirts party has a chance to win,&rdquo; said Pavin Chachavalpongpun of the Institute of Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore.        

But, he said, &ldquo;I think the Democrats will work with other smaller parties to form a coalition, with again the help of the military and influential figures.&rdquo;        
Poypiti Amatatham contributed reporting.
