
William Craig, a Protestant politician in Northern Ireland whose banning of a civil rights march by Roman Catholics in 1968 helped set off 30 years of sectarian violence, which he fueled with incendiary pronouncements, died April 25 in Bangor, Northern Ireland. He was 86.        

His family announced the death in the newspaper The Belfast News Letter.        

Mr. Craig surged to international attention in the 1970s as the leader of the Ulster Vanguard, a right-wing, self-described umbrella group for Protestant partisans dedicated to union with Britain and opposed to Irish nationalism. At a 1972 political rally in Belfast, purporting to be the biggest in Northern Island in a half-century, Mr. Craig said Protestants might have to &ldquo;liquidate the enemy.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want an indiscriminate Holocaust,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want innocent people to suffer. We don&rsquo;t want to find ourselves in conflict with the Roman Catholic community, but we want to see that the terrorists are sought out.&rdquo;        

Gerry Fitt, a Catholic and a leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party, denounced the speech as &ldquo;fascist.&rdquo; Vanguard was often described in its early days as having fascist overtones because of its uniformed honor guard with sashes and a special salute, and had close relationships with paramilitary groups.        

But Mr. Craig was not easy to pigeonhole. His organization joined members of the Protestant working class with the Orange Order, a 200-year-old Protestant brotherhood with great social and political influence in Northern Ireland. After stoutly opposing Britain&rsquo;s proposal for Protestants and Catholics to share power, he surprised all factions in 1975 by proposing that Protestants ally with Catholics in a voluntary coalition government.        

Mr. Craig&rsquo;s most historic act came in September 1968 when, as Northern Ireland&rsquo;s home affairs minister, he banned a civil rights demonstration protesting discrimination against Catholics in voting, housing and employment. He contended that the movement was only a front for the nationalist Irish Republican Army. He also banned a counterdemonstration by a Protestant fraternal organization.        

The civil rights demonstrators defied the ban and were clubbed by the police in front of television cameras. Days of riots followed. Students like Bernadette Devlin, a Catholic and a future member of the British Parliament, were radicalized, and the events heightened the sectarian tensions known as &ldquo;the troubles.&rdquo; The British Army entered Northern Ireland the next year to help the civil authorities, and after dissolving Northern Ireland&rsquo;s parliament, Britain ruled Northern Ireland directly starting in 1973. (Direct rule ended with the Good Friday peace agreement of 1998, but has been reimposed several times for limited periods.)        

William Craig was born Dec. 2, 1924, in Cookstown, Northern Ireland. His father was a bank official. William Craig pressed the unionist cause in college, helping to found the Unionist Association at Queen&rsquo;s University in Belfast, where he earned his law degree.        

He was a bomber gunner in the Royal Air Force in World War II; worked as a lawyer; and was elected to the Northern Ireland parliament in 1960. He was home minister twice, in 1963-64 and from 1966 to 1968, when he was dismissed over a policy disagreement with Northern Ireland&rsquo;s prime minister, Terence O&rsquo;Neill.        

He began Ulster Vanguard in 1972, describing it as an umbrella group, not a political party or military force. Newspapers said he rivaled Ian Paisley as a leader of extremist Protestants in Northern Ireland. Mr. Craig told the 1972 Belfast rally that the group &ldquo;must be used to build up dossiers on the men and women who are enemies of this country.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;One day it may be our job, if the politicians fail, to liquidate the enemy,&rdquo; he said.        

On another occasion he told the Conservative Club in London that his followers would &ldquo;shoot and kill&rdquo; if their British heritage was threatened. He also publicly suggested that Catholics should pay more attention to family planning, and that there were &ldquo;educational and social reasons why Catholics did not get legal appointments&rdquo; to state positions. Some Catholics called him &ldquo;Adolf Craig.&rdquo; Mr. Craig was married to the former Doris Hilgendorff; they had two sons.        

After Vanguard briefly became the Vanguard Unionist Progressive Party, he was elected to the British Parliament. But he served only one term, and afterward faded from public view.        
