
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Janet Napolitano, the United States homeland security secretary, said  Saturday that her department planned to triple the number of  agents in Afghanistan to train border and customs workers &mdash; an effort that is partly aimed at curbing the smuggling of cash out of the country.        

The department is sending 52 former agents, who will work on contract, to reinforce the 25 agents currently in Afghanistan.        

Ms. Napolitano was visiting the country for two days to inspect border crossings and meet with government leaders, including President Hamid Karzai.        

The United States Embassy estimates that $10 million a day leaves Afghanistan by plane bound for Dubai, United Arab Emirates &mdash; some of it the proceeds from illegal activities.        

According to a secret cable released by WikiLeaks, Ahmed Zia Massoud, a former Afghan vice president, visited the United Arab Emirates last year carrying $52 million in cash. Mr. Massoud has denied the report.        

Beyond the flow of money to Dubai, millions of dollars more are believed to be smuggled through border crossings, and American officials fear at least some of the money is being funneled to Afghan insurgents taking shelter in Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal regions.        

In addition to providing training for Afghanistan&rsquo;s Customs Department, the additional agents are to help with the transition from military to civilian control of border crossings, where Afghan officials and others say that bribes are often used to avoid inspections of black-market goods, including drugs.        

&ldquo;Border protection will lead to customs revenues and legitimate trade,&rdquo; Ms. Napolitano said. &ldquo;Then Afghanistan will have money for social services and education.&rdquo;        

Ms. Napolitano and other Homeland Security Department officials flew over the Torkham Gate border crossing with Pakistan because a ground visit was deemed too dangerous. Torkham, a chaotic border station near the Khyber Pass on Afghanistan&rsquo;s eastern border, is believed to be a major crossing point for smugglers.        

A high-ranking Afghan official, who works at Torkham and spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that another border official had taken hundreds of thousands of dollars in bribes and that he has been pressed to do so as well.        

&ldquo;Government officials in Jalalabad pressure me to take bribes and give part of the money to them,&rdquo; he said, referring to officials in the provincial capital.        

Travelers say they routinely pass through Torkham without being asked for identification or having their goods inspected. On the rare occasions that they are confronted by border officers, a small bribe gets them through the crossing, many say.        

Mohammad Asif, who has a business in Kabul selling laptop computers, crosses into Pakistan twice a month to buy parts and computers.        

&ldquo;Crossing the border is very easy for us without having a passport or any other kind of identification cards,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The Pakistani and Afghan border forces ask you only to pay them money &mdash; it doesn&rsquo;t matter what you have and what you are bringing into the country.&rdquo;        

Also on Saturday, an unidentified coalition service member died when an improvised explosive device detonated in southern Afghanistan.        
Sharifullah Sahak and an employee of The New York Times contributed reporting.
