
JAKARTA, Indonesia &mdash; A meeting of Southeast Asian leaders ended here on Sunday with two significant issues unresolved, which led some analysts to question the leaders&rsquo; ability to confront entrenched problems.        

The meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations failed to make progress in resolving the deadly border dispute between Thailand and Cambodia. In addition, the meeting ended with the question left open of whether Myanmar would assume the organization&rsquo;s rotating chairmanship.        

Myanmar, formerly Burma, had asked to take up the chairmanship in 2014, which would end an arrangement in which the nation has been skipped over because of concerns over its authoritarian government and poor human rights record.        

Civic groups and some elected officials in the region have criticized the proposal. Human Rights Watch said last week that a chairmanship for Myanmar would reduce the regional bloc, known as Asean, to &ldquo;the laughingstock of intergovernmental forums.&rdquo;        

Bantarto Bandoro, a professor of international relations at Indonesia Defense University, said the failure to move forward on either issue reflected a broader pattern in which Asean members had been unwilling to tackle contentious issues. This, he said, has blunted the organization&rsquo;s ambitious plans to create a regional political and economic community that would include free trade by 2015.        

&ldquo;The problem is that Asean has a limitation in solving the problems that its members have because of the principle of noninterference,&rdquo; Mr. Bantarto said. &ldquo;If Asean continues to keep this so-called sacred principle of noninterference, then I have some pessimism that Asean will be able to solve problems in the future.&rdquo;        

In an attempt to resolve the border dispute, Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva of Thailand and his Cambodian counterpart, Hun Sen, met on the sidelines of the meeting in talks facilitated by President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono of Indonesia.        

The negotiations appeared to yield little other than an agreement for the two countries&rsquo; foreign ministers to remain in Jakarta for one more day of talks. The dispute, which centers on competing land claims near the ancient temple of Preah Vihear, has cast doubt on efforts toward greater political and economic integration.        

Sporadic clashes between Thai and Cambodian troops in recent weeks have left 20 people dead and forced 100,000 to flee their homes. It is the deadliest recent flare-up in the long-running dispute. After their meeting, each prime minister accused the other of standing in the way of a resolution.        

The tensions between the two nations largely overshadowed the two-day talks among leaders of the 10-member regional bloc. Issues like food security, territorial disputes in the South China Sea and the admission of East Timor as a member were on the agenda.        

A spokesman for Mr. Yudhoyono, Teuku Faizasyah, said the agreement for another day of talks between Cambodia and Thailand showed the relevance of Asean as a forum. &ldquo;They will sit together to hammer out some possible breakthroughs &mdash; not really breakthroughs, the way I see it, but how to make progress on the stalemate between them,&rdquo; he said.        
