
TOKYO &mdash; Last week, Prime Minister Naoto Kan surprised many here when he suddenly moved to suspend the Hamaoka nuclear plant, long criticized as one of the most vulnerable and potentially dangerous nuclear power stations in Japan.        

Just as surprising was the response of the plant&rsquo;s operator, the Chubu Electric Power Company. It hemmed and hawed and dragged its feet for three days before finally accepting the prime minister&rsquo;s request on Monday.        

This test of wills over the weekend pitted Japan&rsquo;s leader against one of its most entrenched and coddled interest groups, a nuclear power industry that retains enormous clout even after the disaster at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station, the worst nuclear accident since Chernobyl.        

While Mr. Kan prevailed, experts say the delay in his decision to shut the plant, and the company&rsquo;s subsequent indecision over whether to follow his recommendation, underscore the obstacles to decisive leadership in Japan&rsquo;s consensus-driven political culture.        

Some experts go a step further, saying that the clash over the fate of the Hamaoka plant, which was built on a fault, reflects a breakdown in the old consensus that long served the needs of a nation in times of stable economic growth, but has worked less well in times of crisis.        

&ldquo;The old consensus model between government and business has broken down,&rdquo; said Michael Auslin, director of Japan studies at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington. &ldquo;Everyone is looking out for their own self-interest.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The old way of doing things has broken down, but there is not yet a new way to take its place,&rdquo; Mr. Auslin said.        

This breakdown is the product of the slow disintegration of Japan Inc.&rsquo;s unity during years of national stagnation, culminating in the 2009 election victory of Mr. Kan&rsquo;s Democratic Party, which ended a half-century of virtual one-party rule in Japan.        

Democrats have challenged Japan&rsquo;s sclerotic postwar order, but have struggled to build trust with the nation&rsquo;s powerful business world. Mistrust of the Kan government deepened during the nuclear crisis, when Tokyo often appeared indecisive in its response, and inconsistent in its release of information.        

Moreover, Mr. Kan is challenging the nuclear industry, which held a privileged and protected place as Japan made its postwar march to economic development. The need for energy in this resource-poor nation overrode safety and environmental concerns. Strong collusive bonds were built between the industry and regulators by the practice of &ldquo;amakudari,&rdquo; or &ldquo; descent from heaven,&rdquo; in which retired government officials received comfortable jobs at the companies they regulated.        

&ldquo;Nuclear power plants were long treated as sacred territory,&rdquo; said Katsuhiko Ishibashi, a seismologist and nuclear safety expert at Kobe University who has long argued for tougher quake resistance standards at the country&rsquo;s nuclear facilities. &ldquo;The accident at Fukushima Daiichi is at last starting to change that.&rdquo;        

But not quickly. The clash with Chubu, the operator of the Hamaoka plant, underscores the slow pace of decision making and the reluctance of powerful companies &mdash; even in a period of crisis &mdash; to bend to directives from politicians who they feel may not understand the issues at stake. One of the biggest complaints against Mr. Kan is that he made a quick decision without taking the time to do &ldquo;nemawashi,&rdquo; the time-consuming process of visiting concerned parties ahead of time to work out a compromise that all could agree on.        

Prime Minister Kan had been &ldquo;undeniably abrupt,&rdquo; said Hiromasa Yonekura, chairman of Japan&rsquo;s most powerful business lobby, the Japan Business Federation, known here as the Keidanren.        

&ldquo;What I don&rsquo;t understand about the Democratic Party era is that they reach decisions just like that,&rdquo; Mr. Yonekura said at a news conference on Monday. &ldquo;Publicizing his own opinions first, then explaining to Chubu Electric later is nothing more than a political performance. These sort of decisions should have been debated first.&rdquo;        

Hamaoka is in many ways a symbol of nuclear power&rsquo;s protected status. While the plant has faced years of lawsuits seeking its suspension because of its precarious location, Japan&rsquo;s compliant courts have consistently ruled in the industry&rsquo;s favor.        

Nuclear safety experts have long warned of the dangers posed by the Hamaoka plant, which lies in an area riddled with known fault lines about 120 miles southwest of Tokyo. The government&rsquo;s own experts have estimated that there is close to a 90 percent chance of an earthquake of about magnitude 8.0 hitting the area within the next 30 years.        

Board members at Chubu Electric Power at first failed to reach a decision at a meeting on Saturday, a day after Naoto Kan, Japan&rsquo;s prime minister, publicly called on the operator to close the plant until major safety improvements could be made to protect against quake and tsunami risks in the region. Local reports said that executives had debated the financial losses that would result from closing the facility, as well as the power shortages that might result from losing a major source of energy in the region.        

The decision to adhere to the government&rsquo;s request was &ldquo;agonizing&rdquo; for the company, Akihisa Mizuno, president of Chubu Electric, said at a news conference on Monday.        

&ldquo;The request from the prime minister is one that carries a lot of weight, and which is based on growing public concern over nuclear power in the wake of the serious accident at Fukushima,&rdquo; Mr. Mizuno told reporters.        

&ldquo;We are prepared to put into place safety measures to strengthen our defenses against tsunamis,&rdquo; Mr. Mizuno said. &ldquo;We believe this is the only way we can regain the trust of the local community, and of wider society.&rdquo;        

Two reactors at the plant will be closed, while a third, already shut down for scheduled inspections, will remain off-line, Mr. Mizuno said. Two older reactors at the plant were decommissioned in 2009.        

But in a show of defiance, Mr. Mizuno said the utility had asked the government for assistance &ldquo;to help avoid or lessen&rdquo; the impact on its shareholders.        

Mr. Kan has sought to appease the nuclear power industry by assuring that he will not demand the closing of other nuclear facilities in Japan. The country remains committed to nuclear energy use, the prime minister told reporters on Sunday.        

The trade minister, Banri Kaieda, also sought to smooth over ties with the industry on Monday, praising Chubu Electric for its decision to close the plant. &ldquo;I know that Chubu Electric faced a lot of difficulties,&rdquo; Mr. Kaieda said at a news conference. &ldquo;I deeply respect its swift handling of the matter.&rdquo;        
