
BANGKOK &mdash; The prime minister of Thailand said Monday that he had received the king&rsquo;s approval to dissolve Parliament seven months early. He set elections for July 3.        

The dissolution, planned for Tuesday, opened the way for the next round in a sometimes violent political battle between Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva&rsquo;s military-backed Democrat Party and parties supporting the fugitive former prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra, who was ousted in a coup in 2006.        

In a televised address, Mr. Abhisit said the election would allow voters to decide the future direction of the nation and would prove that Thailand can be governed by law rather than by the protests and military action that have caused continuing instability since the coup.        

&ldquo;I believe a dissolution of Parliament provides a new beginning for the people and progress for Thailand and for effective problem-solving process for the people and their families within the democratic system,&rdquo; he said.        

Although an election will take the country&rsquo;s divisions from the streets into the political arena, analysts cautioned that it could touch off further protests by supporters of the losing side.        

Mr. Thaksin has said from his refuge in Dubai that he intends to be a factor in the election, telling supporters in an address delivered via Skype on Monday that he would take on Thailand&rsquo;s drug problems after returning by the end of the year. His address and his promise to return are the latest in a series of statements that have continued almost since his ouster.        

Mr. Thaksin&rsquo;s supporters, broadly aligned with the &ldquo;red shirt&rdquo; antigovernment movement, remain a strong electoral force in the poor northeastern and northern parts of the country.        

The red shirts demonstrated in the streets of Bangkok last April and May in a protest that was crushed by the military and left about 90 people dead. Previous protests by the red shirts and their opponents, known as the yellow shirts, also involved violent encounters.        

Mr. Abhisit&rsquo;s announcement on Monday followed a court ruling earlier in the day that removed potential legal obstacles by declaring that newly passed election laws were constitutional. The election is expected to be close, and if neither party wins a majority of the 500 seats, a coalition with smaller parties will be needed to form a government.        

Mr. Abhisit&rsquo;s Democrat Party holds 172 seats in the departing coalition government, while the Pheu Thai Party backed by Mr. Thaksin holds 186 seats.        

Mr. Abhisit&rsquo;s announcement came at a time of economic strength in Thailand. In recent months, he has announced a series of populist economic measures and subsidies aimed at winning over Mr. Thaksin&rsquo;s constituency.        

He has also chosen a period of some disarray for the Pheu Thai Party, which in recent months has been torn by divisions and infighting.        
