
WASHINGTON &mdash; The killing of Osama bin Laden has set off a reassessment of the war in Afghanistan and the broader effort to combat terrorism, with Congress, the military and the Obama administration weighing the goals, strategies, costs and underlying authority for a conflict that is now almost a decade old.        

Two influential senators &mdash; John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana &mdash; suggested Tuesday that it was time to rethink the Afghanistan war effort, forecasting the beginning of what promises to be a fierce debate about how quickly the United States should begin pulling troops out of the country.        

&ldquo;We should be working toward the smallest footprint necessary, a presence that puts Afghans in charge and presses them to step up to that task,&rdquo; Mr. Kerry, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said at a hearing. &ldquo;Make no mistake, it is fundamentally unsustainable to continue spending $10 billion a month on a massive military operation with no end in sight.&rdquo;        

Both Mr. Kerry and Mr. Lugar, the committee&rsquo;s senior Republican, said they remained opposed to a precipitous withdrawal.        

Still, &ldquo;the broad scope of our activities suggests that we are trying to remake the economic, political and security culture of Afghanistan &mdash; but that ambitious goal is beyond our power,&rdquo; Mr. Lugar said. &ldquo;A reassessment of our Afghanistan policy on the basis of whether our overall geostrategic interests are being served by spending roughly $10 billion a month in that country was needed before our troops took out Bin Laden.&rdquo;        

Inside the Pentagon, however, officials make the case that rather than using Bin Laden&rsquo;s death as a justification for withdrawal, the United States should continue the current strategy in Afghanistan to secure additional gains and to further pressure the Taliban to come to the bargaining table for negotiations on political reconciliation.        

And in Congress, a debate is getting under way over the underlying authority used by two successive administrations to wage the post-Sept. 11 fight against terrorist organizations and their supporters.        

The House Armed Services Committee is expected to take up a defense authorization bill on Wednesday that includes a new authorization for the government to use military force in the war on terrorism. The provision has set off an argument over whether it is a mere update &mdash; or a sweeping, open-ended expansion &mdash; of the power Congress granted to the executive branch in 2001.        

The new authorization to use military force against Al Qaeda was unveiled by the committee chairman, Representative Howard P. McKeon, Republican of California. The committee is scheduled to vote Wednesday on amendments to the bill.        

The provision states that Congress &ldquo;affirms&rdquo; that &ldquo;the United States is engaged in an armed conflict with Al Qaeda, the Taliban, and associated forces,&rdquo; and that the president is authorized to use military force &mdash; including detention without trial &mdash; of members and substantial supporters of those forces.        

That language, which would codify into federal law a definition of the enemy that the Obama administration has adopted in defending against lawsuits filed by Guant&aacute;namo Bay detainees, would supplant the existing military force authorization that Congress passed overwhelmingly on Sept. 14, 2001. It instead named the enemy as the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 attacks.        

Critics of Mr. McKeon&rsquo;s provision have reacted with alarm to what they see as an effort to entrench in a federal statute unambiguous authority for the executive branch to wage war against terrorists who are deemed associates of Al Qaeda but who lack a clear tie to the Sept. 11 attacks.        

In a joint letter to Congress, about two dozen groups &mdash; including the American Civil Liberties Union and the Center for Constitutional Rights &mdash; contended that the proposal amounted to an open-ended grant of authority to the executive branch, legitimizing an unending war from Yemen to Somalia and beyond.        

&ldquo;This monumental legislation &mdash; with a large-scale and practically irrevocable delegation of war power from Congress to the president &mdash; could commit the United States to a worldwide war without clear enemies, without any geographical boundaries&rdquo; and &ldquo;without any boundary relating to time or specific objective to be achieved,&rdquo; the letter warned.        
Helene Cooper contributed reporting.
