
MEXICO CITY &mdash; A Guatemalan court has acquitted a former president, Alfonso Portillo, of charges that he embezzled state money.        

The decision appeared to be a setback to United Nations-sponsored efforts to reform Guatemala&rsquo;s corruption-racked judicial system. Guatemalan prosecutors, assisted by a special United Nations commission, accused Mr. Portillo, along with his defense and finance ministers, of having illegally transferred $15 million to the Ministry of National Defense in 2001. The prosecutors contended that the money was then withdrawn as cash.        

But a panel of judges voted 2 to 1 to acquit the three late Monday. The two judges in favor of acquittal discredited evidence from two crucial witnesses and argued there was not enough evidence to show that Mr. Portillo and the ministers handled the money.        

The case against Mr. Portillo; his defense minister, Eduardo Ar&eacute;valo Laks; and his finance minister, Manuel Hiram Maza Castellanos, was seen as emblematic of attempts to fight powerful groups in Guatemala that operate criminal networks.        

Some of these groups involve former military officers who waged a clandestine war against government opponents in the 1970s and 1980s, while others are more recent organizations linked to drug trafficking, smuggling and illegal adoptions.        

The United Nations panel, the International Commission Against Impunity in Guatemala, reacted angrily on Tuesday to the court&rsquo;s decision and said that it would join a possible appeal by Guatemala&rsquo;s attorney general.        

The acquittal &ldquo;reflects the real state of justice in Guatemala&rdquo; and confirms the commission&rsquo;s mission of fighting impunity, according to a statement released by the commission, led by a former Costa Rican attorney general, Francisco Dall&rsquo;Anese. &ldquo;Guatemalan society must demand an impartial, equitable and independent judicial system,&rdquo; it said. &ldquo;Nobody can be above the law.&rdquo;        

Mr. Portillo, president of Guatemala from 2000 to 2004, faces extradition to the United States. Federal prosecutors in New York accuse him of having embezzled tens of millions of dollars from the Guatemalan government and laundering it through American banks.        
