
BAGHDAD &mdash; In the Shiite enclave of Sadr City, young men demand in militant tones that American troops leave immediately. Iraqi Army officers worry that the country will take a violent turn if the troops go. In the north, Kurdish factions that have enjoyed 20 years of American security guarantees fret about their future, and Sunni Muslims worry about Iran&rsquo;s rise as a political power. In Parliament, the political leadership has largely stayed silent.        

Iraq now has a choice of whether American troops stay or go at the end of this year, but United States officials have said time is running out to make a decision. The debate rippling across the country reflects a nation still struggling with issues of sectarian identity, national pride and how to secure its future.        

For many Iraqis, it is a decision with two bad choices: remaining beholden to a foreign power many still view as an occupier or charting a perilous new future on their own.        

&ldquo;We can choose now,&rdquo; said Mustafi Ali, 26, holding an Arabic translation of an American political philosophy book while trolling the stalls recently on Mutanabbi Street in Baghdad. &ldquo;But it&rsquo;s not useful. Both choices are bad.&rdquo;        

But like many important milestones of the war, from ratifying a constitution in 2005 to negotiating a security agreement in 2008 to setting elections in 2010 and forming a government afterward, Baghdad is marching to its own clock, not to the one in Washington, where affairs of state are harnessed to the dictates of election schedules and the 24-hour news cycle.        

The decision could prove to be one of the most momentous ones yet of Iraq&rsquo;s young democracy. As Iraqis debate the issue on the streets and in the mosque, the discussion often pivots on symbolic matters of national dignity and has less to do with whether Iraq can remain secure without the help of the United States military.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a golden opportunity for the Iraqi government to have the decision of whether or not U.S. troops stay or leave in its hand, to show to the Iraqi people that the government has sovereignty,&rdquo; said Majid Mohammadi, a college student in Anbar Province.        

Iraqis are also asking themselves a simple question with no simple answer: Will the country become more or less violent if the Americans leave?        

Many Iraqis, especially in the northern areas where Arabs, Kurds and Turkmens compete for land, believe that the American presence is a buffer against an ethnic civil war.        

But elsewhere, Iraqis who were inclined to see the Americans stay now worry that if they do, their presence could cause new violence set off by insurgent groups like the Mahdi Army, the militia loyal to the anti-American cleric Moktada al-Sadr.        

&ldquo;I prefer that the U.S. forces leave Iraq because then extremists wouldn&rsquo;t have an excuse to carry guns,&rdquo; said Amira Jwad, 35, a government worker in Najaf.        

Last month, Mr. Sadr said he would order his men to attack United States forces if they stayed. A member of Parliament from Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s party was recently quoted in an Iraqi published report as saying that the party would recruit foreign fighters to take on the American forces. A spokesman for the party later said that it had no intention of recruiting the fighters.        

The most fervent opposition can be found in Sadr City, the Shiite slum in Baghdad that represents the heart of Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s constituency. On a recent Friday before prayers began, Najim Abbas, a young house painter, echoed what many there say when asked about Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s threat to reconstitute his militia.        

&ldquo;Whatever he says, we will do,&rdquo; Mr. Abbas said. &ldquo;We will keep on resisting until the last days of our lives.&rdquo;        

Once prayers began, the preacher cast the American issue as the most important one facing the Iraqi people.        

&ldquo;Government services are important, but there are things that are more important than these things, which is the U.S. withdrawal according to the agreement,&rdquo; the preacher said. &ldquo;We need to make this decision now. We don&rsquo;t want to wait. If we do, they will say, &lsquo;We don&rsquo;t have enough time to withdraw.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

The agreement between the United States and Iraq requires all American troops to leave the country by the end of 2011, barring a request from the Iraqis to extend their presence.        

In the corridors of power, no politician, not even Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, seems to want ownership of the issue.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Mr. Maliki, who has rarely consulted Parliament as he has consolidated power over the past five years, distanced himself from the issue last week, saying the matter would have to be decided by Parliament.        

&ldquo;If there is an intention to change the terms of the agreement and have U.S. troops stay, there must be a national consensus,&rdquo; Mr. Maliki said at a news conference in Baghdad.        

&ldquo;The government is a partnership government, so everyone is responsible for the decision,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The government, the Parliament and political blocs, it&rsquo;s everyone&rsquo;s responsibility, and all must bear this responsibility.&rdquo;        

While the growing sense among American diplomats and Iraqi officials is that the government here will not ask for American troops to stay, events here have a way of taking unforeseen turns, and as the American military withdraws, it is also making contingency plans should the Iraqis make a last-minute decision to seek continued military support.        

Despite efforts by the Americans to communicate to the Iraqi people that they will only stay if the Iraqi government asks, misinformation and conspiracy theories abound about the Americans&rsquo; intentions.        

At Al Shabander cafe in Baghdad, where many of the city&rsquo;s intellectuals congregate on Fridays to drink coffee and smoke shisha, Ali Abdul Rahman, a short-story writer, said he believed that the Americans, who plan to close all their bases in the country, would ultimately dictate their future in Iraq.        

&ldquo;They want to keep a strong muscle over us for their benefit,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t understand what the withdrawal means. Is it a complete withdrawal? Or will they keep their bases? I think they&rsquo;ll keep their bases. I don&rsquo;t think they only came for our benefit.&rdquo;        

Iraqis also fear that if the United States leaves, other countries in the region will quickly swoop in and try to take advantage of the power vacuum created by the Americans&rsquo; departure.        

&ldquo;The sectarian conflict between Iran and the rest of the Arab countries will seep into Iraq because the Iranians will try and make the Shiites more powerful and the Arab countries will support the Sunnis,&rdquo; said Ibrahim al-Sumydai, a political analyst. &ldquo;This will lead to a sectarian war.&rdquo;        

For the rest of the year, many American troops will spend their days alongside the Iraqi forces, training and advising them so they can function on their own and start to move from a counterinsurgency force to one that can defend the nation&rsquo;s borders.        

But the debate around Iraq will hinge on more than security. As violence has fallen, Iraq has put a mirror to itself, asking fundamental questions about what type of country it can be and if it can achieve that without more help from the Americans.        
