
MILAN &mdash; In her campaign posters, Mayor Letizia Moratti of Milan, the candidate backed by Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi in an election this weekend, clearly has top billing. Yet she has been regularly upstaged every time he has come here to campaign for her.        

Mr. Berlusconi, weakened by scandals and a wobbly coalition cobbled together with politicians of various stripes, has been trying to turn the mayoral campaign into a referendum on his popularity and legitimacy.        

The vote in Milan &ldquo;will be the biggest boost to our government and our majority,&rdquo; he recently said. &ldquo;This vote has meaning for Milan, but also for Italy.&rdquo;        

So while Ms. Moratti has spent weeks promoting her accomplishments (listed in a publication titled &ldquo;The 100 Projects We&rsquo;ve Achieved&rdquo;), Mr. Berlusconi has worked quite deliberately to keep the focus on himself.        

At a rally for Ms. Moratti on Sunday, he called prosecutors &ldquo;the cancer of democracy.&rdquo; He was outraged, he said, because &ldquo;every Monday the prime minister must subject himself to the humiliation of ridiculous and unfounded accusations.&rdquo;        

Every Monday for the past few weeks, Mr. Berlusconi has been appearing in court hearings in Milan in four separate cases involving charges of corruption, tax fraud, abuse of office and sex with an underage prostitute.        

In this political climate, it is hard to tell whether the wavering support for Ms. Moratti indicated in the most recent polls is more a reflection of dissatisfaction with the mayor or with unpopular decisions in Rome, like Italy&rsquo;s increasing involvement in the bombing of Libya or the government&rsquo;s handling of the crisis on the island of Lampedusa, which has been overwhelmed by migrants from North Africa.        

&ldquo;It would be negative to lose Milan in a moment when Berlusconi is seen as losing popularity,&rdquo; said Nando Pagnoncelli, chief executive of Ipsos Italy, an international market research company. &ldquo;He wants to right the situation and allow her to win.&rdquo;        

On Tuesday, the prime minister&rsquo;s party posted a video from Mr. Berlusconi on its Web site in which he urged support for his coalition from the nearly 13 million Italians who will be voting in municipal and provincial elections in 1,177 towns and nine provinces on Sunday and Monday.        

The personalizing of the political debate, with its focus on Mr. Berlusconi over local issues, does not sit well with people like Giangiacomo Schiavi, deputy editor of the Milanese newspaper Corriere della Sera. &ldquo;We should be speaking of the city, of public spaces for children and the elderly, of clean streets and smog,&rdquo; he said.        

Milan used to be an engine for the rest of the country, both in terms of the economy (it still produces a tenth of the country&rsquo;s gross domestic product) and of vision. &ldquo;It needs to recover that role of leader city, to give a positive message of modernity,&rdquo; Mr. Schiavi said.        

He said he would like to see more discussion of the impoverishment of the middle class and of how to better integrate the 217,000 legal immigrants who make up about a sixth of Milan&rsquo;s 1.3 million people.        

Last month, Ms. Moratti spoke of a city &ldquo;taking a new direction&rdquo; under her leadership. Milan scored a coup when it was awarded the 2015 World&rsquo;s Fair. &ldquo;An expo centered on knowledge,&rdquo; she called it, one that will leave a legacy beyond the fairgrounds: a research center that will work on food security projects.        

She cited the advantages of having a female perspective in running one of Italy&rsquo;s most complex cities. &ldquo;Women have an innate appreciation of beauty,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s reductive to consider this in terms of the individual, but if you broaden it out you can see it as the beauty of a city.&rdquo;        

Several museums have opened during her five years in office, and others are planned. Green space has increased, no small thing in this chronically traffic-choked metropolis, and she has lobbied to cement Milan&rsquo;s reputation as Italy&rsquo;s design and fashion capital. Her positions on security and immigration, two issues that her administration has often intertwined, has been tough (too much so, her critics say).        

Some residents remain unimpressed. &ldquo;The city may be better from the point of view of museums, but that doesn&rsquo;t touch the lives of most people, who are left to fend for themselves,&rdquo; said Maurizio Gardinazzi, a disgruntled taxi driver. &ldquo;Milan used to set itself apart from other cities because of its orderliness. Now there&rsquo;s little difference with Rome or Naples.&rdquo;        

Ms. Moratti showed on Wednesday that she could be just as much of a scene-stealer as the prime minister. During a televised debate, she accused her strongest challenger, Giuliano Pisapia, who heads a coalition of center-left parties, of having been convicted of stealing a car 26 years ago. Mr. Pisapia was in fact acquitted of the charge.        

&ldquo;This is an operation of media assassination,&rdquo; he said on his Web site. &ldquo;I will continue my electoral campaign dealing with the problems of the city that this administration has left unresolved.&rdquo;        
