
ATHENS &mdash; Tens of thousands of Greeks took to the streets here on Wednesday for a largely peaceful protest against the debt-ridden government&rsquo;s austerity drive, as a general strike called by labor unions disrupted transport services and closed schools and other public services.        

The one-day strike came as the government &mdash; still struggling to get its financial house in order &mdash; is about to unveil yet another raft of spending cuts and tax increases. But many experts are increasingly skeptical of Greece&rsquo;s ability to find a path to solvency without further aid from its European partners.        

Greece&rsquo;s economy has shrunk far more than experts originally expected last year, when the government needed a $140 billion rescue package to avoid bankruptcy. It shrank 4.5 percent last year, and is likely to contract by an additional 3 percent, according to Greece&rsquo;s Central Bank. The national debt &mdash; now at about 140 percent of G.D.P. &mdash; is forecast to hit nearly 160 percent by 2012.        

Just how that debt would be restructured to keep Greece from falling even further behind remains an open question. So far, Greek and European officials have said a restructuring that would cause bondholders to suffer a haircut &mdash; a loss on their holdings &mdash; is out of the question. But that does not preclude softer options, like longer maturity dates on the loans in the rescue package and perhaps even a lower interest rate.        

Experts believe proposals are likely to come after the European Union, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund complete an audit of Greece&rsquo;s progress in executing various reforms it agreed to in exchange for the emergency loans last May. That report is due next month. But despite Greece&rsquo;s grim finances and the appeals of labor unions, the demonstration Wednesday drew a modest turnout by Greek standards, with the police and the unions putting the figures at 20,000 and 40,000, respectively.        

Prime Minister George Papandreou continues to outpoll his rivals, though he is facing some disorder in his own party. He held an emergency cabinet meeting on Tuesday after one of his most popular and visible ministers, Andreas Loverdos, criticized his government for &ldquo;mixed policy messages.&rdquo;        

Mr. Loverdos, the health minister, was referring to months of cabinet in-fighting that has delayed an austerity package and a $70 billion privatization program, which the European Union and the International Monetary Fund are demanding be in place before any further talk of new aid.        

During the demonstrations, tensions flared up outside Athens University when hundreds of youths pelted the police with stones and bottles. Officers responded by firing tear gas that sent passers-by scurrying into side streets. Maria Kalimeri, a 48-year-old teacher, sheltering from the tear gas under a bus stop, said she had had enough of austerity, and of protests. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not enough that we&rsquo;ve had our salaries cut, they treat us like trash,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not an anarchist, I&rsquo;m a taxpayer. Are they going to arrest me for demonstrating?&rdquo;        

A statement posted on the police&rsquo;s Web site on Wednesday night said that 12 people had been detained and that 15 officers had been injured. The statement did not give an overall figure for injured demonstrators but confirmed reports on local news Web sites that a 30-year-old man had suffered serious head injuries during the skirmishes.        

The labor unions that organized Wednesday&rsquo;s strike want the government to revoke wage cuts and tax increases. They are particularly opposed to a privatization plan to raise up to $71.3 billion by 2015 through the sale of state utilities and venues built for the Athens Olympic Games in 2004.        

Ordinary Greeks seem less outraged, despite the indignant slogans at rallies. By early afternoon the crowds in central Athens had thinned, and tourists were photographing the riot police stationed in front of Parliament.        
Niki Kitsantonis reported from Athens, and Suzanne Daley from New York.
