
BAGHDAD &mdash; As American troops break down their bases and prepare to head home, Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki said Wednesday that he would meet with Iraqi leaders to discuss whether the United States military should remain after the end of the year.        

If a solid majority of Iraqi lawmakers and political leaders back a continuing American presence, Mr. Maliki said he could support asking the United States to keep some of its remaining 45,000 troops in Iraq past the withdrawal deadline of this December.        

&ldquo;This decision would be binding on everyone,&rdquo; Mr. Maliki said at a news conference.        

Mr. Maliki refused to say whether he wanted American forces to remain in Iraq, saying that reporters and &ldquo;superpower nations have been unable to take my personal opinion regarding this matter.&rdquo;        

But he signaled that he was leaving the door open for just such a possibility. His comments were a continuation of a shift from several months ago, when he said that Iraq was able to defend itself and that there was no need for any American soldiers to stay beyond the deadline.        

Mr. Maliki said he would sit down with rival leaders by the end of the month and make a decision on whether to seek a troop extension before August.        

But that may be cutting it uncomfortably close.        

On a recent visit to Baghdad, Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said that &ldquo;time is running short&rdquo; and that Iraqi leaders had only a few weeks to make up their minds. The remaining troops are expected to begin heading home this summer and to leave in larger numbers through the autumn.        

During his visit, Admiral Mullen said that Iraq and the United States were not speaking formally about keeping American troops beyond 2011.        

The future of the American military presence is one of the most volatile questions in Iraq.        

Military and political leaders from Iraq and the United States admit that Iraq&rsquo;s security forces are not yet ready to defend Iraq&rsquo;s airspace or borders. Few Iraqis are glad to have American soldiers still here more than eight years after the invasion, but many worry that violence and terrorist attacks will increase if the American force leaves altogether.        

One of Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s most important allies, a powerful political group loyal to the anti-American cleric Moktada al-Sadr, is vehemently opposed to the American presence in Iraq. Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s followers have promised to resist any move to keep American soldiers here longer, putting Mr. Maliki and his fragile governing coalition in a perilous position.        

On Wednesday, though, Mr. Maliki delivered a tough message to Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s followers, saying they would have to accept the majority&rsquo;s decision, whatever that might be.        

&ldquo;If they want to break the law or withdraw from the political process,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;that will be up to them.&rdquo;        
