
Calcutta        

THE door opened, and out came Didi, as everyone knows her. Didi means Big Sister, but Mamata Banerjee is hardly big, at least in size. She is barely five feet, dressed plainly in a simple cotton sari and plastic sandals. Yet, as she stepped out of her tiny house, Didi began barking orders that sent her covey of male aides into a solicitous tizzy. It was time to wage her political insurgency.        

&ldquo;Go! Go! Go!&rdquo; she shouted as she slid into a small black car and the driver lurched into the tumult of a city of 15 million people. &ldquo;First, we are going to the hospital!&rdquo;        

It was last Sunday, and like almost every other day during the last two decades, Ms. Banerjee, 56, continued her unswerving pursuit of toppling one of the most entrenched political machines in the world. The Communist-led Left Front government has won seven consecutive elections and dominated the state of West Bengal for more than 30 years even as the state, once an intellectual and economic capital of India, has suffered a gradual decline.        

Now, with new elections expected to be called no later than May, the Left Front appears on the verge of being beaten by a woman who, quite against convention and expectation, is emerging as one of the most powerful and unpredictable politicians in India. If Ms. Banerjee wins, she will join a group of regional leaders whose successes are reshaping the Indian political map.        

&ldquo;We have been fighting this battle for a long time, since my student days,&rdquo; she said as the small black car sped through the streets of Calcutta. &ldquo;We have been the only and lonely people who have opposed them.&rdquo;        

There are 90 million people in West Bengal, more than in Germany, and for many of them Ms. Banerjee is the blunt instrument knocking down their own Berlin Wall. Her admirers regard her as an elemental force as much as a politician. She is unmarried, and when asked  what she does for entertainment, or whether she likes to travel, she seemed incredulous. &ldquo;Entertainment?&rdquo; she said, repeating the word. &ldquo;In my life?&rdquo;        

HER ideology is simple, if rigid: getting rid of the Left Front and the Communist Party of India-Marxist, or C.P.M., the majority party in the front. Yet, despite the tingly anticipation of change and the palpable excitement among many voters, even some of Didi&rsquo;s most ardent supporters admit to a slightly nervous question:        

Is West Bengal&rsquo;s blunt instrument also capable of governing the state?        

&ldquo;What are Mamata&rsquo;s politics?&rdquo; asked Mahasweta Devi, one of Calcutta&rsquo;s most famous intellectuals. &ldquo;It is very difficult to say. We&rsquo;ve seen that she is against the C.P.M. Nothing more than that.&rdquo;        

And for now, that is what matters.        

Now to the hospital. In West Bengal, politics is often waged like war, and a bloody battle has just occurred. Two days earlier near the village of Netai, at least seven villagers were killed and others were wounded outside an armed camp controlled by the C.P.M. These camps, scattered across the state, are deeply controversial: the party says the camps are for combating the Maoist rebels steadily encroaching into the countryside, but critics, including Ms. Banerjee, say the camps serve the political purposes of the C.P.M. by intimidating villagers during the lead-up to the state elections.        

She had already driven overnight to the scene of the shooting and then returned to Calcutta for a rally the previous night with almost 100,000 people. At the rally, as smoke floated over the dais and balloon-tied banners bearing her face floated into the air, she blamed the Left Front for the killings and reminded the crowd, if indirectly, that she, too, had felt the blows of political violence. It is the crucible of her political story.        

The daughter of a teacher, Ms. Banerjee joined the student wing of the Indian National Congress Party while attending a women&rsquo;s college in Calcutta. By the late 1970s, the C.P.M. had taken control of West Bengal and Ms. Banerjee was a rising star of the opposition, having won a seat in Parliament and  later serving in ministerial positions in New Delhi. But as the Congress Party began to reach out to the Left Front as a potential coalition partner, Ms. Banerjee  bolted to form her own party, the All-India Trinamool Congress. Barely a year later, while leading a march near her home, her skull was fractured by a C.P.M. cadre, leaving her hospitalized for months.        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
