
HONG KONG &mdash; A thief hid in the Palace Museum in Beijing&rsquo;s Forbidden City after closing time on Sunday night and stole nine 20th-century gold purses encrusted with jewels from a temporary exhibition, embarrassed Chinese officials said Wednesday.        

The small Western-style gold purses had been lent by the Li Yiang Museum in Hong Kong, which in turn had been lent the purses by a Hong Kong art collector.        

A Palace Museum worker tried to stop a &ldquo;suspicious man&rdquo; inside the museum at 10:30 p.m. on Sunday, but the man ran off, prompting the worker to sound an alarm, Palace Museum officials said at a news conference in Beijing. Two of the purses were found in &ldquo;slightly damaged&rdquo; condition, they said, but the other seven were taken from the museum.        

A spokesman for the Beijing police said by telephone on Thursday that the police had detained a suspect on Wednesday evening and had recovered some of the missing seven purses, although he declined to say how many.        

Neither the Palace Museum nor the Li Yiang Museum tried to assign a value to the missing purses.        

Feng Nai&rsquo;en, the spokesman and curatorial assistant with the Palace Museum, said at the news conference that &ldquo;the Palace Museum bears an unshirkable responsibility for this regretful incident.&rdquo; The theft is likely to have a political dimension as well. China&rsquo;s Nationalists took the cream of the Palace Museum&rsquo;s collection with them to Taiwan in the last days of China&rsquo;s civil war in the late 1940s.        

Beijing officials have demanded for decades that the collection be returned to the Forbidden City, the palace of generations of Chinese emperors. The collection in Taiwan goes on exhibition in other countries only if they pass legislation agreeing that they will not accept legal claims to it from China.        

Officials in Taiwan have consistently argued that the collection could have been destroyed during the Cultural Revolution if it had been left in Beijing.        
