
A reporter for Al Jazeera&rsquo;s English-language news channel who disappeared while covering the uprising in Syria almost two weeks ago was sent to Iran within two days of being detained by Syrian authorities, the network confirmed Wednesday.        

Al Jazeera has sought information from the Syrian government on the whereabouts and condition of the reporter, Dorothy Parvaz, since losing contact with her on April 29, shortly after she arrived in the Syrian capital, Damascus, from Qatar. Five days later, Syrian officials said she was being held in the capital. The network said the officials told it that she would be released.        

But on Tuesday the Syrian Embassy in Washington told Al Jazeera that Ms. Parvaz was deported on a flight to Tehran on May 1, according to a spokesman for the network, Osama Saeed. She appears to have been in Iranian custody since that time. Mr. Saeed said the network had gotten no official confirmation from Iranian authorities.        

&ldquo;We have now received information that she is being held in Tehran,&rdquo; Al Jazeera said in a statement on Wednesday, citing unnamed Syrian officials. &ldquo;We are calling for information from the Iranian authorities, access to Dorothy, and for her immediate release.&rdquo;        

The Syrian government put out a statement on Tuesday saying that Ms. Parvaz had entered Syria on an expired Iranian passport and had therefore been deported to Iran &ldquo;in accordance with international law&rdquo; after being &ldquo;escorted by the Iranian consul to Caspian Airlines Flight 7905 heading to Tehran.&rdquo;        

Ms. Parvaz holds American, Canadian and Iranian citizenship, and she has worked for Al Jazeera since August 2010.        

The network has received conflicting information on Ms. Parvaz from the Syrian government in the nearly two weeks since her disappearance, Mr. Saeed said, but Tuesday&rsquo;s statement was the first written comment from the authorities on her whereabouts. In an interview on Monday, Bouthaina Shaaban, an adviser to the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, indicated that Ms. Parvaz had been sent to Iran as early as May 1.        

The Syrian government has barred journalists from freely covering events there since antigovernment protests began in March. At least three journalists are being held in Syria, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists. A fourth journalist, Fayiz Sara, a veteran Syrian freelancer detained since April 11, was released Tuesday.        

Iran had at least 34 reporters in custody at the end of last year, more than any other country besides China, according to Mohamed Abdel Dayem, the committee&rsquo;s Middle East and North Africa coordinator.        
