
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The Syrian military intensified a methodical, ferocious march across the country&rsquo;s most restive locales on Wednesday, shelling the country&rsquo;s third-largest city from tanks, forcing hundreds to flee and detaining hundreds more in what has emerged as one of the most brutal waves of repression since the Arab Spring began.        

Homs, in central Syria near the Lebanese border, has become the latest target of the crackdown, which has already besieged and silenced, for now, the cities of Dara&rsquo;a, in the fertile but drought-stricken southern steppe, and Baniyas, on the Mediterranean coast. Dozens of tanks occupied Homs, as black-clad security forces, soldiers and militiamen in plain clothes filtered through the industrial city of 1.5 million people. At least 19 people were killed there Wednesday, human rights groups said.        

The crackdown in some neighborhoods alternated with the relative calm in the center of a city that is home to a Sunni Muslim majority and a Christian minority.        

&ldquo;We see the smoke rising in the sky after we hear the shells explode,&rdquo; said Abu Haydar, a resident reached by telephone. &ldquo;The sky was pretty quickly covered in smoke.&rdquo;        

In public statements and interviews, the government has acknowledged the crackdown, describing the military&rsquo;s targets as militant Islamists and saboteurs. It said nearly 100 soldiers and members of the security forces had been killed, and American officials say that some protesters have indeed taken up arms.        

In Washington, two Obama administration officials said that the United States still did not see a clear or organized opposition or another leader in Syria who could serve to unite the foes of the government of President Bashar al-Assad.        

One administration official said that some national security officials were hoping that even if Mr. Assad stayed in power, he would move away from the alliance with Iran because so many of the Sunni protesters wanted to see an end to that alliance. &ldquo;There are some who think that because of that, Assad would have to back away,&rdquo; the official said.        

But he said the administration remained divided about whether Mr. Assad would actually make a break from Iran.        

The Syrian news agency, which has portrayed the crackdown as the response to an armed uprising, said two soldiers were killed and nine were wounded in Homs and Dara&rsquo;a.        

But the sheer scope of the crackdown &mdash; along a crescent that runs from the coast to the border with Jordan &mdash; suggests a leadership willing to bring to bear the full force of its feared security forces, as it tries to navigate perhaps the greatest challenge to four decades of rule by the Assad family. In the past week, the government has sought to prove it has the upper hand in a conflict that has rivaled the bloodshed in Libya, now mired in what resembles a civil war.        

An economy that the government has sought to modernize is reeling from the unrest, residents say, and critics warn that the government is sowing the seeds for more violence with the breadth of the killings, detentions and torture it has administered.        

&ldquo;The only exit the regime is offering right now is to restore the wall of fear and turn Syria into a very backward society through methods which would make it impossible for the regime to open the political system in any meaningful way,&rdquo; a Damascus-based analyst said on the condition of anonymity, given the danger of the situation there.        

Though the Syrian government said it had formed a commission Wednesday to draft a new law to govern general elections, critics called it a largely cosmetic step by a government in survival mode, hewing to its own logic that it must provide an exit from the crisis to sustain its support among minorities, the middle class and the business elite.        

&ldquo;Can the regime bring this to a close?&rdquo; the analyst asked. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s the urgency felt by forces within the regime right now. They can&rsquo;t afford financially for this crisis to last much longer. That&rsquo;s why they&rsquo;re hitting very hard right now to make sure the protests aren&rsquo;t an issue, to bully them into staying home and to restore the wall of fear.&rdquo; To do so, he said, would require even more &ldquo;extreme and, most importantly, arbitrary kinds of violence.&rdquo;        
Reporting was contributed by Helene Cooper from Washington; Hwaida Saad and an employee of The New York Times from Beirut; Ranya Kadri from Amman, Jordan; and an employee of The Times from Damascus, Syria.
