
BANGKOK &mdash; For most of his 17-year career, Somsak Jeamteerasakul wrote about the Thai monarchy from what seemed to be the haven of a Bangkok university campus.        

On Wednesday, Mr. Somsak answered a summons at a police station and was met by 50 riot police officers and a determined gaggle of supporters yelling, &ldquo;Fight! Fight!&rdquo;        

He was presented with charges lodged by the powerful Thai military that he had violated a law that forbids anyone from defaming, insulting or threatening leading members of the royal family, a serious offense that carries a prison sentence of up to 15 years.        

His case is a symbol of a major cultural shift under way in Thailand, with the absolute reverence Thais extended the royal family apparently modulating, and some daring to question the news media&rsquo;s adulatory coverage and the royals&rsquo; relationship with the military. It comes at a time when Thailand is already rattled by fractured politics, a more assertive military and anxiety over the declining health of the paramount symbol of national unity, King Bhumibol Adulyadej, 83.        

Mr. Somsak, a professor at Thammasat University, one of the country&rsquo;s most prestigious, last year wrote something akin to Martin Luther&rsquo;s 95 Theses challenging Thailand&rsquo;s current form of constitutional monarchy. Mr. Somsak&rsquo;s supporters say they are outraged that it was the military that brought the charges against him, and they say that the accusations are a form of political intimidation just as campaigning begins for national elections on July 3.        

The military casts a long shadow in Thailand, where disgruntled generals have instigated 18 coups, including a takeover five years ago.        

Now, senior generals are flexing their muscle again. In addition to lodging the charges against Mr. Somsak, the army has staged exercises with heavy weaponry outside its barracks three times in the past month in what the Thai news media described as a &ldquo;show of force.&rdquo; And it is leading a $8 million campaign, provided for in the most recent Thai government budget, to &ldquo;protect the monarchy.&rdquo;        

The political consensus cultivated by the king during his more than six decades on the throne is fraying in the twilight of his reign.        

The country is divided between those who are seeking to preserve a traditional, relatively hierarchical system and those seeking to break up the dominance of an elite that includes senior military officers, bureaucrats, influential business families and the retinue of royal aides. This is only one of many rifts in Thai society, which is also split along geographic lines and by loyalties to political clans and specific politicians.        

The country&rsquo;s divisions were deepened by a violent military crackdown last year on antigovernment protesters in Bangkok that left about 90 people dead.        

In this atmosphere of political upheaval, there are signs that the royal family, which has commanded tremendous respect and allegiance in past decades, feels underappreciated and perhaps threatened.        

Princess Chulabhorn Walailak, the youngest daughter of King Bhumibol, told an interviewer last month that Thais were not always aware of the dedication and hard work of the royals, particularly the king.        

&ldquo;I am concerned that the new generation of, let&rsquo;s say, 20-year-old youngsters does not quite know what the king has done,&rdquo; she said in a television interview.        

State-owned Thai television broadcasts a program each night of royal news, which highlights the day&rsquo;s activities of the royal family. But the princess proposed that 10 minutes be added each night, focusing on the good deeds of the king and queen.        

&ldquo;Please pity them,&rdquo; she said to her interviewer, who had tears rolling down his cheeks. &ldquo;When they work wholeheartedly for the Thai people, both of them are very attentive.&rdquo;        

The specific charges against Mr. Somsak, who has focused his research on the monarchy for the past decade without controversy until now, have not been made public. But the professor told reporters on Wednesday that the charges were related to two &ldquo;open letters&rdquo; he posted on the Internet in response to the princess&rsquo;s television interview. In the postings, Mr. Somsak criticized the princess for, among other things, attending the funeral of a pro-monarchy demonstrator in 2008 but not mentioning in her interview the deaths of antigovernment protesters in last year&rsquo;s military crackdown.        

Mr. Somsak said he was confident he would be vindicated because the l&egrave;se-majest&eacute; law he is accused of violating covers only the king, queen and crown prince.        
(Page 2 of 2)
In January 2010, Mr. Somsak posted eight proposals to change the Thai monarchy on a Thai Web site. Among his suggestions were removing an article from the Constitution that speaks of the king as &ldquo;enthroned in a position of revered worship&rdquo; and abolishing the &ldquo;one-sided public relations and educational activities related to the monarchy.&rdquo;        

He advocated the abolition of the privy council, which advises the king, as well as the Crown Property Bureau, which manages the king&rsquo;s vast business holdings. He also called for the abolition of Article 112 of the criminal code, the l&egrave;se-majest&eacute; law.        

A number of Thais have become critical of the universally laudatory coverage of the royal family in the media, whether on television, in large posters or at the movies. One activist was arrested in 2008 for refusing to stand up in a movie theater when the royal anthem was played, a tradition at all public cinemas. A spate of pejorative, often cryptic, comments on the Internet about the monarchy are blocked by the authorities in a virtual game of cat and mouse.        

But the true feelings of the nation as a whole are unknowable. There are no opinion polls on the topic. One measure of public attitudes toward the monarchy is the volume of l&egrave;se-majest&eacute; proceedings: an average of more than 100 cases annually in recent years compared with 10 a year in the 1990s, according to the Article 112 Awareness Group, an organization that opposes the use of the law. The data also indicate an increasingly aggressive use of the law.        

The combative head of the army, Gen. Prayuth Chan-ocha, declined to be interviewed, as did two other top generals.        

General Prayuth has made clear that he would actively police Thai society for threats to the monarchy. &ldquo;The army has the duty to protect three main institutions: the nation, religion and the monarchy,&rdquo; he said last year soon after becoming army chief.        

Last month, when asked by reporters about threats to the monarchy, he lashed out at &ldquo;academics who are either insane or lunatics.&rdquo;        

Mr. Somsak, who believes that those comments were directed at him, says he is frustrated that people cannot talk openly about the monarchy. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s against the principles of democracy and even against common sense,&rdquo; Mr. Somsak said in an interview. &ldquo;You cannot regard the monarchy as always right all the time.&rdquo;        
