
WASHINGTON &mdash; The United States is not bent on containing China, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said Friday, but the Obama administration is cultivating other allies across Asia to help it manage Beijing&rsquo;s increasingly bold projection of military and economic power.        

In a closely watched address delivered four days before President Hu Jintao&rsquo;s scheduled state visit to Washington, Mrs. Clinton sought to balance tensions over China&rsquo;s military buildup and disagreements over North Korea with the administration&rsquo;s desire to work with Beijing on issues like climate change.        

&ldquo;Distrust lingers on both sides,&rdquo; she said in her speech at the State Department.        

Mrs. Clinton said that while the United States-China relationship was critically important, &ldquo;there is no such thing as a G-2,&rdquo; the phrase popularized by analysts who argue that Washington and Beijing,  widely seen as the economic superpowers of today and tomorrow, should steer the world.        

She also delivered a polite criticism of China&rsquo;s human rights record that was more detailed than she had previously offered as secretary of state, citing the persecution of the pro-democracy group Charter 08 and the imprisonment of Liu Xiaobo, the political activist who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize but whose family was blocked from attending the prize ceremony in Norway last month.        

&ldquo;The longer China represses freedoms,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;the longer that Nobel Prize winners&rsquo; empty chairs in Oslo will remain a symbol of a great nation&rsquo;s unrealized potential and unfulfilled promise.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s speech &mdash; on the heels of an economic address by Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner and a visit to Beijing by Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates &mdash; sets the stage for what some analysts say is the most important visit by a Chinese leader to the United States in years.        

While Mr. Geithner and Mr. Gates tackled two clear irritants in the relationship &mdash; China&rsquo;s undervalued currency and the increasingly defiant People&rsquo;s Liberation Army &mdash; Mrs. Clinton confronted a broader set of strategic tensions, including China&rsquo;s testy relations with its neighbors and its reluctance to bear down on a belligerent North Korea.        

&ldquo;Some in the region and some here at home see China&rsquo;s growth as a threat that will lead either to cold war-style conflict or American decline,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;And some in China worry that the United States is bent on containing their rise and constraining their growth &mdash; a view that is stoking a new streak of assertive Chinese nationalism. We reject those views.&rdquo;        

Nevertheless, Mrs. Clinton spoke at length about the administration&rsquo;s work to reinforce ties with cold war allies like Japan and South Korea, to restore long-neglected relationships with countries in Southeast Asia and to court emerging powers like India.        

Last July, Mrs. Clinton infuriated Chinese officials when she thrust the United States into a long-running dispute between China and its neighbors over control of some small, strategically important islands in the South China Sea. The United States, analysts said, put a spotlight on China&rsquo;s bullying behavior.        

&ldquo;We are working to firmly embed our relationship with China within a broader regional framework, because it is inseparable from the Asia-Pacific&rsquo;s web of security alliances,&rdquo; she said.        

To experts on China in the audience, the message was unmistakable.        

&ldquo;She&rsquo;s saying, &lsquo;We&rsquo;re still trying to have a reciprocal relationship, but if it doesn&rsquo;t work, we&rsquo;re hedging our bets,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said Orville Schell, who heads the Center on U.S.-China Relations at the Asia Society.        

Mrs. Clinton said that China had cooperated in imposing international sanctions against Iran over its nuclear program. And she said China was finally starting to help the United States try to restrain North Korea&rsquo;s behavior after the torpedoing of a South Korean warship and a deadly artillery raid.        

&ldquo;We fear, and have discussed this in depth with our Chinese friends, that failure to respond clearly to the sinking of a South Korea military vessel would embolden North Korea to continue on a dangerous course,&rdquo; she said.        

Mrs. Clinton also reinforced points made by Mr. Geithner and Mr. Gates. She said that China needed to let its currency rise more rapidly to ease the trade imbalance with the United States. And she contended that the Chinese military should be open to more extensive ties with the Pentagon to ease American concerns about its motives.        

For all that, Mrs. Clinton was clearly not trying to provoke China. She spoke of global challenges, like climate change and development, in which Beijing and Washington should work together.        

Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s speech inaugurated a lecture series dedicated to Richard C. Holbrooke, the hard-charging diplomat who died last month. Early in his career, he served as assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific affairs, the youngest holder of that post to date.        

Noting that Mr. Holbrooke had played a role in the normalization of diplomatic relations with China in 1979, Mrs. Clinton said that the relationship between the two nations had &ldquo;arrived at a critical juncture.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;It is clear that we cannot paper over the difference between our countries; nor should we try to do so,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;But the future of our relationship can be strong if we each meet our responsibilities as great nations.&rdquo;        
