
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; The president of a French private security company who had scheduled a meeting on Thursday to discuss business opportunities with opponents of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi died in a hospital here on Wednesday, apparently after he was shot in the stomach, the French Foreign Ministry and rebel officials here in Benghazi said.        

The circumstances that led to the shooting were murky on Thursday, as was the status of four of the executive&rsquo;s colleagues, who were reported to have been detained. No one seemed to be sure who was holding them: Benghazi&rsquo;s civil prosecutor referred questions to military prosecutors, who in turn said they could not comment on a continuing case.        

&ldquo;We are very sorry for what happened,&rdquo; said Gen. Ahmed al-Ghatrani, a rebel military spokesman, who blamed &ldquo;gangs that the old regime used,&rdquo; without providing additional details.        

In Paris, the Foreign Ministry released an equally murky statement, asserting that the police in Benghazi had detained five French citizens on Wednesday night, and that &ldquo;one of them was hurt by a bullet and died during the night in Benghazi hospital.&rdquo;        

The statement did not identify any of those people, but it said: &ldquo;Our representative on the spot is demanding to see our detained compatriots. He is in contact with the local authorities to examine the situation of those held.&rdquo;        

The authorities did not release the name of the dead man, but several people said he was Pierre Marziali, the president of Secopex, a private security company based in Carcassonne, France.        

The confusion about the shooting contributed to a growing feeling that a shadow war is simmering in Benghazi between the many militias under the rebel umbrella and former Qaddafi loyalists or other groups with unknown allegiances. No one seemed able to say who had attacked the Secopex team, and no one seemed to know, or was willing to say, exactly why the security contractors were in Libya.        

A woman who answered the telephone at Secopex&rsquo;s offices on Thursday, sounding shaken, said she &ldquo;had no information&rdquo; on the company&rsquo;s team in Libya.        

Secopex has been said in many news reports to be the only private military security company in France. According to its Web site, Mr. Marziali co-founded the company in 2003 and it specializes, among other things, in training bodyguards.        

Agence France-Presse reported in 2008 that the company had brokered a deal with the Somali government to create a unified coast guard and to train the bodyguards of Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, then Somalia&rsquo;s president.        

A former employee at Secopex who spoke only on condition of anonymity said, &ldquo;Mr. Marziali went to Libya on a mission which, I believe, had been ordered by France.&rdquo;        

Because France has not sent troops to Libya, Secopex was engaged for &ldquo;protection missions,&rdquo; the man said. Those assertions could not be independently confirmed, but several countries, including France, have sent military advisers to aid the rebels, who have struggled against Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s more seasoned and better equipped forces.        

Rebel officials, in the past, have said they would consider the possibility of hiring private companies to help secure vital public works, including oil fields.        

The former employee described Mr. Marziali, a former paratrooper, as &ldquo;pleasant, audacious and well connected.&rdquo;        

In Benghazi, the Secopex team had stayed for at least a month in a residential neighborhood in a two-story private villa with a high wall surrounding it. They told one resident that they worked in &ldquo;logistics support.&rdquo; By midnight on Wednesday, the house was empty, a neighbor said. Several pickups like the ones used by some of the rebel militias arrived at the house, and men went inside, returning with several pieces of luggage.        

A rebel spokesman said that Mr. Marziali had been scheduled to speak with the vice chairman of the opposition&rsquo;s Transitional National Council, Abdul Hafidh Ghoga, on Thursday morning. By Thursday afternoon, rebel officials were at the morgue at Jalaa Hospital in Benghazi, apparently trying to identify Mr. Marziali, who had what appeared to be a bullet hole in his stomach.        

General Ghatrani, the rebel military spokesman, said military investigators were cooperating with French diplomats.        
Kareem Fahim reported from Benghazi, and Maïa de la Baume from Paris. Alison Smale contributed reporting from Paris.
