
KAMPALA, Uganda &mdash; Ugandans frustrated with their government held large, boisterous celebrations on Thursday to welcome home the nation&rsquo;s leading opposition figure, drowning out a lavish and dignitary-studded inauguration ceremony for President Yoweri Museveni.        

Kizza Besigye, a three-time presidential candidate and a ringleader of Uganda&rsquo;s recent street protests over rising commodity prices, flew home on Thursday from Kenya, where he had received medical treatment after being wounded during a recent arrest. Barred from returning on Wednesday, he made it back early the next morning and then spent virtually the entire day driving from Uganda&rsquo;s main airport to the capital, Kampala &mdash; normally a 45-minute trip &mdash; while being thronged by dancing and singing supporters.        

Cheers of excitement turned to eerie silence as the police fired tear gas to disperse the crowds. Protesters scattered and made their way to a soccer field, where they held a mock swearing-in of Mr. Besigye.        

&ldquo;Museveni is treating us very bad,&rdquo; said Sarah Nabatanzi, who awaited Mr. Besigye on a motorcycle laden with palm leaves. &ldquo;Now you see they are beating us.&rdquo;        

The outpouring of support for Mr. Besigye&rsquo;s return, which eclipsed the swearing-in ceremony for Mr. Museveni&rsquo;s fourth elected term &mdash; he has governed Uganda for a quarter-century &mdash; was by far the largest demonstration by Ugandans protesting the government, and it could signify a sea change in the country&rsquo;s political atmosphere.        

Many supporters held up old Besigye campaign posters, while others rode motorcycles and chanted opposition slogans as they drove toward the man they called &ldquo;our president.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I cannot believe this,&rdquo; said a motorcycle driver awaiting Mr. Besigye. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t believe this day.&rdquo;        

For the past month, Mr. Besigye and other opposition leaders, many of whom lost handily to Mr. Museveni in the February election, have staged twice-weekly street demonstrations against rising fuel and food prices and what they call debilitating government corruption.        

The protests have mostly been tiny and timid, and have been dismissed by some as shallow political theater orchestrated by the losing candidates.        

But in recent weeks, the protests&rsquo; narrative and political momentum have built as the government has mounted a brutal and at times fatal response, making many Ugandans rethink the extent of the nation&rsquo;s democracy.        

Mr. Museveni touched on the issues in his inaugural address, saying the government would scrutinize fuel prices, but he also argued that the country was more united than ever.        

Scenes from the street drew a different portrait. Mr. Besigye flew to Kenya last month for medical care after being arrested, attacked with a type of pepper spray by plainclothes police officers and shot in the hand with a rubber bullet.        

On Tuesday, the police used water cannons to disperse a group of six people, some of them political leaders, who were huddled against a building. Another opposition leader was whisked away in a police van.        

And what started as an almost-embarrassing political flop for Mr. Besigye last month &mdash; with roughly five followers during his first protest &mdash; culminated Thursday in a dramatic procession celebrating his return.        

A deeper political dispute may be developing. In recent weeks, there has been a surge of criticism against the government and the use of force against the mostly peaceful protesters.        

&ldquo;Lots of this anger is being vented at Museveni as he is sworn in, both because of widespread belief of fraud in the election and because of the way the government has handled Besigye,&rdquo; said Elliott Green, a specialist on Uganda at the London School of Economics. &ldquo;The next question is where things might go from here.&rdquo;        

Mr. Besigye, who came in a distant second to Mr. Museveni in the elections, with roughly 20 percent of the vote, said he would not recognize the government.        

Mr. Museveni has long been a close ally of the United States, and many voters gave him high marks for stabilizing the country and delivering growth after decades of dictatorships and rebellion.        

But Mr. Museveni has recently been bedeviled by accusations of corruption involving campaign financing, the purchase of Russian fighter jets and secretive oil contracts.        

Furthermore, many security officials used by the government to counter the protests have been linked to a violent branch of Uganda&rsquo;s police force accused of widespread human rights abuses.        
