
MURGHAB, Tajikistan &mdash; On the outskirts of this wind-scoured town, founded in 1893 as a Russian military post, the construction of a new customs compound heralds the return of another major power.        

When it opens this year, the sprawling new lot will accommodate much larger caravans of Chinese trucks than the existing trade depot, speeding the flow of clothing, electronics and household appliances that have lately flooded Central Asia, from nomadic yurts on the Kyrgyz steppes to ancient alleyways in Samarkand and Bukhara.        

&ldquo;Trade is growing between China and all these countries around it,&rdquo; said Tu&rsquo;er Hong, whose truck was one of about 50 from China transferring goods to Tajik drivers one day recently at the current post.        

While China is seizing the spotlight in East and Southeast Asia with its widening economic footprint and muscular diplomacy, it is also quietly making its presence felt on its western flank, once primarily Russia&rsquo;s domain.        

Chinese officials see Central Asia as a critical frontier for their nation&rsquo;s energy security, trade expansion, ethnic stability and military defense. State enterprises have reached deep into the region with energy pipelines, railroads and highways, while the government has recently opened Confucius Institutes to teach Mandarin in capitals across Central Asia.        

Central Asia, says Gen. Liu Yazhou of the People&rsquo;s Liberation Army, is &ldquo;the thickest piece of cake given to the modern Chinese by the heavens.&rdquo;        

The five predominantly Muslim countries that won independence after the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 &mdash; Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan &mdash; are once again arenas for superpower rivalry, much as the region was during the 19th century Great Game between Russia and Britain. This time the players are China, Russia and the United States, which uses Central Asia as a conduit for troops to Afghanistan.        

Chinese officials are wary of what they view as American efforts to surround China, seeing American troops and military alliances in Central Asia, India and Afghanistan as the western arc of a containment strategy that also relies on cooperation with nations in East and Southeast Asia.        

China is flexing its own military muscle in the area, conducting sophisticated war games in Kazakhstan in September as part of annual exercises that traditionally include several Central Asian nations. According to a State Department cable released by WikiLeaks, American officials suspected China of offering Kyrgyzstan $3 billion to shut down the American air base there.        

The  cable, dated Feb. 13, 2009, described an awkward meeting between Tatiana C.  Gfoeller, the American ambassador to Kyrgyzstan, and Zhang Yannian, the Chinese  ambassador there, in which Ms. Gfoeller confronted Mr. Zhang with her suspicions  of the $3 billion bribe.&nbsp;&ldquo;Visibly  flustered, Zhang temporarily lost the ability to speak Russian and began  spluttering in Chinese to the silent aide diligently taking notes right behind  him,&rdquo; the cable said. Mr. Zhang then rebutted the accusation.        

But China&rsquo;s new presence in Central Asia is in many ways more Silk Road revival than Great Game redux. Chinese analysts say one goal of Beijing is to economically integrate Central Asia with the restive western region of Xinjiang, breaking down trade barriers, even if the Central Asian governments are wary.        

&ldquo;The growing economic footprint in Central Asia is pretty significant,&rdquo; said an American official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly about Chinese policy in the region. &ldquo;In many ways, the investments are welcomed, not only by those countries, but also by the U.S. But there&rsquo;s a lack of transparency in terms of China&rsquo;s investments and relations with those countries.&rdquo;        

Local people are cautious too, especially in Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan, where they have long feared that Chinese migration could tip the balance of economic power in sparsely populated countries. In Almaty, Kazakhstan, a protest erupted last January against a proposed land deal involving China.        

&ldquo;Many of us Kazakhs are very suspicious of the Chinese influx in general, but what can we do?&rdquo; said Aidelhan Onbedbayev, 35, a driver who shuttles merchants and travelers between Almaty and Zharkent, a border town. &ldquo;The government makes these decisions and invites them in for investment with free-trade zones and land offers.&rdquo;        

Some Chinese officials have been blunt about their interests.        
Xiyun Yang and Benjamin Haas contributed research from Beijing. Teo Kaye contributed reporting from Zharkent, Kazakhstan.
