
BAGHDAD &mdash; Three American soldiers were killed and one wounded in Iraq on Saturday, raising to five the number of service members from the United States killed here since the beginning of the year.        

At the Ghazlani Training Center, south of Mosul, American soldiers were training Iraqi forces  Saturday morning when a trainee opened fire on his trainers, according to an Iraqi Army officer.        

The exercise was meant to be conducted without live fire, said the officer, who was speaking on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the news media, but the Iraqi soldier had stolen live ammunition for his AK-47 rifle.        

He killed two American soldiers and wounded one, according to Iraqi and American military officials. The Iraqi trainee was killed, the Iraqi military officer said. The wounded service member was evacuated to Joint Base Balad, according to the United States military.        

The drill was devised to provide the Iraqis with instruction in conducting raids, searching buildings and making arrests.        

The American military provided no further details because it had not yet notified the soldiers&rsquo; next of kin. An investigation was under way, according to a release from the military.        

Training is the central focus of the remaining American mission in Iraq. Troops sometimes find themselves training the same fighters who previously attacked them, but such assaults have been rare.        

In a separate episode, another American service member was killed Saturday in Diyala Province, in central Iraq. The military confirmed the death but would not provide details.        

An Iraqi police source said a rocket had fallen on Forward Operating Base Warhorse in central Iraq but did not know the extent of injuries. The Iraqi, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to talk to the media, said Iraqi police had arrested six people, including four police officers.        

These were the first United States combat deaths in Iraq since Jan. 2, when two members of the Puerto Rican National Guard, Sgt. Jos&eacute; M. Cintr&oacute;n Rosado, 38, and Specialist Jos&eacute; A. Delgado Arroyo, 41, were killed by a bomb in Taji, in central Iraq.        
An Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Mosul.
