
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Syrian forces carried out raids in towns on the outskirts of Damascus and a besieged city on the coast on Thursday, as the number of detainees surged in a government campaign so sweeping that human rights groups said many neighborhoods were subjected to repeated raids and some people detained multiple times by competing security agencies.        

The ferocious crackdown on the uprising, which began in March, has recently escalated, as the government braces for the possibility of another round of protests on Friday, a day that has emerged as the weekly climax in a broad challenge to the 11-year rule of President Bashar al-Assad.        

Residents have reported that hundreds of detainees are being held in soccer stadiums, schools and government buildings in various towns and cities across the country, some of them arrested in door-to-door raids by black-clad forces carrying lists of activists.        

Others have said the arrests are often arbitrary, sometimes for little more than a tattered identity card, in a campaign that seems motivated to bully people to stay indoors and to restore a measure of the fear that has buttressed the Assad family&rsquo;s four decades of rule. Many men have been forced to sign a pledge not to protest again, residents said.        

&ldquo;The reaction of the authorities has excluded any possibility of having a rational solution,&rdquo; said Rassem al-Atassi, the president of the Arab Association for Human Rights in Syria, in Homs, the country&rsquo;s third largest-city and a center of the uprising.        

Mr. Atassi himself was released last week after being detained for 10 days.        

&ldquo;I only see this crisis becoming worse,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s no political solution.&rdquo;        

The brutality of the repression has led the United States and the European Union to impose some sanctions on figures in the leadership, though not on Mr. Assad himself. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton moved the United States a step closer to calling for the ouster of Mr. Assad on Thursday as she denounced the crackdown.        

&ldquo;The recent events in Syria make clear that the country cannot return to the way it was before,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said before a meeting in Greenland among Arctic nations. &ldquo;Tanks and bullets and clubs will not solve Syria&rsquo;s political and economic challenges.&rdquo;        

The Obama administration has criticized the Syrian government repeatedly and imposed some sanctions on several senior security officials, but it has not yet pursued aggressive diplomatic measures, including action at the United Nations Security Council.        

Mrs. Clinton said that the United States would now pursue &ldquo;additional steps to hold Syria responsible for its gross human rights abuses.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;There may be some who think this is a sign of strength,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;but treating one&rsquo;s own people in this way is in fact a sign of remarkable weakness.&rdquo;        

A senior official elaborated that sanctions were being considered on additional Syrian officials. That could include Mr. Assad himself.        

Bouthaina Shaaban, an adviser to Mr. Assad, said this week that Syrian officials thought that the American condemnations so far were &ldquo;not too bad.&rdquo;        

In the meantime, its military has besieged Dara&rsquo;a, the southern town where the uprising began with protests over the arrests of youths, as well as Baniyas and Homs.        

The detentions have piled up so rapidly that assembling a tally has become guesswork. Syria&rsquo;s National Organization for Human Rights put the number at 9,000. Wissam Tarif, the executive director of Insan, a human rights group, said his organization had recorded 8,000 people arrested as of May 3. In the past week, he said, they had recorded 2,800 more &mdash; though, as with the National Organization, he said he suspected that the number was much higher.        

&ldquo;The numbers are in the thousands,&rdquo; said Khalil Maatouk, a Damascus lawyer who works with prisoners and detainees. &ldquo;Those who were released told me that the jails are packed, and they&rsquo;re using stadiums and government buildings to keep them all.&rdquo;        

The Syrian government has acknowledged the crackdown, calling it a response to an armed uprising of militant Islamists, saboteurs and even ex-convicts. American officials have acknowledged that some protesters are armed, though they are a distinct minority, and reports from refugees fleeing across the Syria-Lebanon border suggest that armed clashes between security forces and their opponents have erupted this week in Homs.        

Reporting was contributed by Hwaida Saad and an employee of The New York Times from Beirut; an employee of The Times from Damascus, Syria; and Steven Lee Myers from Nuuk, Greenland.
