
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Two months into the NATO bombing campaign against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces, Britain&rsquo;s top military commander has said that the Libyan leader could remain &ldquo;clinging to power&rdquo; unless NATO broadened its bombing targets to include the country&rsquo;s infrastructure.        

The comments, by Gen. Sir David Richards, came at the end of a week that saw NATO step up its airstrikes, with an accelerated tempo of attacks on the capital, Tripoli. In the predawn hours of Thursday, a volley of heavy bunker-busting bombs that struck Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s underground command headquarters in the city appeared to have narrowly missed killing him.        

Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s defiant audio message after that attack, telling NATO he was &ldquo;in a place where you can&rsquo;t get me,&rdquo; appears to have played a part in galvanizing opinion among NATO commanders, particularly in Britain and France, the nations carrying out the bulk of the bombing.        

Britain, in particular, with heavy combat commitments in Afghanistan and mounting costs for the Libyan air campaign straining its military budget, has been concerned that the conflict could be settling into a long-running stalemate.        

Under the United Nations Security Council resolution approving the Libyan air campaign, NATO was empowered to use &ldquo;all necessary means&rdquo; to protect the country&rsquo;s civilian population from attack by pro-Qaddafi forces, which hold Tripoli and much of western Libya, while rebel forces control much of the country&rsquo;s eastern region. That mandate has been stretched beyond attacks on tanks, artillery and other units engaged in front-line combat to a wide range of targets in Tripoli and elsewhere that have been identified by NATO as &ldquo;command-and-control&rdquo; centers, including Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s Tripoli bunker.        

But with the war now at the end of its third month and the two sides skirmishing in battle zones spread across hundreds of miles, there has been growing concern in NATO capitals that the strategy needs a game-changing adjustment that might bring a rebel victory closer.        

NATO officials have made no secret of their belief that this would most likely come with attacks that weaken Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s hold on Tripoli, ideally attacks that spread a sense of despondency among Qaddafi forces and lend an impetus to a rebel underground that has roots in some quarters of the city.        

General Richards, chief of the defense staff in Britain, spoke in an interview at NATO&rsquo;s southern headquarters in Naples, Italy, which has served as a command center for the attacks. &ldquo;The vise is closing on Qaddafi, but we need to increase the pressure further through more intense military action,&rdquo; he said in the interview, published in The Sunday Telegraph. &ldquo;We now have to tighten the vise to demonstrate to Qaddafi that the game is up.&rdquo;        

He added that the bombing campaign, which has involved more than 2,500 sorties since it began March 19, had been &ldquo;a significant success.&rdquo; But he added: &ldquo;We need to do more. If we do not up the ante now there is a risk that the conflict could result in Qaddafi clinging to power.&rdquo;        

The general suggested NATO should be freed from restraints that have precluded attacking infrastructure targets; other NATO officials have suggested in recent weeks that these could include elements of the electrical power grid in government-held areas, and fuel dumps. And he defended attacks seemingly aimed at Colonel Qaddafi himself, saying that &ldquo;if he was in a command-and-control center that was hit by NATO and he was killed, that would be within the rules.&rdquo;        

A tally of NATO attacks given by alliance spokesmen in Brussels gave a measure of how the bombing had already been intensified, with a strong focus on Tripoli. NATO said that alliance aircraft struck 39 &ldquo;key targets&rdquo; in and around the capital in the first four days of last week, including the strike Thursday on Qaddafi headquarters in south-central Tripoli. The Tripoli targets, NATO said, included seven &ldquo;command-and-control&rdquo; centers, compared with only three similar strikes in the 10 days before then.        

But the increased tempo of the attacks has shown little sign, so far, of seriously destabilizing Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s rule. For weeks, there has been a heavily dispirited atmosphere in Tripoli, with many ordinary Libyans eager to pull Western reporters aside to say they yearned for Colonel Qaddafi to be ousted. NATO bombing attacks have often been followed by outbreaks of automatic fire in neighborhoods in central Tripoli, apparently started by hit-and-run attacks by elements of the anti-Qaddafi underground.        

General Richards&rsquo;s call for a widening of the bombing targets prompted a dismissive reaction from the Qaddafi government. Khalid Kaim, a deputy foreign minister, said the airstrikes had been aimed at infrastructure from the start, and he cited a string of attacks on what he described as civilian targets in several cities. As for attempts to kill Colonel Qaddafi, he said that NATO had conducted four airstrikes aimed at Libya&rsquo;s leader, the latest on Thursday. Further attempts to kill him, he said, would be &ldquo;a waste of time.&rdquo;        

Airstrikes have also remained intense against pro-Qaddafi forces attacking rebellious cities, with new bombing reported Sunday around the western city of Misurata and another rebel stronghold, Zintan.        
Scott Sayare contributed reporting from Paris.
