
TUNIS &mdash; Tanks, police officers and gangs of newly deputized young men wielding guns held the deserted streets of Tunis Saturday night after a day of sporadic rioting and gunfire. Power changed hands for the second time in 24 hours, and the swift turnabout raised new questions about what kind of government might emerge from the chaos engulfing Tunisia.        

The interim government named Friday had hoped that the toppling of President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, who fled the country, would satisfy protesters, but continued unrest Saturday made clear that they were determined to chase his allies from power as well.        

Bursts of gunfire rang out through the capital all day Saturday, and a patient discharged from a major hospital here reported that the emergency room was packed with people suffering gunshot wounds.        

After a hail of machine-gun fire in the late afternoon in downtown Tunis, snipers were visible on the rooftop of the Interior Ministry, aiming down at the Boulevard Bourguiba. Human rights groups said that they had confirmed dozens of deaths at the hands of security forces even before the biggest street battle began Friday, and on Saturday residents huddled in their homes for fear of the police.        

The tumbling political succession started Friday when Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi announced on state television that the president was gone and that he was taking over. Then, on Saturday morning, Mr. Ghannouchi, an ally of Mr. Ben Ali, abruptly announced that he was surrendering the reins of government to the speaker of Parliament, complying with succession rules spelled out in the Tunisian Constitution. Now the speaker, Fouad Mebazaa, is expected to hold elections to form a new government within 60 days.        

The shake-up underscored the power vacuum left here after the end of Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s 23 years of authoritarian rule &mdash; a transition of dizzying speed that Tunisians view with both hope and fear.        

With Tunisia&rsquo;s relatively large middle class, high level of education and secular culture, some here argue that their country is poised to become the first true Arab democracy. And commentators around the Middle East pondered the potential regional implications of the success of Tunisia&rsquo;s protests; Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s fall marked the first time that street demonstrations had overcome an Arab autocrat. &ldquo;Will Tunisia be the first domino to fall?&rdquo; asked a headline on the Web site of the news channel Al Jazeera.        

But others at home and abroad worried that Tunisia could slide into chaos, laying the groundwork for a new strongman to emerge. Mr. Ben Ali was viewed in the West as a reliable ally in the fight against the Islamic extremism flourishing in other parts of North Africa, and in Washington, national security experts said extremist groups like Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb could capitalize on the disorder to find a new foothold.        

For now, though, the political field remains conspicuously empty. Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s pervasive network of secret police had succeeded in effectively eliminating or co-opting any truly viable opposition or political institution. The former president also long ago wiped away the Islamist groups that form the main grass-roots opposition in most Arab countries.        

&ldquo;There are very few players to keep track of,&rdquo; said Michael Koplow, an expert on Tunisia who has written about the uprising for Foreign Policy magazine. &ldquo;If there were new free elections, it is unclear whether there is anyone qualified to run who the people would accept. It is wide open.&rdquo;        

There is also no apparent leader or spokesman for the four-week-old protest against joblessness and government corruption that forced Mr. Ben Ali from power. The protests erupted spontaneously after the Dec. 17 suicide by self-immolation of a college-educated street vendor in the Western city of Sidi Bouzid frustrated by the lack of opportunity (the police had confiscated his wares because he did not have a permit). They spread through online social networks like Facebook and Twitter. And they accelerated as demonstrators shared homemade digital videos of each confrontation with the police.        

&ldquo;There are no leaders, that is the good thing,&rdquo; one protester declared Friday as thousands crowded around the Interior Ministry just before the police imposed martial law and Mr. Ben Ali left the country.        

Protesters immediately turned against the unconstitutional ascension of Mr. Ghannouchi, arguing that he was a crony of Mr. Ben Ali who came from the same hometown of Sousse. It remains unclear if critics will be satisfied with the switch in power to Mr. Mebazaa, who has presided over a Parliament dominated exclusively by Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s ruling party and like almost every other Tunisian elected official, owes his career to the former president.        

There were reports in Arabic news outlets this weekend that it was the Tunisian military that finally triggered the unwinding of Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s government. As the demonstrations escalated on Thursday afternoon, the country&rsquo;s top military official, Gen. Rachid Ammar, is said to have refused to shoot protesters.        

That afternoon, the military began pulling its tanks and personnel out of downtown Tunis, leaving the police and other security forces loyal to the ruling party to take their place as President Ben Ali delivered his final speech pleading, in effect, for another chance. The tanks returned after Mr. Ben Ali left the country.        

On Saturday afternoon, there were some signs that General Ammar himself may now have an eye on politics. On Facebook, a staging ground of the street revolt, almost 1,700 people had clicked that they &ldquo;like&rdquo; a Web page named &ldquo;General Rachid Ammar President&rdquo; and emblazoned with his official photographs.        
Reporting was contributed by Mona El-Naggar from Cairo; Anthony Shadid from Beirut, Lebanon; Steven Erlanger from Paris; and Thom Shanker from Washington.
