
JERUSALEM &mdash; Israel&rsquo;s borders erupted in deadly clashes on Sunday as thousands of Palestinians &mdash; marching from Syria, Lebanon, Gaza and the West Bank &mdash; confronted Israeli troops to mark the anniversary of Israel&rsquo;s creation. More than a dozen people were reported killed and scores injured.        

With an unprecedented wave of coordinated protests, the popular uprisings that have swept the region touched Israel directly for the first time. Like those other protests, plans for this one spread over social media, including Facebook, but there were also signs of official support in Lebanon and Syria, where analysts said leaders were using the Palestinian cause to deflect attention from internal problems.        

At the Lebanese border, Israeli troops shot at hundreds of Palestinians trying to force their way across. The Lebanese military said 10 protesters were killed and more than 100 were wounded. Israel said it was investigating the casualties.        

In the Golan Heights, about 100 Palestinians living in Syria breached a border fence and crowded into the village of Majdal Shams, waving Palestinian flags. Troops fired on the crowd, killing four people. The border unrest could represent a new phase in the uprising against President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.        

In the West Bank, about 1,000&nbsp;protesters carrying Palestinian flags and throwing stones and occasional firecrackers and gasoline bombs fought with Israeli riot troops near the military checkpoint between Ramallah&nbsp;and Israel. Scores were injured, local medical officials said.        

In Gaza, when marchers crossed a security zone near the border, Israeli troops fired into the crowd, wounding dozens.        

In Jordan and Egypt, government security forces thwarted protesters headed to the border.        

Every year in mid-May, many Palestinians observe what they call &ldquo;the nakba,&rdquo; or catastrophe, the anniversary of Israel&rsquo;s declaration of independence in 1948 and the war in which hundreds of thousands of Palestinians lost their homes through expulsion and flight. But this was the first year that Palestinian refugees and their supporters in Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and Egypt, inspired by the recent protests around the Arab world, tried to breach Israel&rsquo;s military border from all sides.        

&ldquo;The Palestinians are not less rebellious than other Arab peoples,&rdquo; said Ali Baraka, a Hamas representative in Lebanon.        

At day&rsquo;s end, as a tense calm returned to the country&rsquo;s borders, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel said the protests had been aimed at destroying Israel, not creating a Palestinian state alongside it.        

&ldquo;The leaders of these violent demonstrations, their struggle is not over the 1967 borders but over the very existence of Israel, which they describe as a catastrophe that must be resolved,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It is important that we look with open eyes at the reality and be aware of whom we are dealing with and what we are dealing with.&rdquo;        

Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority, saluted the protesters in a televised speech, referring to the dead as martyrs. &ldquo;The blood of the nakba fatalities was not spilled in vain,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They died for the Palestinian people&rsquo;s rights and freedom.&rdquo;        

Officials and analysts have argued that with peace talks broken down and plans to request the United Nations to declare Palestinian statehood in September, violence could return to define this conflict, relatively quiet for the past two years.        

&ldquo;This is war,&rdquo; said Amjad Abu Taha, a 16-year-old from Bethlehem who joined the protesters in Ramallah, a rock in one hand and a cigarette in the other. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re defending our country.&rdquo;        

Nearby, hundreds of Israeli troops roamed the area, using stun guns and tear gas.        

In Gaza, the Hamas police stopped buses carrying protesters near the main crossing into Israel, but dozens of demonstrators continued on foot, arriving at a point closer to the Israeli border than they had reached in years and drawing Israeli fire.        

Later, in a separate episode, an 18-year-old Gazan near another part of the border fence was shot and killed by Israeli troops when, the Israeli military says, he was trying to plant an explosive.        

Reporting was contributed by Nada Bakri and Hwaida Saad from Beirut, Fares Akram from Gaza, Ranya Kadri from Amman, Jordan, and David D. Kirkpatrick and Liam Stack from Cairo.
