
PARIS &mdash; The prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in The Hague on Monday sought arrest warrants for Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya, a son and the colonel&rsquo;s brother-in-law on charges of orchestrating systematic attacks against civilians that amount to crimes against humanity.        

The chief prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, said Colonel Qaddafi, his son Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi and his brother-in-law Abdullah al-Sanousi formed an inner circle that crushed peaceful demonstrations and ordered the use of live ammunition and heavy weapons against protesters.        

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said he had &ldquo;direct evidence&rdquo; that the three men had held meetings to plan and direct the operations. Mr. Qaddafi&rsquo;s &ldquo;second-eldest son, Seif al-Islam, is a de facto prime minister, and Abdullah al-Sanousi is his right-hand man, his executioner,&rdquo; the prosecutor said.        

A three-judge panel will decide whether to issue arrest warrants. Mr. Moreno-Ocampo seemed to send a clear message from Western governments when he said that it was not up to others, or NATO, but to Libyans themselves to make any arrests.        

It was unclear what effect the court&rsquo;s action would have on the NATO-led bombing campaign in Libya, which has moved closer to the hiding places of the country&rsquo;s leadership. NATO officials were not immediately available at the alliance&rsquo;s headquarters in Brussels on Monday night to say whether an arrest warrant would embolden them to intensify airstrikes on Libya&rsquo;s command-and-control centers and, by extension, against Colonel Qaddafi and his son and brother-in-law.        

But Oana Lungescu, the senior NATO spokeswoman, said by e-mail that the court&rsquo;s announcement was &ldquo;further proof that the international isolation of the Qaddafi regime is growing every day.&rdquo; She added, &ldquo;It is hard to imagine that a genuine transition in Libya can take place while those responsible for widespread and systematic attacks against the civilian population remain in power.&rdquo;        

At a news conference at The Hague, the prosecutor hinted that he had received intelligence from other governments, from Libyans outside the country and recently from &ldquo;a lot of phone calls from inside Libya,&rdquo; but he said his office was not taking evidence from witnesses inside the country &ldquo;because they can be killed.&rdquo; There was so much evidence, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said, that &ldquo;we&rsquo;re almost ready for trial.&rdquo;        

Jalal al-Gallal, a spokesman for the rebels&rsquo; Transitional National Council, said he hoped that news of the arrest warrants might spur NATO to widen its bombing campaign. &ldquo;I honestly believe it has to be continuous, relentless,&rdquo; Mr. Gallal said. &ldquo;I think they realize it. They need to intensify now.&rdquo;        

Officials in Tripoli have already said they will ignore any of the court&rsquo;s decisions, and there appears little chance that any of the three men named could be arrested at home any time soon.        

Libya is not among the 114 countries that recognize the court. But in this case, the charges against Libyan leaders carry additional weight because it was the United Nations Security Council that unanimously decided in February to instruct the court to investigate the crackdown against civilians.        

A senior Libyan official said the court had no jurisdiction over Libya because the Qaddafi government was not a signatory to the treaty that created it.        

&ldquo;Since we are not a party to the treaty, I think we will not be paying a lot of attention to the announcement of the I.C.C.,&rdquo; Khalid Kaim, a deputy foreign minister, told reporters early Monday.        

Discussing Libya recently, some diplomats have said they hoped that the prospect of arrest warrants would prompt new defections from the Qaddafi ranks and press other countries to further isolate the accused or arrest them in the unlikely event that they traveled abroad. But others said that it would narrow the list of places where Colonel Qaddafi or his close associates could go into exile, should such a deal be made. While governments can promise immunity from prosecution, the court cannot.        
John F. Burns contributed reporting from Tripoli, Libya, and Elisabeth Bumiller from Washington.
