
MOSCOW&mdash; Mikhail D. Prokhorov, the Russian billionaire and principal owner of the New Jersey Nets basketball team, announced Monday that he would lead a liberal Russian political party with close ties to the Kremlin.        

The decision, seven months before parliamentary elections, seems to be part of a Kremlin effort to provide an alternative for Russians disaffected with the country&rsquo;s dominant political party, United Russia, while still ensuring continued support for the ruling authorities.        

The party that Mr. Prokhorov will lead, Right Cause, generally espouses pro-Western liberal views in tune with those of the business and intellectual elite in Moscow and St. Petersburg. It was set up by the Kremlin in 2008, and some critics refer to it as nothing more than a fake opposition intended to help give Russia the semblance of a true multiparty democracy.        

The Kremlin did not immediately comment, though it is very unlikely that Mr. Prokhorov would have made the decision without the approval of Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin and President Dmitri A. Medvedev.        

The Kremlin closely monitors the political activities of the billionaires known as oligarchs. The last person of Mr. Prokhorov&rsquo;s standing to venture into politics was the oil tycoon Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, who was arrested in 2003 after challenging Mr. Putin. He remains in jail.        

On Monday, Mr. Prokhorov provided few details of the arrangement with Right Cause, other than to confirm persistent rumors that he would take control.        

&ldquo;I have made this difficult, and to a great extent unexpected, decision,&rdquo; he said in remarks broadcast on government television. He said he would demand &ldquo;carte blanche&rdquo; in managing the party, including the right to bring in new people and change its name.        

&ldquo;My goal is to take second place in the parliamentary elections this year,&rdquo; Mr. Prokhorov said in a later interview with the Interfax news agency.        

Georgy Bovt, a co-chairman of Right Cause, said the party had been in negotiations with Mr. Prokhorov for several months and would confirm him as leader in a coming party congress.        

Mr. Bovt said Mr. Prokhorov would most likely head the party&rsquo;s ticket in December&rsquo;s parliamentary election, though he is not necessarily required to become a member of Parliament should Right Cause reach the threshold that would give it seats.        

Mr. Prokhorov&rsquo;s decision seems certain to increase speculation over which of Russia&rsquo;s leaders will run in the presidential election in March 2012. Mr. Putin and Mr. Medvedev, longtime political allies, have said that that they would not compete against each other and that they would decide between themselves who would run.        

That has not prevented the country&rsquo;s elite from taking sides. Mr. Putin, as United Russia&rsquo;s leader, has the party&rsquo;s backing. The prime minister has also unveiled a new political organization, the All-Russia People&rsquo;s Front, that appears to be part of an effort to broaden his support.        

Right Cause has already declared its support for a second term for Mr. Medvedev, though it was unclear whether Mr. Prokhorov would personally follow suit.        

There have been other Kremlin-backed parties, but none have been led by someone with Mr. Prokhorov&rsquo;s wealth and renown.        

His international prestige has been rising, in large part because of his 2010 purchase of the Nets. Since closing the deal, he has courted fans, cavorted with Jay-Z, the rap star and part owner of the Nets, and pledged to contribute to the Atlantic Yards development project in Brooklyn, where the Nets are to move. At a news conference in January, Mr. Prokhorov declared, &ldquo;America, I come in peace.&rdquo;        

Denis Volkov, an analyst at the Levada Center, a research organization in Moscow, said it was too early to tell how Mr. Prokhorov&rsquo;s foray into politics might alter the political calculus, to the extent that there is one in Russia. He also said that Mr. Prokhorov had probably had little choice.        

&ldquo;Major businessmen are under the authorities&rsquo; control,&rdquo; Mr. Volkov said. &ldquo;If the government says you have to head a party, you head a party.&rdquo;        
