
CAIRO &mdash; Suzanne Mubarak, the wife of the ousted president Hosni Mubarak, has agreed to turn over about $4 million worth of assets to the Egyptian government in exchange for her release from detention without bail, her lawyer and Interior Ministry officials said Tuesday.        

Farid el-Deeb, a high-profile criminal defense lawyer here representing the Mubarak family, said that Mrs. Mubarak had not admitted any wrongdoing but had acknowledged that certain assets that appeared to belong to her were in fact public property, including charitable funds in her bank accounts and a presidential mansion. Mrs. Mubarak still faces criminal corruption charges.        

Since the fall of the Mubarak government, the Egyptian authorities have searched for assets of former officials, including Mr. Mubarak and his family, which may have been illegally obtained. In February, officials in Switzerland announced that tens of millions of dollars in Swiss bank accounts belonging to Mr. Mubarak or five prominent associates had been frozen.        

While Mrs. Mubarak has not acknowledged any wrongdoing, her revelations about commingling of personal and philanthropic funds are likely to raise questions about accountability and oversight. Still, Mr. Deeb said he believed that Mrs. Mubarak would be &ldquo;in a good position&rdquo; heading into her corruption trial.        

Mrs. Mubarak is the latest of more than a dozen top figures from the Mubarak government and political leadership, including her husband and two sons, who have been detained by prosecutors in a drive to fulfill the demands of the Egyptian revolution to root out official corruption and punish those responsible.        

The Egyptian corruption investigator in charge of her case could not be reached for comment. But Mr. Deeb, the Mubaraks&rsquo; defense lawyer, said one of the assets turned over to the government was the presidential mansion in the Heliopolis neighborhood of Cairo, where the Mubarak family lived during Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s nearly three decades in power. Mr. Deeb said Mrs. Mubarak had never considered it her property. &ldquo;She proved it was not hers,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It belonged to the state.&rdquo;        

The other category of assets appeared to raise more serious questions about the Mubarak family&rsquo;s holdings: money in bank accounts under Mrs. Mubarak&rsquo;s name, including some in dollars and other foreign currencies. Mr. Deeb said the money belonged to some of the charitable foundations Mrs. Mubarak managed, not to Mrs. Mubarak herself.        

&ldquo;People would often deposit money in the name of &lsquo;the first lady&rsquo; or &lsquo;the president&rsquo;s wife,&rsquo; and the bank would just deposit it into her account,&rdquo; Mr. Deeb said. &ldquo;She argued that this is charity money and she would not be running these charities anymore, so give the money to the state.&rdquo; It was not clear if turning over the funds would win her favorable treatment in the criminal court as well as the release without bail.        

Mrs. Mubarak was detained Friday and held at a hospital near the Mubaraks&rsquo; home in Sharm el Sheik. She had reportedly complained of chest pains after suffering a panic attack at her detention.        

Mr. Mubarak is being held at the same hospital after suffering a heart attack during his interrogation. He is awaiting transfer to a Cairo prison, which already holds the couple&rsquo;s sons, Gamal and Alaa, as well as at least a dozen of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s former associates suspected of corruption.        

Mr. Deeb, the lawyer representing Mr. Mubarak, his wife and their sons, was previously best known for defending prominent figures arrested after challenging Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s power, including the former presidential candidate Ayman Nour.        

Mona El-Naggar contributed reporting.
