
ROME &mdash; For months, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi has nimbly weathered sex scandals and dissent within his own coalition, but this week he suffered something even rarer in his long career: a political miscalculation.        

Letizia Moratti, the incumbent center-right candidate for mayor of Milan, suffered a resounding defeat on Monday in an election that Mr. Berlusconi said he considered a test of his popularity in his own hometown.        

Analysts called the results a failure of Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s trademark strategy of personalizing local elections &mdash; and a clear sign that his luster was fading even as he remained at the helm of the government. Others said the results damaged ties between Mr. Berlusconi and the Northern League, a pillar of his coalition, and were likely to usher in more political instability for the nation.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think it&rsquo;s the end of Berlusconi, but this is certainly a signal,&rdquo; said Marcello Veneziani, a political commentator for Il Giornale, a conservative daily newspaper owned by the Berlusconi family. &ldquo;It suggests that the personalization of local politics, reducing them to a pro-or-against vote for Berlusconi, no longer pays.&rdquo;        

Before the election, Mr. Berlusconi repeatedly redirected the focus of the Milanese campaign onto himself and his personal travails with prosecutors in Milan, where he is facing trial in four separate criminal cases on charges of tax fraud, corruption, abuse of office and paying for sex with a minor. The prime minister contends that the left-leaning judiciary has trumped up the charges to destroy his political career.        

Despite his efforts, the center-left candidate, Giuliano Pisapia, beat Ms. Moratti by more than six percentage points &mdash; 48 to 41.6 percent &mdash; prompting a runoff election in two weeks. Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s party also failed to sway voters in several other major cities.        

Mr. Berlusconi was uncharacteristically silent on Tuesday, while aides told the ANSA news agency that the prime minister was &ldquo;surprised and saddened.&rdquo;        

At a news conference on Tuesday, Defense Minister Ignazio La Russa said that the center-right coalition was confident it could still win in Milan.        

Even if it does, the results signaled a new phase in power dynamics within the governing coalition.        

&ldquo;Yesterday marked the beginning of the reassessment of a leader who, after presenting himself and being considered by his loyalists and allies as a god, now runs the risk of becoming a scapegoat,&rdquo; wrote Massimo Franco, a political analyst, in a front-page editorial in the Milan newspaper Corriere della Sera on Tuesday.        

Indeed, the open question going into the runoff on May 29 and 30 is whether the Northern League, the most powerful party in Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s center-right coalition, which has increasingly voiced discontent with the prime minister in recent weeks, will worry about being tainted by Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s sagging popularity and pull out of the government.        

Yet that prospect could be diminished by the fact that the Northern League itself, known for its anti-immigrant stance and its belief in keeping tax revenue local, did worse than expected in some of its northern strongholds, including Milan.        

Other analysts argue that the prime minister and the Northern League are locked in a desperate grip, in which neither can survive without the other.        

After Milan, the most closely watched races were in Turin, where the center-left maintained its majority in the first round of voting, and Bologna, where the left also won. In all, about 13 million Italians voted in elections for nearly 1,300 city councils and 9 regional administrations.        

Pier Luigi Bersani, the leader of the Democratic Left, the largest opposition party, spoke of &ldquo;winds from the north blowing&rdquo; against the conservative coalition &mdash; but returns from other cities suggested discontent in the center-left electorate as well.        

The Democratic Left lost in Naples, where it had governed since 1993, coming in third.        
