
LONDON &mdash; Brushing aside bomb threats, Queen Elizabeth II embarked on the first visit by a reigning British monarch to the Irish Republic on Tuesday &mdash; a visit heavy on symbolism after decades of hostility and mistrust, and protected by some of the tightest security Dubliners could recall.        

Hours before she arrived, the Irish Army carried out a controlled explosion of a pipe bomb discovered in a tote bag in the luggage compartment of a bus heading for the capital, police officials said.        

The bus was traveling from Ballina in the west of Ireland toward Dublin, and the device was found in Maynooth, 40 miles from Dublin. About 30 passengers had left the bus when it was stopped and searched, apparently after a tip by an informant, the police said.        

News agencies reported that the Irish police had also found a sham device, harmless but meant to appear to be a bomb, at a tram station in North Dublin. On Monday, a bomb threat received in London was first taken by the police as credible, but later described as a probable hoax.        

Despite the alarms, the queen and her husband, Prince Philip, flew into a military airfield outside Dublin, shielded by security operations intended both for her visit and for President Obama, who is scheduled to visit the country early next week.        

The queen, 85, wore an outfit in the Irish color of emerald green, signaling what British and Irish officials have depicted as a mood of reconciliation between countries that fought a bitter independence war early in the 20th century.        

In more recent times, British and Irish governments have worked closely on issues like the effort to cement the 1998 Good Friday peace accord in Northern Ireland and within the European Union, of which they are both members.        

The Good Friday agreement led to the formation of a power-sharing government in Northern Ireland that includes unionists, who are mainly Protestant and want the province to remain part of Britain, and republicans, who are mainly Catholic and want a united Ireland.        

In the past, sectarian rivalries have colored the broader Anglo-Irish relationship, and both sides have long historical memories of a past characterized by war and turbulent relations dating from the 12th-century invasion by King Henry II of England.        
Douglas Dalby contributed reporting from Dublin.
