
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; The oil minister of Libya fled to neighboring Tunisia over the weekend, the Tunisian Interior Ministry said Tuesday, in what appeared to be another high-level defection from the increasingly isolated government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. Officials in Tripoli said the oil minister was on official business outside the country.        

The minister, Shukri Ghanem, the chairman of Libya&rsquo;s National Oil Corporation and a former prime minister, arrived in Tunisia on Saturday, N&eacute;ji Zairi, a spokesman for the Tunisian Interior Ministry, said in an interview. Subsequently, Mr. Zairi told other reporters that the ministry knew only that Mr. Ghanem had entered Tunisia, and not whether he had defected.        

In the absence of any statement from Mr. Ghanem, or any information on his whereabouts, uncertainty about his intentions prevailed. Moussa Ibrahim, the chief Libyan government spokesman in Tripoli, told reporters that Mr. Ghanem had been in Tunisia in his official capacity and that Mr. Ibrahim had not &ldquo;been able to contact him today.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;He is supposed to be out of Libya for a couple of days,&rdquo; Mr. Ibrahim said.        

But Mr. Ibrahim added that the government&rsquo;s struggle against a rebel uprising &ldquo;doesn&rsquo;t depend on individuals, even if they are high-ranking officials,&rdquo; and that, in any case, whether Mr. Ghanem defected was &ldquo;his business&rdquo; &mdash; statements that appeared to suggest that the Qaddafi government knew that Mr. Ghanem had defected. If so, it would not be the first high-level defection among Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s associates.        

Moussa Koussa, who was the foreign minister, defected in March and spent time in London being questioned by British intelligence officials before leaving for Qatar. A former justice minister in Tripoli, Moustafa Abdul Jalil, heads the rebels&rsquo; national transitional council. A former interior minister, Abdul Fatah Younes, who had been one of the top generals in the Qaddafi forces, has also joined the rebels, serving as their military chief of staff.        

The defections have added to the deepening isolation around the Qaddafi government since the uprising began three months ago. On Monday the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in the Hague sought arrest warrants for Colonel Qaddafi, his son Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi and the colonel&rsquo;s brother-in-law on charges of orchestrating systematic attacks against civilians. Qaddafi loyalists fighting a rebel army in the contested city of Misurata, 130 miles east of Tripoli, retreated last week, losing control of the city&rsquo;s airport.        

Loyalist soldiers captured by the rebels have spoken of demoralized and ill-disciplined ranks in the military. And NATO warplanes have been relentlessly pounding targets in and around Tripoli, which led Libyan officials on Monday to threaten to post &ldquo;human shields&rdquo; at sites threatened by NATO, in a tactic once used by Saddam Hussein of Iraq.        

Some Tripoli residents who contacted a reporter for The New York Times outside Libya said this week that Qaddafi soldiers had started going house-to-house, rounding up men in their 20s by force to conscript them into military service. Some families were scrambling to send young men abroad to avoid induction, these residents said.        

If the defection of Mr. Ghanem, 68, is confirmed, it would mark the loss to the Qaddafi government of one of its most experienced international negotiators. Educated partly at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University in Medford, Mass., outside Boston, he was a senior official at the Organization of Oil Exporting Countries before returning to Libya, where he served as prime minister from 2003 to 2006.        

During his time as head of the government, he was seen as an architect of Libya&rsquo;s rapprochement with the West after years of hostility that saw Colonel Qaddafi supporting a range of anti-Western terrorist groups. The rapprochement included a payment of more than $2 billion by the Qaddafi government in compensation to the families of the 270 people killed by the bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, as well as Libya&rsquo;s agreement to abandon secret programs to develop nuclear and chemical weapons.        
John F. Burns reported from Tripoli, and Scott Sayare from Paris. J. David Goodman contributed reporting from New York.
