
MOSCOW &mdash; Yegor Sviridov was killed in an unremarkable place &mdash; a bus stop surrounded by housing blocks, a grove of scraggly birch trees and a store called Fruit Heaven.        

On Saturday, 40 days after Mr. Sviridov died in a brawl with migrants from the North Caucasus, the bus stop completed its transformation into a shrine. Hundreds of mourners streamed in, tossing flowers onto a mound that grew to shoulder-height. Many unwound red scarves from around their necks and tied them to the bus stop, honoring Spartak, a soccer team Mr. Sviridov ardently supported. Teenage boys stared into the bus stop, where candles were flickering, and reverently crossed themselves.        

Mr. Sviridov&rsquo;s death set off a chain of events whose culmination is still unclear. It unleashed populist anger not only against ethnic minorities but against the police, because several of the ethnic Caucasian youths were released after questioning. Five days later, a  crowd of angry protesters gathered on Manezh Square, outside the Kremlin, attacking the police and, as they dispersed, lashing out at  dark-skinned passers-by.        

Though the initial explosion has not been repeated, nationalist leaders who came to the bus stop on Saturday said they would not let the moment pass.        

&ldquo;The revolt will not take place in Manezh Square, it will take place in people&rsquo;s minds,&rdquo; said Dmitri Dyomushkin of the ultranationalist Slavic Force, as he held up a banner with Mr. Sviridov&rsquo;s face on it. A woman appeared over his shoulder, interrupting.        

&ldquo;Animals have taken over this neighborhood,&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;Look around, there&rsquo;s not a single Russian cafe.&rdquo;        

Orthodox Christians traditionally commemorate the dead after 40 days, and the authorities were braced for violence that did not materialize. Police officers in  body armor lined the road in the morning, standing motionless in falling snow for so long that circles of bare earth formed underneath them; a police helicopter hovered overhead.        

The authorities last month seemed intent on soothing Mr. Sviridov&rsquo;s supporters, with Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin making a televised visit to his grave carrying a fat bunch of roses. On Saturday, the powerful Investigative Committee went a step further, releasing a statement saying that the Caucasian youths &ldquo;intentionally provoked&rdquo; the brawl that ended in Mr. Sviridov&rsquo;s death and that none were legally registered in Moscow.        

Many of the mourners said they were still dissatisfied with the government&rsquo;s response.        

&ldquo;The president said what happened on Manezh Square was a pogrom,&rdquo; said Aleksandr Lalomov, 51, a geologist. &ldquo;The West starts crying genocide. But it is simply the reaction of normal people to the inaction of the authorities.&rdquo;        

Mourners complained that ethnic Caucasians, who flowed into the city after the collapse of the Soviet Union, had monopolized the job market and increased the crime rate. Mr. Lalomov said he was always impressed with the people he met when traveling in the Caucasus.        

&ldquo;But their sons who move here believe they can do whatever they want,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They think all Russian women are prostitutes.&rdquo;        

Marina Borisova, 20, a university student, dropped two flowers at the bus stop.        

She was less focused on the attack on Mr. Sviridov, she said, than on the failure of the police to punish his assailants, a fact she attributed to  corruption.        

&ldquo;We have a system where everything starts at the top and trickles down,&rdquo; she said.        
