
SOSHANGUVE, South Africa &mdash; The crowd was black and poor, and the politician was white and well-to-do. She was onstage, gamely singing a song with Xhosa-language lyrics, and when she started to dance a few simple steps, Simon Mahlangu, a 42-year-old man looking on, nodded appreciatively and said, &ldquo;She&rsquo;s really not as bad you&rsquo;d expect.&rdquo;        

This appraisal of the musical talents of Helen Zille, head of the Democratic Alliance Party, might otherwise have been unimportant. But at that moment, Mr. Mahlangu was concluding that after eight years without a job and decades of living in a shack, he was for the first time going to vote for the &ldquo;D.A.,&rdquo; which many black South Africans consider a white people&rsquo;s party.        

Wednesday is election day in South Africa, as its 278 municipalities choose their local officials. Without a doubt, the most victories will go to the African National Congress, the party that led the nation into liberation and has been the dominant vote-getter during 17 years of post-apartheid democracy.        

But one of the most intriguing questions of the day will be whether the Democratic Alliance, this country&rsquo;s political second fiddle, has finally played an enticing enough tune to attract more than its customary smidgen of the black vote.        

The racial demographics of South Africa are daunting to a party largely led by whites: 79.4 percent of the nation&rsquo;s 50 million people are black; 9.2 percent white; 8.8 percent mixed race; 2.6 percent Asian. Ms. Zille has had limited success in bringing blacks into her party&rsquo;s leadership positions, but she has energetically campaigned in black townships nonetheless.        

&ldquo;Delivery for all,&rdquo; is the theme of the D.A.&rsquo;s campaign, a reference to the many so-called service delivery protests that have broken out nationwide as people deplore their lack of electricity, clean water and indoor plumbing.        

In the 2009 parliamentary elections, the African National Congress won in a landslide, getting 66 percent of the vote. But while the Democratic Alliance was a distant second, with 17 percent, it managed to win a narrow majority in the Western Cape, accumulating enough white and mixed-race votes to make Ms. Zille, who had been Cape Town&rsquo;s mayor, the province&rsquo;s premier.        

Recent polls show increasing dissatisfaction with the A.N.C., but it remains to be seen whether that will translate into increasing defections to other parties, or merely fewer voters at the polls. Ms. Zille said she expected her party to solidify its hold in Cape Town, where it now governs in a coalition, and win enough votes in the Port Elizabeth area to force a similar arrangement there.        

The challenge to any opposition party is onerous: though Nelson Mandela is old, frail and politically inactive, the A.N.C. still basks in his afterglow.        

&ldquo;Our battle is not so much about race; it&rsquo;s about the liberation struggle and how to overcome the A.N.C.&rsquo;s ability to claim it as their own,&rdquo; said the Democratic Alliance&rsquo;s national spokeswoman, Lindiwe Mazibuko, the party&rsquo;s best-known black leader despite having joined it only three years ago, recruited after interviewing Ms. Zille for a college research paper.        

Like much of the region, this country emerged from white control with a multiparty democracy dominated by an entrenched heir to power. The A.N.C. has a wide ideological wingspan, trying to satisfy millionaire entrepreneurs and doctrinaire communists alike.        

Pundits have long predicted that the party will someday split in two, amoeba-like, with each faction claiming to be the more legitimate. But two and a half years ago, when A.N.C. malcontents did form a new party, the rebellion quickly foundered, leaving an uncompetitive weakling behind.        

Those disenchanted with the A.N.C. often seem at a loss for a fertile place to transplant their enthusiasm. Last week, on the BBC program &ldquo;Hard Talk,&rdquo; the Nobel Prize-winning author Nadine Gordimer spoke harshly of the party, and yet she said there was nowhere else to take her political allegiance.        

When the Democratic Alliance was suggested as an alternative, she said: &ldquo;Yes, but unfortunately it hasn&rsquo;t yet become truly representative. It still does not represent enough of the black majority.&rdquo;        

Ms. Zille, 60, a former reporter and anti-apartheid activist, said with some exasperation that such views represented a &ldquo;self-defeating argument.&rdquo; She said, &ldquo;One has to at least try.&rdquo;        

Among her efforts was a campaign stop here in Soshanguve, a sprawling township north of Pretoria, where the blue T-shirts of the Democratic Alliance were previously seen as rarely as long-tailed tuxedos.        

It was not difficult for Ms. Zille to find a place that might welcome her message. She walked amid stillborn government-subsidized houses, half-built walls unfinished four years after work began.        

&ldquo;The contractor won&rsquo;t complete the houses because he says the local councilor won&rsquo;t pay him,&rdquo; she told a small crowd. &ldquo;Well, what did the councilor do with the money?&rdquo;        

Corruption within the A.N.C. is a reliable target. The party suffers a regular run of scandals. There is also broad discontent about how the party selects local candidates, enough so that President Jacob Zuma made the unconventional promise to seek a post-election way to replace many A.N.C. councilors soon after voters grudgingly elect them.        

Each party has faulted the other for building unenclosed toilets &mdash; outdoor plumbing without privacy &mdash; in its respective constituency. Sanitation is no small issue in a nation where many still relieve themselves in a bucket.        

But while the A.N.C. has failed some, it has made others more beholden. Since the end of apartheid, the government has built 2.5 million homes, brought electricity to 8.5 million households and tripled the number of people with access to potable water. Though the country has only 6 million taxpayers, about 15 million people receive some kind of social grant.        

As Ms. Zille campaigned in Soshanguve, a woman named Sarah Matsepane, 34, eyed her as an intruder, someone who might take away her government-built house or the $35-a-month check she received to care for her child.        

&ldquo;Why would I ever leave the A.N.C.?&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;And even if I considered it, I&rsquo;d only have to think of Nelson Mandela and the years he spent in jail for us. What kind of person would turn her back on that?&rdquo;        
