
TOKYO &mdash; Japan vowed Tuesday to stick to its goal of stabilizing a stricken nuclear power plant in as soon as six months, despite recently acknowledging that damage to the plant&rsquo;s reactors might be worse than initially estimated.        

The operator of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant, Tokyo Electric Power Company, has in the past week offered a graver account of how the accident unfolded after the facility was ravaged by the tsunami that followed the March 11 earthquake. The company now acknowledges that a fuel meltdown occurred at three of the plant&rsquo;s six reactors in the early hours of the crisis, something experts had been suggesting for weeks.        

&ldquo;Even though we have confirmed that the nuclear core melted soon after the accident, our three- to six-month timeline will not change,&rdquo; Tokyo Electric&rsquo;s nuclear chief, Sakae Muto, said at a news conference on Tuesday.        

Tokyo Electric said it would change some aspects of its plan to bring the reactors to what it called a &ldquo;cold shutdown,&rdquo; where temperatures at the core fall below the boiling point.        

The utility no longer plans to fill up the reactors with water to stabilize them, it said. Instead, the company will now try to keep the reactors cool by building self-circulating cooling systems at the damaged reactors.        

Workers have been pumping water into the reactors since the first days of the accident, but have allowed contaminated water to seep out, causing dangerous runoff, some of which has spilled into the Pacific Ocean.        

Tokyo Electric will also drape a large polystyrene cover around the severely damaged outer structure of Reactor 1 in an attempt to reduce radiation emissions, and to shield the building from summer typhoons.        

To protect the plant from tsunami risks, Tokyo Electric will start placing stone-filled cages as makeshift armor units along the site&rsquo;s shoreline.        

Stabilizing the reactors would allow workers to start dismantling and decontaminating the site, a process which experts have said will take at least a decade. About 80,000 people who lived around the plant, 140 miles north of Tokyo, have fled their homes, while thousands of farmers and fishermen risk losing their livelihoods as contamination spreads from the plant.        

It is unclear whether even six to nine months will be enough to start a cleanup. Tokyo Electric in the past week has released data that show that the fuel rods at the three most damaged reactors started to melt down rapidly after the site was jolted by a quake at 2:46 p.m. on March 11, knocking out its external power supply. Less than an hour later, the plant was overrun by a 50-foot tsunami, which inundated the plant&rsquo;s backup diesel generators, according to the company.        

The crisis worsened rapidly after that. At 7:30 p.m. on March 11, less than five hours after the quake, damage began to the nuclear fuel at Reactor 1, the company now says.        

Twenty minutes later, an uncontrolled meltdown had begun, as fuel started to slump to the bottom of the reactor pressure vessel.        

By 9 p.m. on the 11th, temperatures had reached 2,800 degrees Celsius, the melting point of the uranium nuclear fuel rods, leading most of the fuel to fall to the bottom of the reactor vessel. The company says meltdown also happened at Reactors No. 2 and 3.        

Tokyo Electric officials had previously said that the uranium fuel rods in the reactors&rsquo; cores were likely to have melted only partly.        

The high temperatures also caused the fuel rods&rsquo; zirconium cladding to react chemically with water, producing hydrogen gas. That hydrogen built up inside the reactor buildings, setting off explosions at two reactors and severely damaging a third.        

A fourth reactor that was not operating at the time of the accident has also been wrecked. Tokyo Electric has suggested that hydrogen may have traveled there from an adjacent reactor through pipes and vents.        

The International Atomic Energy Agency will send a fact-finding mission to Japan next week, the government said Tuesday.        

Japan&rsquo;s chief cabinet secretary, Yukio Edano, said that the 20-member team will spend about a week in Japan and report its findings in June.        
