
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; A normally peaceful northern city erupted in violence on Wednesday, as thousands of protesters clashed with security forces after a NATO night raid that local officials claim killed four civilians. NATO defended the night operation and said the four people who were killed, two of them women, were armed insurgents who fired on its troops.        

At least a dozen people were killed Wednesday as protesters armed with Kalashnikov rifles, axes, grenades and gasoline bombs battled with the police on the streets of Taliqan, the capital of Takhar Province, in the northeast, and then assaulted a small NATO base on the city&rsquo;s outskirts, local officials and witnesses said.        

The protesters chanted &ldquo;Death to Americans&rdquo; and &ldquo;Death to Karzai,&rdquo; referring to President Hamid Karzai, as they hurled firebombs and rocks at the German-run NATO outpost, officials said. Some also fired guns. Smoke rising from the base could be seen across the city.        

Security forces quelled the riot after several hours, but not before dozens of people, including women and children, had been killed or wounded. Dr. Hassan Baseej, director of the provincial health department, said that 12 bodies and 80 people with wounds had been brought to the provincial hospital by early afternoon and that more victims of the violence were expected.        

Two German soldiers and three Afghan guards were also wounded in the attack, said Abdul Jabar Taqwa, the provincial governor. It was not immediately known whether NATO forces were involved in trying to subdue the protesters, or opened fire on them.        

Mr. Taqwa condemned the NATO raid that precipitated the riot but also blamed Taliban agents for stirring up the crowd of 3,000 to 4,000 people during what was intended to be a peaceful demonstration.        

&ldquo;This tragedy is much bigger than the one done last night by coalition forces,&rdquo; he said, promising to find the people who incited the violence.        

At one point, the protesters carried coffins with the bodies of the four people killed in the raid through the streets, the governor said. They were buried later in the day. According to witnesses, people in the crowd grew infuriated when a protester introduced a 10-year-old girl.        

&ldquo;This is the only remaining member of the family killed by foreigners last night,&rdquo; the protester announced.        

Night raids have been a bitter source of tension between NATO and Afghan officials, including Mr. Karzai, who has said they frequently lead to civilian casualties and deepened popular distrust of the government and NATO forces.        

&ldquo;With all the repeated warnings that have been given by the president of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan in regards to the prevention of these willful operations by NATO forces, it seems these types of operations have not been stopped,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s office said in a statement on Wednesday.        

In its own statement, NATO said the joint Afghan and coalition raid was aimed at a man accused of providing weapons and explosives to the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan &mdash; a group linked to Al Qaeda that has been responsible for numerous attacks in northern Afghanistan.        

The team was preparing to search a family compound when a woman wearing an ammunition belt and carrying an AK-47 pointed the rifle at team members; after ignoring several commands to drop it, she was killed, the statement said. The second woman was killed shortly afterward when she rushed out of the compound and pointed a pistol at coalition forces, the statement said.        

It added that a suicide vest rigged with 30-millimeter rounds and a detonation cord were found in a search of the compound. Though they are rarely combatants, women have been known to join insurgent fighting forces and have acted as suicide bombers.        

In addition to the four people killed, two other people suspected of being insurgents were detained.        

But local officials insisted that the four who were killed were not insurgents.        

&ldquo;It was a wrong operation based on wrong intelligence information,&rdquo; said Shah Jahan Noori, the police chief of Takhar Province. &ldquo;These kinds of operations are increasing the gap between the people and the government.&rdquo;        
Alissa J. Rubin contributed reporting from Kabul, and employees of The New York Times from Taliqan and eastern Afghanistan.
