
SULAIMANIYA, Iraq &mdash; The protesters are gone from the central square, pushed out by the brutal tactics of the security forces. The jails have been emptied of the young students and journalists who were rounded up for speaking their mind in public. The wounded are home, quietly nursing their injuries.        

The pro-democracy protests sweeping the Arab world arrived in the semiautonomous Kurdish region of Iraq nearly three months ago, inspired by the revolts in Tunisia and Egypt. But the protests here ended up more like those in Bahrain and Oman, crushed by an authoritarian government.        

&ldquo;We are ashamed of what they have done,&rdquo; said Bayan Barwai, a member of the Islamic Union Party, an opposition party that supported the protests. &ldquo;Sixty days and nothing.&rdquo;        

The crackdown in the region known as Iraqi Kurdistan, in which at least 10 people were killed, has exposed troubling questions about the kind of government the American war has left in Iraq&rsquo;s most stable region, as well as accusations that the Americans condoned the violent response.        

While the American invasion toppled Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s dictatorship, it has emboldened the Kurdish regional government, long dominated by two parties with an entrenched patronage system, to tighten its grip on power.        

&ldquo;The parties today behave just like how the Baathists behaved before,&rdquo; said Chnor Muhammed, a 33-year-old journalist who received a wound to her left hand, referring to Mr. Hussein&rsquo;s party.        

The protests that broke out here in mid-February took the Kurdish region by surprise. Located in northern Iraq, it has been relatively free of the violence that tore the rest of the country apart, making it a haven for foreign investment, and it has close ties to the United States, which has provided security guarantees stretching back to the days of the no-fly zone after the 1991 Persian Gulf war.        

Nearly every day, hundreds and, at times, thousands of people turned out in the central square of Sulaimaniya to demand an end to joint rule by a two-party system, which they said was corrupt and repressive. The protesters demanded the resignations of high-ranking officials, the installation of a temporary government and new elections.        

&ldquo;People here are as frustrated as the rest of the Middle East,&rdquo; said Muhammed Tawfeek, the spokesman of Gorran, an opposition party that joined the street protests.        

He said the crackdown, and threat of arrest, sent many of the protest organizers into hiding. &ldquo;There are lots of young people who can&rsquo;t go back to their universities or their homes,&rdquo; he said.        

After more than two months of daily protests, the demonstrations were quashed last month when the regional government ordered the security forces to occupy the central square. The security forces opened fire and detained protesters, actions that registered sharp rebukes from Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch.        

The crackdown has presented an unexpected challenge to American diplomats who have relied on the region to be a stable counterpoint to the continued violence and political dysfunction that roils the rest of Iraq.        

&ldquo;Kurdistan is the only place in Iraq that the United States can be proud of,&rdquo; said Airy Hirseen, a leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, which governs the region along with the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan.        

Mr. Hirseen said that he had been in contact with American officials during the protests, and that they did not press the authorities to end their aggressive response.        

A number of witnesses said that an American military officer was seen at the central square during the protests, and the perception grew among the demonstrators that the Americans condoned the harsh response.        

&ldquo;They gave the green light for the P.U.K. to do whatever they want to the protesters,&rdquo; said Adnan Osman, a member of the regional Parliament from the Gorran party. &ldquo;The embassy should give a statement and clear it up.&rdquo;        

An American Embassy spokesman said the Americans urged the Kurdish security forces to show restraint, and for both sides to refrain from violence.        
Duraid Adnan and an employee of The New York Times contributed reporting.
