
WASHINGTON &mdash; As tumult rages across the Middle East, and relations with Pakistan border on a breakdown, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton was scheduled Wednesday night to host a private dinner with at least six former Latin American presidents, part of a quiet campaign to repair relations with a region that complains it has been ignored by American policy makers.        

Diplomatic tensions have left the United States without ambassadors in Bolivia, Venezuela, Ecuador and Mexico. Free trade agreements long sought by Panama and Colombia &mdash; two of the United States&rsquo; closest allies in the region &mdash; remain stalled by domestic political fights, while China has moved ahead of the United States to become Brazil&rsquo;s most important trading partner.        

In Cuba, a State Department contractor remains in prison more than a year after he was detained for handing out satellite telephones as part of a semi-covert U.S.A.I.D. program aimed at undermining the Castro government. Haiti&rsquo;s reconstruction has been plagued by poor coordination. Honduras remains outcast from the Organization of American States after a coup in which troops forced a democratically elected president out of the country in his pajamas.        

And the fight against organized crime in Mexico has failed to stem the violence that has left nearly 40,000 people dead, while drug trafficking organizations have expanded their brutal networks in Central America.        

Although Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s dinner with the former presidents of Mexico, Colombia, Brazil, Peru, Panama and El Salvador had been in the works for weeks, organizers said it coincided with her sense that years of neglect had resulted in missed opportunities in the region. It also coincides, analysts said, with the start of an American election season that is certain to hinge in some part on Hispanic votes.        

Mrs. Clinton has made at least two speeches about Latin America in recent weeks, including one on Monday before a group of politically active Mexican-American leaders. And two weeks ago she accepted &mdash; some say encouraged &mdash; the resignation of her chief envoy to Latin America, Arturo Valenzuela, igniting soul-searching by diplomats and experts about the expectations for closer ties that were raised by President Obama&rsquo;s election, and why his administration had failed to achieve them.        

Ted Piccone, a deputy director at the Brookings Institution, who helped the State Department arrange Wednesday&rsquo;s dinner for the six former Latin American presidents, said Mrs. Clinton had begun to &ldquo;think about the kind of legacy she&rsquo;s aiming to leave&rdquo; in the region. He said she had acknowledged that &ldquo;the United States could be doing better,&rdquo; and had expressed a desire to &ldquo;take things up a notch.&rdquo;        

The outlook among the United States&rsquo; neighbors is not all bleak, analysts said. Mrs. Clinton has traveled to Latin America more than any of her recent predecessors. On a number of occasions, she has brought every senior member of the cabinet along with her. Mr. Obama has met with seven Latin American presidents since February. He also made three trips to the region, and was criticized here for being in Brazil in March when he ordered airstrikes against Libya.        

Dan Restrepo, Mr. Obama&rsquo;s senior adviser on Latin America at the National Security Council, said, &ldquo;Our relationships with the major countries in the hemisphere are in good shape, as evidenced by the president&rsquo;s outreach in recent months.&rdquo;        

But as the world gets smaller, less credit is given for miles traveled. &ldquo;Lackluster,&rdquo; was the word several leaders in the region used in interviews to describe the administration&rsquo;s achievements in Latin America. The danger, they said, is that the lack of sustained engagement threatened to leave the United States on the sidelines as its neighbors enjoyed faster economic growth than any other region except Asia, and as democracies that once looked to the United States as a kind of political north star begin searching for others to help them set a new course.        

&ldquo;Nobody can deny the importance that China is having, more and more,&rdquo; President Juan Manuel Santos of Colombia said in a recent interview. &ldquo;They are investing in Latin America. They are very attracted to Colombia because we have what they need, and for us this is music to our ears.&rdquo;        
Ginger Thompson reported from Washington, and Simon Romero from Caracas, Venezuela.
