
In a message to Muslims made public 16 days after his death, Osama bin Laden praised the pro-democracy uprisings that had swept the Arab world and, in the view of some experts, had called into question the relevance of Al Qaeda, the terrorist network he founded and led for 23 years.        

In the 12-minute audio message, posted on Wednesday to jihadist forums on the Web, Bin Laden welcomed the uprisings that toppled the autocratic leaders of Tunisia and Egypt, according to a translation released by the SITE Intelligence Group, a private Web monitoring service. As Sahab, Al Qaeda&rsquo;s media branch, entitled the recording, &ldquo;Speech from the Martyr of Islam &mdash; As We Think of Him &mdash; To the Islamic Ummah,&rdquo; or global community of Muslims.        

&ldquo;We watch with you this great historic event and we share with you joy and happiness and delight and felicity,&rdquo; Bin Laden said. &ldquo;We are happy for what makes you happy, and we are sad for what makes you sad. So congratulations to you for your victories.&rdquo;        

Before he was killed May 2 by Navy Seals who stormed his compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, Bin Laden had not reacted publicly to the series of popular demonstrations in Arab countries that had riveted the world&rsquo;s attention.        

But Al Qaeda had said in a statement after his death that he had recorded a commentary about a week before his death.        

Some experts on the Middle East have said that the so-called Arab Spring appeared to catch Al Qaeda unawares and that young demonstrators had implicitly rejected its extremist ideology. But some militants, including Anwar al-Awlaki, the American-born Qaeda propagandist hiding in Yemen, have claimed that the uprisings will make room for Islamists to seize power.        

In recent years, Bin Laden has released about half a dozen audio messages annually. But months had passed without any comment on the transforming events in the Arab world.        

His new message, presumably his last, did not scold the demonstrators in Egypt and Tunisia for the fact that their slogans and demands were almost exclusively secular in nature.        

But he said the region was at a &ldquo;serious crossroads&rdquo; that offered a &ldquo;great and rare historic opportunity to rise with the Ummah and to free yourselves from servitude to the desires of the rulers, manmade law, and Western dominance,&rdquo; suggesting that the new order should be governed by shariah, or Islamic law.        

He advised creating a &ldquo;council&rdquo; to advise the new governments in Egypt and Tunisia and decide on the best timing for uprisings in other countries.        

He did not comment on the continuing attempt to overthrow Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in Libya or the turmoil in Yemen, Syria and other countries.        

But he urged Muslims to seize the moment. &ldquo;A delay may cause the opportunity to be lost, and carrying it out before the right time will increase the number of casualties,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I think that the winds of change will blow over the entire Muslim world, with permission from Allah.&rdquo;        

The audio message was accompanied by a photograph of Bin Laden in which his beard has considerable gray in it, in contrast with some videos found in his compound in which he appeared to have dyed his beard black.        
