
SKOLKOVO, Russia &mdash; As the start of President Dmitri A. Medvedev&rsquo;s news conference drew near on Wednesday, 800 journalists were in such a state of anticipation that they burst into spontaneous applause when an aide climbed up to the podium to adjust a teacup set out for the president.        

Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s televised question-and-answer session &mdash; his first such event since taking office three years ago &mdash; had the trappings of a major political announcement, coming at a moment of deep intrigue about whether he will run for president again or step aside to make way for his mentor, Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin.        

But in the end Mr. Medvedev chose not to use the gleaming platform for anything beyond hints at his intentions. He acknowledged that the news conference would be an &ldquo;appealing and tempting&rdquo; moment for an announcement, and that his audience expected it, but said that for reasons he did not explain, the time was not right.        

&ldquo;The whole election process sets its own rules of the game, and I will follow them too,&rdquo; he said at the event, held at the Skolkovo business school outside Moscow. &ldquo;You can expect an announcement soon.&rdquo;        

He said that the two men saw Russia&rsquo;s future differently, with Mr. Putin advocating a &ldquo;calm, gradual&rdquo; approach to modernization, while he would pursue a swifter pace of reforms.        

One of his most telling responses, to a question about his decision to replace veteran regional leaders, seemed to refer equally to the choice currently before Mr. Putin, whose rule of Russia will approach two decades if he returns to the presidency and serves six years.        

&ldquo;No one can stay in power forever,&rdquo; Mr. Medvedev said. &ldquo;People who harbor such illusions usually come to a rather bad end, and the world has given us quite a few examples of late. This applies to the regional governors, too.        

&ldquo;You cannot have one and the same person in power for 20 years, even if they are competent, well qualified, and know their region,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We need to open the road to young people.&rdquo;        

Commentators began to deconstruct Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s appearance as soon as it ended. Many liberals &mdash; eager to see him seize the political initiative by declaring his candidacy or announcing significant firings &mdash; said he had let a fateful moment slip by. Lilia Shevtsova, an analyst at the Moscow Carnegie Center, described the appearance as &ldquo;political hara-kiri,&rdquo; all but guaranteeing that Mr. Putin would return.        

&ldquo;Mr. Medvedev has practically no time left to declare his political intentions,&rdquo; read an editorial on the online newspaper Gazeta.ru. &ldquo;This means that Russia&rsquo;s new president will be chosen behind the scenes, and not in public.&rdquo;        

But other analysts found hints that Mr. Medvedev was prepared to fight for power.        

One possibility discussed in recent weeks was that Mr. Medvedev could use his extraordinary executive powers to dismiss part or all of the government, up to and including Mr. Putin. Asked Wednesday why he had not fired ministers since becoming president, Mr. Medvedev said he had complaints about their work but did not think piecemeal firings were effective, suggesting he would consider a broader overhaul.        

In the middle of the news conference, Mr. Medvedev glanced down at his iPad and announced a piece of news: Sergei M. Mironov had been removed as head of the Federation Council, the upper house of Russia&rsquo;s Parliament.        

Mr. Mironov, a loyal ally of Mr. Putin, helped the Kremlin establish A Just Russia, a pro-government opposition party. He had become an increasingly vociferous critic of United Russia, the governing party, and the authorities in his native St. Petersburg. Minutes earlier, Mr. Medvedev had answered a question about the conflict, calling it &ldquo;a sign of political competition.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;None of us wants to have just one party deciding everything,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;What we are seeing now reflects the differences that exist in political life at the moment.&rdquo;        
