
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Four foreign journalists held for several weeks by the Libyan government were released on Wednesday and taken to a Tripoli hotel, with government officials saying they would be provided with transport to a border crossing with Tunisia on Thursday.        

In addition, a journalist from Al Jazeera who had been detained in Syria and then held in Iran for almost three weeks has been released, her family and the network said Wednesday.        

That journalist, Dorothy Parvaz, disappeared in Syria last month while covering antigovernment protests. Her whereabouts were unknown until Syrian officials acknowledged a week ago that they had sent her to Iran shortly after detaining her.        

The journalists released in Tripoli were James Foley and Clare Morgana Gillis, who are American; Manu Brabo, who is from Spain; and Nigel Chandler from Britain.        

Libyan officials said they had no information about a fifth journalist who has been missing for weeks, Anton Hammerl, a freelance photographer who holds South African and Austrian citizenship.        

The decision to release the four, after weeks of uncertainty about their safety and repeated assurances that they would be freed, appeared to be linked to a new effort by Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s government to find a way out of its increasing isolation through diplomatic negotiations.        

That bid has been rebuffed by rebel officials and by Western governments backing the NATO bombing campaign, who have said Colonel Qaddafi must step down as a condition for any talks.        

Libyan officials said a judge in Tripoli had sentenced the four journalists to suspended one-year jail terms and fined them 200 Libyan dinars each &mdash; about $165 at the official exchange rate &mdash; for entering the country illegally.        

The officials said the charges stemmed from the journalists&rsquo; entering rebel-held territory in eastern Libya without the required visas.        

Emphasizing the government&rsquo;s good will in the affair, as Libyan officials presented it, Moussa Ibrahim, the chief government spokesman, said the released journalists were welcome to remain in Libya and resume their reporting from Tripoli if they chose.        

But from their brief conversations with other reporters, the four appeared to have decided to leave the country as soon as possible.        

The journalists appeared tired Wednesday when they arrived at the Tripoli hotel that is the headquarters for the foreign news media covering the conflict, but Ms. Gillis, a freelance reporter who has written for The Atlantic magazine and USA Today, said they were in good health.        

Mr. Brabo, a freelance photographer, said he, Ms. Gillis and Mr. Foley, a freelance writer who has worked for the Boston-based news agency GlobalPost, were arrested April 5 when they moved from rebel-held positions around Adjdabiya and ran into government troops a few miles outside Brega, an oil town 500 miles east of Tripoli.        

It was not immediately clear where Mr. Chandler, who has worked as a freelance cameraman for the BBC and other TV networks, was arrested.        

Mr. Brabo said that his early experience in government hands, with Ms. Gillis and Mr. Foley, had been &ldquo;unpleasant,&rdquo; but that they had been treated well during later detention at a villa in Tripoli, where they were allowed visits by European diplomats.        

In March, four journalists for The New York Times were detained under similar circumstances in eastern Libya. The four journalists &mdash; reporters Anthony Shadid and Stephen Farrell and photographers Tyler Hicks and Lynsey Addario &mdash; were released after six days. In an account of their experiences, the four said they had been abused by their Libyan captors.        
J. David Goodman contributed reporting from New York; Kareem Fahim from Benghazi, Libya; and Alan Cowell from London.
