
WASHINGTON &mdash; The United States intensified political and economic pressure on Syria on Wednesday by imposing sanctions on President Bashar al-Assad and six other senior Syrian officials in the wake of a bloody crackdown on political protests in the country.        


The sanctions against Syria reflected mounting American frustration that Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government was ignoring international condemnation by not pursuing a peaceful resolution to the popular uprising that has swept the country since March. The European Union&rsquo;s chief foreign policy official, in Washington for talks, said that the group&rsquo;s 27 member nations were also considering a significant expansion of sanctions.        

Although senior administration officials left open the possibility that Mr. Assad could still negotiate a way to remain in power, their tone has sharpened drastically as Syrian security forces continued to resort to &ldquo;wanton violence, intimidation and repression,&rdquo; as one official put it Wednesday. The official echoed remarks by Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton last week that inched the United States closer to calling explicitly for Mr. Assad&rsquo;s ouster, saying that &ldquo;the country cannot go back to the way it was before.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;President Assad has a clear choice: it&rsquo;s either to lead this transition to democracy, or to leave,&rdquo; the official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity under rules imposed by the administration.        

Until now, American and European officials have criticized the Syrian government but stopped short of sanctioning Mr. Assad, who is still sometimes viewed as a reformer willing at least to make gestures of political openness only to be stymied by more hard-line elements in Syria&rsquo;s ruling elite. The administration has concluded, officials said, that its measured approach was not working.        

It remains to be seen how punishing sanctions will be, but coordinated sanctions by the United States and Europe could have an economic bite, in addition to a political one, something that officials in Syria seem genuinely to fear.        

The sanctions freeze any assets Mr. Assad and the others have in American financial institutions, and prohibit trade with them. Similar sanctions against Libya&rsquo;s leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, have led to the seizure of more than $36 billion in assets, according to the Treasury Department.        

In addition to Mr. Assad, the administration sanctioned Syria&rsquo;s vice president, its prime minister, interior and defense ministers, and the directors of military intelligence and political security, as well as additional Syrian security and intelligence services.        

The Treasury Department also imposed sanctions on the commander of Iran&rsquo;s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, Qassem Soleimani, and a deputy. The senior administration official said that Iran was providing &ldquo;material support&rdquo; to the government&rsquo;s crackdown.        

Catherine Ashton, the European Union&rsquo;s senior foreign policy official, said in an interview that the intensifying sanctions were &ldquo;a strongly political signal that the relationship has changed fundamentally&rdquo; between Syria and outside nations.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s more than impatience,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a recognition from the international community that this killing of people &mdash; this terrible violence &mdash; is totally unacceptable,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;We have to use what we have available to us, which is both through the political expression of sanctions and their effect &mdash; make that point loudly, clearly, directly.&rdquo;        

In Syria, Mr. Assad has repeatedly promised to make changes in the political system &mdash; ending emergency rule, for example &mdash; and yet has continued with a broad and brutal crackdown. That has increased his diplomatic isolation. &ldquo;He says, &lsquo;I will do it,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey said in a television interview. &ldquo;But I am having a hard time understanding if he is being prevented from doing it or if he is hesitating.&rdquo;        

The sanctions come amid growing signs that the Syrian government feels emboldened after staggering in the face of an unprecedented challenge to 40 years of rule by the Assad family. Syrian officials now say they believe they have the upper hand, and talk of putting an end in weeks, not months, to protests that erupted across the breadth of the country, from the southern steppe and Mediterranean coast to the outskirts of Damascus.        
Steven Lee Myers reported from Washington, and Anthony Shadid from Beirut, Lebanon. Hwaida Saad and an employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Beirut.
