
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; As votes were being counted Thursday in South Africa&rsquo;s local elections, the governing African National Congress was once again steamrolling to victory, though not quite at its customary pace.        

With 97 percent of votes in, the A.N.C. was ahead with 62 percent, down from the 66 percent it won in the 2006 local elections. And the party in second place, the Democratic Alliance, had raised its tally to 24 percent from 15 percent. Some commentators were calling the results a breakthrough for the D.A., which many black South Africans consider a white people&rsquo;s party.        

&ldquo;The D.A. has cracked, if not broken, the white ceiling,&rdquo; a political analyst, Allister Sparks, said on eNews, the South African all-news television channel.        

Ballots were still being counted in many of the nation&rsquo;s 278 municipalities, and official results will not be announced until Friday or Saturday.        

But both of the leading parties had reasons to cheer &mdash; and lament.        

The Democratic Alliance not only solidified its position as the leading opposition party, but it also fortified its hold in Western Cape Province, where it handily won Cape Town and added several other municipalities to its control.        

Helen Zille, the D.A.&rsquo;s leader, is the premier of the Western Cape, the only one of South Africa&rsquo;s nine provinces without a black majority.        

Before Wednesday&rsquo;s vote, Ms. Zille energetically tried to expand the party&rsquo;s reach, campaigning in black townships considered to be A.N.C. strongholds. She loosened up her campaigning style, singing and dancing before crowds.        

&ldquo;If I can get this result from dancing, I will do it again for the next election,&rdquo; Ms. Zille told reporters on Thursday, pleased with the results of the vote.        

The Democratic Alliance also hoped to win the Nelson Mandela Bay municipality in the Eastern Cape, which includes Port Elizabeth. A victory there would have given it control of another of the nation&rsquo;s major cities. But the A.N.C. held off the challenge, getting 52 percent of the vote.        

In fact, during a time of widespread protests about the failure of government to provide services to the poor, the A.N.C., which has dominated post-apartheid politics, managed to maintain the loyalty of most constituencies.        

Most notably, it was running well ahead in Balfour, a place where residents have repeatedly rebelled against what they see as A.N.C. mismanagement by burning public buildings and blocking roads.        

In Balfour, as in other places, the Congress of the People, or COPE, made a disappointing showing. The party began in 2008, led by a splinter group of A.N.C. heavyweights.        

COPE won 7 percent of the vote in the 2009 parliamentary elections but it has been riven by internal bickering, and on Thursday was tallying less than 3 percent.        

&ldquo;What we&rsquo;ve seen is the complete collapse of COPE,&rdquo; Ms. Zille said. &ldquo;The D.A. is the only party that is growing.&rdquo;        
