
BAGHDAD &mdash; Three explosions aimed at Iraqi security forces ripped through the divided northern city of Kirkuk on Thursday morning, killing at least 29 people, most of them police officers, and wounding scores more.        

The attackers used a now familiar tactic, detonating successive explosions so those who rush to the scene of the first blast are hurt. The initial blast was caused by a small improvised explosive device attached to a sedan outside the local police headquarters. After the police arrived, a larger car bomb went off, killing 26 officers and 3 civilians.        

&ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t feel anything,&rdquo; said Kaweh Hama Rashid, a police officer wounded in the second blast. &ldquo;I just fell to the ground, and blood covered me. I saw all of my friends dying and wounded in front of my eyes.&rdquo;        

About 30 minutes later, a third car bomb exploded near the provincial government headquarters, wounding about 13 people, including Kirkuk&rsquo;s head of criminal investigation, the target of the explosion, security officials said.        

Three ethnic groups are grappling for control of the Kirkuk area and its rich oil reserves. The fight for primacy among Arabs, Kurds and Turkmens is one of the most potentially volatile issues facing Iraq as American troops prepare to withdraw over the next six months.        

&ldquo;Kirkuk is witnessing a deterioration in the security situation,&rdquo; said Hassan Toran, a Turkmen and head of the provincial council. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s possible the attacks will increase if American troops leave Iraq.&rdquo;        

Security officials said that at least 105 people were wounded in the blasts and that victims with critical burns were ferried to more advanced hospitals that were one to two hours away.        

Dozens of wounded police officers filled the hallways of Kirkuk Hospital, some laid out on blood-covered floors, as family members crowded the entrance. Doctors said they were overwhelmed by the flood of people with severe burns and shrapnel wounds, and they put out a call for blood donors. The United States military sent a team of medical providers after receiving requests for help.        

Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki ordered investigators to the scene of the bombings, and said the government would compensate the victims&rsquo; families.        

Earlier this year, the United States military sent troops into Kirkuk to help defuse a standoff between rival groups of security forces that had threatened to destabilize the city.        

The dispute began in February when leaders of the semiautonomous Kurdistan region deployed soldiers near largely Arab neighborhoods around Kirkuk, saying they were worried about attacks on peaceful demonstrations. The move angered local Arab leaders, and American diplomats and military officials pressed Kurdish leaders to withdraw the soldiers.        

Some officials and residents in Kirkuk said the standoff, which ended without bloodshed, demonstrated the need for a continuing American presence in the region. Under a security agreement, the 46,000 American troops remaining in Iraq are to withdraw by the end of the year.        

Iraqi leaders have said they plan to hold discussions in coming weeks about whether they should ask for some American troops to stay longer &mdash; a politically delicate question. American leaders have suggested they would consider the request.        

But military transfers are already taking place. On Sunday, the American military handed over a base in Kirkuk Province staffed by 160 soldiers to Iraqi security forces.        

Lt. Col. Steve Wollman, a spokesman for American forces in northern Iraq, said there did not appear to be any connection between the base closing and Thursday&rsquo;s attack.        
Omar al-Jawoshy contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an employee of The New York Times from Kirkuk.
