
LONDON &mdash; Garret FitzGerald, who served twice as Irish prime minister, helped set the stage for peace in Northern Ireland and shifted the tone of Ireland&rsquo;s relations with Britain, died Thursday in Dublin. He was 85.        

The Irish government said he died after a short illness.        

Across the country, flags were lowered to half-staff on government buildings, and a former president, Mary Robinson, struck the national mood when she said, &ldquo;There&rsquo;ll be a sadness way beyond the political.&rdquo;        

Mr. FitzGerald, who was prime minister in the 1980s, died just as British-Irish relations broke new ground with a visit by Queen Elizabeth II, the first British monarch to visit the Irish Republic. The queen said Mr. FitzGerald had made a &ldquo;lasting contribution to peace.&rdquo;        

Mr. FitzGerald was recognized as a shrewd, nuts-and-bolts economist. But he was also perceived as sort of an absent-minded professor, given to making memorable remarks. He once said of an idea, &ldquo;That&rsquo;s fine in practice, but will it work in theory?&rdquo;        

On the campaign trail, a press photographer once noticed that he was wearing unmatched shoes, a sartorial blunder that only increased his popularity.        

Mr. FitzGerald, who also served as foreign minister in the 1970s, belonged to the center-right Fine Gael party, became its leader in 1977 and took over as prime minister in 1981, leading a short-lived coalition with Labour that showed what The Irish Times called its inexperience. The government fell because of a proposal to tax clothes and children&rsquo;s shoes.        

The coalition lost power in early 1982 but regained it later that year in a new pact with Labour. Mr. FitzGerald&rsquo;s new term &mdash; he continued in office until 1987 &mdash; allowed him to set about improving badly strained relations with Britain, then led by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who had long been skeptical of Irish nationalism.        

Asked if he had liked Mrs. Thatcher, the Iron Lady by one nickname, he replied, &ldquo;It didn&rsquo;t really matter as long as she liked me.&rdquo;        

Their negotiations led to the British-Irish agreement of 1985, which gave officials from the Irish Republic a formal say in Northern Ireland&rsquo;s affairs for the first time since the creation of the Irish Free State in 1922.        

The cooperation helped the governments in London and Dublin propel the feuding Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland to reach the 1998 Good Friday agreement. From then on, Irish leaders worked closely with British officials, notably Prime Minister Tony Blair, to prod the two sides to a power-sharing government that largely sustained the peace.        

Bertie Ahern, a former Irish prime minister who joined Mr. Blair in pressing for the Good Friday accord, said Thursday that Mr. FitzGerald had been &ldquo;generous in his advice and vocal in his encouragement&rdquo; of the pact.        

Mr. FitzGerald was born in Dublin on Feb. 9, 1926. His parents were both nationalists, his mother, the former Mabel Washington McConnell, a Protestant from Northern Ireland and his father, Desmond FitzGerald, a Roman Catholic from the south. Desmond FitzGerald, who was active in the war for independence, was external affairs minister for the Irish government in the 1920s.        

After studying history, French and Spanish at University College, Dublin, Garret FitzGerald qualified as a barrister in 1947, the same year he married Joan O&rsquo;Farrell, who died in 1999. But he never practiced law, working instead at the national airline, Aer Lingus.        

Before entering politics he established himself in academia as an economist, lecturing at University College, and as a journalist, covering Ireland for several foreign newspapers.        

He is survived by a daughter, Mary, and two sons, John and Mark.        

Mr. FitzGerald was an ardent supporter of the European Union as a means of offsetting Britain&rsquo;s overwhelming economic influence in his country. Though he retired from formal politics in 1992, almost to the end he campaigned in favor of expanding the European project &mdash; and Ireland&rsquo;s part in it &mdash; in contentious referendums in 2002 and 2009.        

On Thursday, Jos&eacute; Manuel Barroso, the president of the European Commission, said Mr. FitzGerald had played a central role in Ireland&rsquo;s relationship with Europe, praising &ldquo;his convictions, his brilliance, his energy and his friendliness.&rdquo;        

While his international reputation seemed secure, Mr. FitzGerald fought, and lost, bruising political battles at home, particularly against another former prime minister, Charles Haughey, who was seen as his nemesis. (Mr. Haughey died in 2006.)        

Mr. FitzGerald campaigned for what he called a &ldquo;genuine republic,&rdquo; which he said would free Ireland from the influence of the dominant Roman Catholic Church hierarchy. But his efforts in office to legalize the sale of condoms and liberalize the divorce laws foundered.        

After retiring from politics, Mr. FitzGerald continued to be active in Irish public life, mainly as a columnist for The Irish Times and as a prolific author. He appeared frequently on radio and television, making his last appearance on a Saturday night talk show in April.        

Shortly before Mr. FitzGerald&rsquo;s death, Queen Elizabeth made a speech of reconciliation, expressing &ldquo;deep sympathy&rdquo; for &ldquo;all those who have suffered as a consequence of our troubled past.&rdquo;        

Prime Minister Enda Kenny said Mr. FitzGerald &ldquo;would have been very happy to hear the words of her majesty,&rdquo; since he was among those &ldquo;who played their part in putting the jigsaw pieces together for our country and for our two countries.&rdquo;        

The prime minister added, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a legacy that very few will ever match.&rdquo;        

Mr. FitzGerald had remained active as a journalist at many points throughout his career. According to an account by the British Press Association, one of the foreign newspapers he had written for once called him while he was foreign minister to commission an article, unaware that he had become a senior official.        

He &ldquo;duly dashed off&rdquo; the requested article, the news agency said.        
Douglas Dalby contributed reporting from Dublin.
