
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Insurgents ambushed an Afghan construction crew working on a road project in southeastern Afghanistan early Thursday morning, leaving at least 35 dead security guards, laborers and engineers scattered in the mountainous terrain.        

Security guards tried to fight off the attackers in a gunfight that lasted two hours in a remote part of Paktia Province, local officials said. Of the 80 workers and guards at the construction camp, only eight are known to have escaped unharmed. Twenty were wounded, and 17 are missing, the officials said.        

The attack began around 2 a.m., about 30 miles east of the provincial capital, Gardez, in an area under the sway of the Haqqani network, a brutal offshoot of the Taliban.        

The group, based across the border in Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal areas, has been responsible for attacks throughout eastern Afghanistan. In an e-mail to reporters, the Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack without directly implicating the Haqqani network.        

Local officials said they did not begin learning the full scope of the carnage until late morning, when they sent villagers to the area. The villagers discovered bodies scattered among the hillsides and amid smoking mounds of destroyed trucks and other heavy construction equipment.        

An Afghan construction company, Glassco Sky, had the contract for the 27-mile project, which had been under way for about a year and a half, said Ruhullah Samon, a spokesman for the Paktia governor&rsquo;s office. It was not known how many insurgents carried out the attack, but eight were killed by guards, Mr. Samon said.        

&ldquo;It was a tragic incident,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It was really an unprecedented attack on road construction crew members.&rdquo;        

Zamari Zadran, subgovernor of the Wazie Zadran district, where the attack occurred, said members of the construction crew never called for help. One reason may be that the Taliban, either through threats or violence, often force cellphone companies to cut off service at night in many volatile areas to make it easier to move without local residents informing the authorities.        

&ldquo;They did not contact us, so neither we nor the coalition forces could come here to help because we did not know what was happening with them,&rdquo; Mr. Zadran said.        

Road crews largely financed by American and international aid have long been targets for insurgents hoping to disrupt projects that are signs of progress. In March, suicide bombers attacked a road construction camp in neighboring Paktika Province, killing 24 people and wounding 50.        

The crew that was attacked on Thursday was working on a road not far from the Gardez-Khost Highway, a 64-mile project that has been one of the most troubled and costly transportation projects in Afghanistan.        

Since work on the highway began in 2007, there have been at least 364 attacks on the highway, resulting in the deaths of 19 people, almost all of them local Afghan workers. The highway project, which has been financed by U.S.A.I.D., has come to symbolize the pitfalls of corruption and the danger of trying to carry out development projects in areas strongly lacking in security. It has cost about $121 million so far, with the final price tag expected to reach $176 million, or about $2.8 million a mile.        

Contractors trying to build in many of these volatile areas have been accused of paying off insurgent groups, including the Haqqani network, to allow work to continue, which helps to finance the insurgency. Some security outfits have also been accused of helping attacks in order to extort more money for security.        

In the northern province of Takhar, meanwhile, violent demonstrations set off by a joint American-Afghan night raid this week stretched into the second day in the provincial capital, Taliqan. The raid killed four people, two of them women; NATO said they were insurgents who tried to fire on their troops.        

After a dozen people were killed in protests on Wednesday in Taliqan, hundreds more protesters attacked the police headquarters on Thursday. They set fire to offices before being pushed back by police officers, said Shah Jahan Noori, the police chief of Takhar Province.        

At least three protesters were admitted to a local hospital with gunshot wounds, said Dr. Hassan Baseej, director of the provincial health department.        

Local officials have blamed Taliban agitators for inciting the violence. But the demonstrations underscore the fragile situations even in cities like Taliqan that have largely been peaceful as NATO troops begin winding down their presence in the country beginning this summer.        

Though night raids have proved to be an increasingly effective means for NATO to hunt down Taliban commanders, they have angered Afghans for years, both for their intrusiveness and for the civilian casualties they frequently cause.        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul, and employees of The New York Times from Taliqan and Khost, Afghanistan.
