
S&Atilde;O PAULO, Brazil &mdash; Unrelenting rains for much of the weekend complicated the search for scores of people still missing after violent floods stirred mudslides that ripped through hillside communities around Rio de Janeiro, killing more than 600 people since last week.        



The hardest hit towns &mdash; Petr&oacute;polis, Teres&oacute;polis and Nova Friburgo &mdash; have been scenes of widespread devastation since last week. Residents walked dazed through the mud, searching for missing family members and what remains of their belongings. Communications, electricity and potable water were still lacking in several areas, leaving disaster experts to lament Brazil&rsquo;s lack of preparedness for deadly rains, which they say are becoming more common.        

The death toll climbed to 617 early Sunday, with nearly 14,000 reported homeless or having abandoned their homes, according to Rio de Janeiro State officials.        

&ldquo;We still haven&rsquo;t found anyone,&rdquo; said Adalberto Mota, 52, a store clerk who walked through a river of mud searching for five family members in the Vale do Cuiab&aacute; neighborhood of Petr&oacute;polis.        

&ldquo;I just want to leave,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;This was a lovely area, a touristic spot, but it is impossible to live here now.&rdquo;        

The tragedy around Rio was Brazil&rsquo;s deadliest natural disaster. For much of its history, Brazil has been blessed like almost no other country of its size to be almost free of such calamities. Earthquakes, tornadoes, hurricanes, blizzards, erupting volcanoes &mdash; none have proved threats to Brazil.        

Until recently, the most costly and best-known disasters were severe droughts, said Margareta Wahlstrom, the assistant secretary general for the United Nations&rsquo; International Strategy for Disaster Reduction.        

&ldquo;But in the last few years the increasing frequency of floods, high winds and storms has become part of the new normal of Brazil,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;The political choice we have today is to not treat disasters as events that come and go, but decide that you plan for them and realize that they are very costly.&rdquo;        

Brazil has experienced 37 disastrous floods since 2000, said Debarati Guha Sapir, a professor at the Catholic University of Louvain in Brussels who heads a World Health Organization collaborating center on disasters. Seven occurred in 2009 and four in 2008. The rain-related disasters have affected nearly five million people over the last two decades, she said.        

More than 280 people died in Rio State in flooding and landslides last year, and at least 75 more in S&atilde;o Paulo State. That followed the more than 130 who died during heavy rains in Santa Catarina State in 2008.        

But disaster experts say that the stark difference in the death tolls in Brazil and Australia, where at least 28 people have died in flooding in the northeast in the past two weeks, reveal a wide gap in the preparedness of the countries and their flood management policies.        

&ldquo;In a country like Brazil, which is not a poor country, where technological expertise and resources are really not a problem, large numbers of people dying from floods is not a good sign,&rdquo; Dr. Sapir said. What Brazil lacks, she said, are &ldquo;the political will and the priority that public authorities must give to the issue of flood management.&rdquo;        

The hillside areas around Rio lacked early warning systems or effective community organizations that might have helped residents to wake one another as the rains intensified last Tuesday night, disaster experts and residents said. Most people are believed to have died early Wednesday morning as they slept, when water-loosened earth swept their houses away.        

Australia had not experienced severe floods since the early 1970s, Ms. Wahlstrom said, but annual cyclones and minor floods led officials to develop early-warning systems and evacuation guides that residents were regularly drilled on. Better drainage infrastructure and better quality housing also helped, she said.        

Rio de Janeiro State officials have cited irregular occupation of areas at risk of floods and landslides as the main reason that so many have been dying. Carlos Minc, Rio&rsquo;s environment secretary, said Thursday that the state&rsquo;s civil defense authority urgently needed to relocate residents in high-risk areas. &ldquo;The next rain will destroy everything that still remains,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We do not have time for contemplation.&rdquo;        

The city of Rio, in geological mappings, has identified 177 regions with areas at risk to rain-related events.        

City officials have been training community leaders to assist the civil defense authorities during heavy rains, arming them with cellphones that would receive messages alerting them, so they could warn neighbors to evacuate.        
Roberta Nápolis contributed reporting from Petrópolis, Brazil.
