
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The Syrian government condemned on Thursday American sanctions against President Bashar al-Assad and six of his top officials over the ferocious crackdown on antigovernment protesters that human rights activists say has killed at least 850 people.        

The Syrian state news agency said that the sanctions were &ldquo;one in a series of sanctions imposed by the U.S. administration against the Syrian people as part of the U.S. regional policies serving Israel.&rdquo; The report added that the move &ldquo;would not affect Syria&rsquo;s independent choices and steadfastness.&rdquo;        

The American imposition of sanctions on Wednesday represented an escalation of pressure on Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government, which has detained thousands and deployed the army in at least four towns and cities across the country to crush dissent.        

Syria&rsquo;s response came hours before President Obama delivered a much-anticipated speech on the Middle East during which he warned Mr. Assad that Syria would face increasing isolation if he did not address his people&rsquo;s calls for a transition to democracy. Mr. Obama, however, did not explicitly call for Mr. Assad&rsquo;s removal.        

The condemnation came as Syrian Army troops shelled Tall Kalakh, a town adjacent to the Lebanese border, killing at least eight people and bringing the death toll since the assault on the town began last Saturday to 34, according to activists.        

&ldquo;We heard gunfire early this morning coming from the Syrian side of the border,&rdquo; a resident in Wadi Khaled, a Lebanese border area, said by phone. &ldquo;Residents who fled Syria today said that all houses of those who fled in the past four days have been destroyed.&rdquo;        

A resident of Tall Kalakh who wished to remain anonymous for fear of reprisal said that people there found 14 charred bodies that could not be identified in a field. A video posted online and said to be from the town showed people wrapping heavily burned bodies in plastic bags.        

Tall Kalakh is a town of 70,000 people and known for smuggling, where most residents are armed. Witnesses who fled to Lebanon reported gun battles between the Syrian Army and armed residents.        

Syria has prevented most foreign media from entering the country and there was no way to independently confirm witnesses&rsquo; reports.        

The American sanctions came a day after Mr. Assad said that the unrest that has been roiling his country had come to an end. Protesters and opposition figures, however, dismissed the remarks, saying that protests would not end until they realize their demands.        

European nations imposed sanctions on Syria two weeks ago, and the European Union is pushing for another round of sanctions that would target Mr. Assad.        

The Syrian uprising that started in March was inspired by the Tunisian and Egyptian uprisings that toppled those countries&rsquo; leaders in just a few weeks.        

Mr. Assad became president in 2000, inheriting office from his father, Hafez, who ruled Syria for three decades with an iron fist. The uprising against his government poses the most serious challenge to his family&rsquo;s rule.        
