
S&Atilde;O PAULO, Brazil &mdash; In a decade working as a nanny, Andreia Soares finally clambered up the ladder into Brazil&rsquo;s middle class.        

With the money she saved, she bought a two-bedroom apartment with granite kitchen countertops and a small veranda, a house for her mother, a plot of land for her brother and a Louis Vuitton purse from Paris that she proudly pulls from a closet.        

Later this year, with her monthly salary of $3,100, which she earns caring for a 10-month-old girl in an upscale neighborhood, she plans to buy a $39,000 car &mdash; in cash.        

&ldquo;I have always had this dream of buying a house and a car,&rdquo; said Ms. Soares, 39. &ldquo;Today that dream is closer than ever for nannies.&rdquo;        

While she has done better than many of her counterparts, Ms. Soares is part of a nanny revolution that is shattering the colonial stereotype of inexpensive but dedicated domestic help in Latin America.        

As their expectations for a better quality of life rise, nannies are increasingly seeking to work for the very wealthy and becoming less affordable for many middle-class families. The shift is causing ripples of class tension, posing a nettlesome problem in a society in which more women are entering the work force without the sort of elaborate system of day care that exists in some industrialized nations.        

Fading fast are the days when white-frocked nannies worked for a menial salary, with only two days off every 15 days. Better-qualified nannies are refusing to work weekends and are demanding salaries that are two to four times what they were paid just five years ago. A growing number are refusing to sleep over or are leaving the field, choosing jobs that allow more time for a private life, according to parents, nannies and directors of nanny placement agencies.        

The income of domestic employees in Brazil, including nannies and maids, rose 34 percent from 2003 to 2009 &mdash; more than twice the average increase for all of Brazil&rsquo;s active workers &mdash; said Marcelo Neri, an economist at the Get&uacute;lio Vargas Foundation. At the same time, he said, the working hours of domestic employees fell by 5 percent to 36.2 hours a week.        

&ldquo;Today, what I need from a nanny job is different than before,&rdquo; said Ieda Barreto, 32. Seven years ago, she was making about $400 a month and had only 24 hours off every Thursday, making it tough to hold onto a boyfriend. Today she expects to make almost $1,900 working Monday to Friday, and she charges an additional $250 to work weekends.        

&ldquo;I am looking for quality of life,&rdquo; Ms. Barreto said. &ldquo;I value myself much more than I did before.&rdquo;        

The rising expectations reflect the growth of Brazil&rsquo;s middle class, which rose to nearly 55 percent of the population in 2010 from 37 percent in 2003, Dr. Neri said.        

Today, &ldquo;Brazil is becoming like the United States,&rdquo; where hourly paid housekeepers are more common than sleep-over nannies, said Jacqueline Szwarc, a psychologist who was picking up her children outside a private school in S&atilde;o Paulo. &ldquo;The salaries have gotten very high, and the search for domestic help has become very difficult.&rdquo;        

The supply of nannies has thinned as some have sought other work in the expanding job market, driving up salaries for those who stay in the field, economists, nannies and nanny agency directors said. Many remaining nannies are taking courses to become better qualified and to help them find work in wealthier homes, where they can charge much more.        

While some mothers embrace the changes as good for Brazil&rsquo;s development, many are up in arms. Once isolated, nannies now trade information about the market and working conditions through e-mail, blogs and social networks.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a mafia,&rdquo; said Ms. Szwarc, 44, adding that she has been lucky to hold onto the same nanny for 10 years.        

Six years ago, Evanice dos Santos, a former nanny turned blogger, had no Internet access and caught up with fellow nannies at a S&atilde;o Paulo athletic club where her employers were members. Now married, she has dedicated herself to helping nanny friends online &ldquo;find a better path&rdquo; toward more money and better hours.        
Myrna Domit contributed reporting.
