
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; Some of his fellow autocrats may be struggling &mdash; with Hosni Mubarak detained in Egypt and Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi hiding from NATO air bombardments in Libya &mdash; but Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, another of Africa&rsquo;s longest-serving leaders, declared in an interview published Friday that he intended to run for president this year at the age of 87, and live to be 100.        

&ldquo;The doctors say that I am O.K., and some are surprised by my bone structure,&rdquo; Mr. Mugabe told an editor from the state-controlled news media. &ldquo;They say they are the bones of someone who is 40. I suppose it&rsquo;s the exercise. I also take calcium every day.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s pronouncements about his good health and plans to stay in power beyond the three decades he has already governed Zimbabwe come at a time of rising concern within his own party, ZANU-PF, and among senior governing party officials in neighboring South Africa about what would happen if he died in office.        

His repeated trips to Singapore for medical care this year have led to feverish speculation about his health. He has admitted only to having cataract surgery there. In the interview printed Friday in the media he controls, he was not asked about the now common rumor that he has prostate cancer.        

&ldquo;My age says I am not yet old at 87,&rdquo; he insisted. &ldquo;My body is saying the counting does not end at 87 &mdash; at least you must get to 100.&rdquo;        

The subject of Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s mortality is suddenly no longer verboten. This week&rsquo;s issue of A.N.C. Today, the newsletter of South Africa&rsquo;s governing party, reported that South Africa&rsquo;s mediators in &ldquo;the Zimbabwean political debacle&rdquo; were worried about what would happen if Mr. Mugabe died or retired before the country voted on a new constitution and resolved the question of his succession.        

ZANU-PF officials privately confirm that Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s health is weakening and say there is already an ill-disguised power struggle over who will take over when he is gone. But they add that no one in his party is willing to openly call for him to step down. Analysts fear a military coup or violence within ZANU-PF in a fight over the spoils of power in a nation rich in diamonds, gold and platinum.        

&ldquo;There will be chaos,&rdquo; said a senior cabinet official who has been close to Mr. Mugabe for decades. &ldquo;Mugabe is the glue that holds ZANU-PF together. He rules by fear and by buying loyalty. Beyond him, there&rsquo;s no one who can wield such authority over patronage.&rdquo;        

Historians who have studied Mr. Mugabe &mdash; who has dominated what was once one of Africa&rsquo;s most promising countries and is now one of its poorest &mdash; say they believe he wants to stay in power until he breathes his last. Some of his closest allies agree.        

Mr. Mugabe is pushing hard for elections this year. Regional leaders pressured him into sharing power with his rival, Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai, who won more votes than him in the 2008 presidential election, but dropped out of a runoff because of state-sponsored attacks on thousands of his supporters.        

Asked if his party had found a &ldquo;suitable successor&rdquo; for him, Mr. Mugabe responded, &ldquo;Well, well, well,&rdquo; as though surprised anyone had the nerve to ask such a question.        

He replied that every election was a crisis, and that in a crisis the man his party turned to was him. &ldquo;The party needs me, and we should not create weak points, points of weakness within the party,&rdquo; he said.        

Senior ZANU-PF officials say party power brokers are debating the exact date of elections, which will probably be called for October or November. That is far too soon for Zimbabwe to put in place the safeguards to ensure that the next vote is not a repeat of the bloody, discredited 2008 elections that enabled Mr. Mugabe to cling to power, Mr. Tsvangirai said.        

&ldquo;The old man is the candidate,&rdquo; said the cabinet official close to Mr. Mugabe, speaking anonymously to discuss confidential ZANU-PF deliberations. &ldquo;He really wants to run the country, I suspect until death. The talk about a successor is not on the agenda.&rdquo;        

South Africa&rsquo;s president, Jacob Zuma, was supposed to attend a summit meeting of regional leaders in Namibia on Friday to discuss Zimbabwe&rsquo;s crisis, but he canceled at the last minute, claiming he needed to attend to local elections that were held Wednesday across South Africa.        
A Zimbabwean journalist contributed reporting.
