
TOKYO &mdash; Japan moved closer Friday to joining an international child-custody agreement that would give rights to non-Japanese parents involved in disputes with Japanese citizens.        

The Japanese cabinet said it approved a plan to submit legislation to Parliament by the end of the year to ratify the 1980 Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.        

&ldquo;It is desirable for our country to be consistent with international standards,&rdquo; Yukio Edano, the government&rsquo;s chief cabinet secretary, said at a news conference.        

The only Group of 7 nation that has yet to sign the convention, Japan has come under increasing criticism by the Unites States, Canada and several European nations for refusing to join the agreement. In most cases of child abduction involving a Japanese parent and a foreign parent, Japanese mothers married to foreigners have returned to Japan with their children, denying the fathers access to their children.        

The ambassadors of the United States and 11 other nations released a joint statement last year pressing Japan to join the agreement. &ldquo;Currently the left-behind parents of children abducted to or from Japan have little hope of having their children returned and encounter great difficulties in obtaining access to their children and exercising their parental rights and responsibilities,&rdquo; they said.        

In Japan, custody is usually given to the mother in the case of a divorce. Many fathers never see their children again, at least until adulthood, because the courts do not recognize joint custody.        

There is still strong resistance against joining the convention, and supporters are likely to face difficulty pushing the bill through a divided Parliament.        

The issue attracted attention when an American man from Tennessee, Christopher Savoie, was arrested in Japan after trying to take his two children to an American Consulate in 2009. His former wife, Noriko Savoie, had violated an American court custody decision by taking their children to Japan. The Hague convention requires children in such cases to be returned to their countries of usual residence.        

Last year, in a nearly unanimous vote, the House of Representatives passed a nonbinding resolution condemning Japan&rsquo;s &ldquo;abduction and wrongful retention&rdquo; of children. According to the House resolution, 136 children are in Japan against the wishes of an American parent.        
