
PESHAWAR, Pakistan &mdash; A bomb aimed at a two-car convoy carrying American consular officials to work exploded Friday morning, but no Americans were killed or seriously wounded, a United States Embassy spokesman said.        

The attack was the first against Americans since the Navy Seal raid on May 2 that killed Osama bin Laden in Abbottabad.        

In a phone call to The Associated Press, a spokesman for the Pakistani Taliban, Ahsanullah Ahsan, claimed responsibility for the attack.        

&ldquo;We say to the Americans and NATO that we will carry out more deadly attacks, and we can do it,&rdquo; Mr. Ahsan said.        

The initial report from the embassy said a suicide bomber on a motorcycle had detonated the device. But hours later, the embassy spokesman, Alberto Rodriguez, said it appeared that a motorcyclist had simply drawn up to one of the cars at the same time that a roadside device exploded.        

The Pakistani motorcyclist was killed, Mr. Rodriguez said.        

An American who lives three blocks from the site of the attack said the explosion was &ldquo;a big blast that shook the earth.&rdquo; It occurred about 8:30 a.m., when consulate employees regularly arrive at work from their homes in the University Town neighborhood, the American said.        

The Americans in the two armored vehicles said they saw the motorcyclist at the window of one of their cars and believed at first that he was a suicide bomber, Mr. Rodriguez said.        

A Pakistani government official said two Americans were slightly injured. They were riding in a vehicle that belonged to the Regional Security Office, the group responsible for security arrangements for American employees at the consulate.        

Peshawar, the provincial capital of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province, is considered a relatively high-risk area because it borders the tribal areas where the Pakistani Army has been fighting militants for more than two years.        

University Town, an area of large homes with high walls where foreigners and well-to-do Pakistanis live, is considered the most secure in Peshawar, a rambling city that has long served as a rear base for a variety of militants from the tribal areas.        

The American Consulate is a fortified compound about a 20-minute drive from University Town. Many of the Americans at the consulate work on development programs &mdash; construction of schools, police stations and roads &mdash; sponsored by the United States.        

The attack followed threats by militant groups and Al Qaeda to avenge Bin Laden&rsquo;s death.        

The police chief in Peshawar, Liaqat Khan, said there were &ldquo;intelligence reports of a suicide bomber in the area of University Town, so people were well-advised to take extreme care and caution.&rdquo; Security has been increased since the May 2 raid, Mr. Khan said.        

The last attack against an American in Peshawar was in 2008, when gunmen fired at the vehicle of the American consul general, Lynne Tracy, as she was traveling to work. She was not harmed.        

Consulate employees were placed under immediate &ldquo;lockdown&rdquo; after the attack on Friday, an American official said.        

16 Dead in Attack on Tanker        

LANDIKOTAL, Pakistan (Reuters) &mdash; At least 16 people were killed early Saturday when an explosion in northwest Pakistan hit a truck carrying fuel for NATO forces in Afghanistan, officials said.        

&ldquo;The tanker was on fire because of a blast late in the night,&rdquo; a senior local administration official said. &ldquo;There was another blast early in the morning in the same tanker, and 16 people who gathered near it to collect oil were killed.&rdquo;        

Police officials said the first explosion was caused by a bomb. Taliban insurgents often claim responsibility for such attacks.        
Ismail Khan reported from Peshawar, and Jane Perlez from Islamabad.
