
LONDON &mdash; Queen Elizabeth II wrapped up her groundbreaking four-day visit to the Irish Republic on Friday, a trip that ranked among the most politically freighted of her almost 60 years on the throne.        

While the queen has no formal political power, her visit &mdash; the first by a British monarch &mdash; offered powerful symbols of reconciliation and drew broad acclaim among Irish politicians. Her status both as head of state and as the most respected member of Britain&rsquo;s royal family was taken by her hosts as imparting a particular gravity to her words, sealing a closeness that has grown in recent years. Virtually every word and gesture &mdash; down to wearing Ireland&rsquo;s distinctive emerald green when she arrived &mdash; seemed to have been weighed in advance to avoid any impression of royal hauteur.        

&ldquo;Together we have much to celebrate,&rdquo; the queen said in a keynote address at a banquet in Dublin on Wednesday night, referring to &ldquo;the ties between our people, the shared values and the economic, business and cultural links that make us so much more than just neighbors, that make us firm friends and equal partners.&rdquo;        

It was at the official dinner that the queen spoke the words that have been taken as the central message of her trip. &ldquo;To all those who have suffered as a consequence of our troubled past, I extend my sincere thoughts and deep sympathy,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;With the benefit of historical hindsight, we can all see things which we would wish had been done differently or not at all.&rdquo;        

The words were accompanied by sights and sounds that went some way toward illustrating the poles of the relationship.        

For some Irish people the strains of the British anthem &ldquo;God Save the Queen&rdquo; wafting over their capital seemed to offer what might once have seemed an improbable refrain in a land that reviled the British monarchy for centuries. Ireland&rsquo;s bloody war of independence led to the establishment in 1922 of the Irish Free State on territory that excluded Northern Ireland, which was then riven by deep unrest for decades.        

Not everyone was prepared to accept the new order, and republicans staged limited protests. The start of the visit on Tuesday was marred by bomb scares, one of them involving a pipe bomb found in a tote bag aboard a bus heading for Dublin.        

But if the sound of the British anthem signaled reconciliation, then the sight of empty streets cordoned off by about 8,000 police officers showed just how much Irish leaders were aware of the passions, bred of centuries, that the queen&rsquo;s visit could ignite.        

Only on the final afternoon of the visit did the police relax the tight security arrangements, allowing thousands of people in the southern city of Cork to throng the streets as the monarch, breaking with her schedule, walked to greet them.        

The queen has paid frequent visits to Northern Ireland, and it is there that the contest of republicanism and unionism has played out most graphically in recent years. Whatever the relationship between London and Dublin, the enduring question of Irish reunification &mdash; not directly addressed by the queen &mdash; still looms over the political life of the north.        

In a series of public comments, Gerry Adams, the president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, said normalization between Britain and Ireland would not be complete until the island was reunified.        

While Mr. Adams praised the queen&rsquo;s expression of sympathy as &ldquo;sincere,&rdquo; he told BBC radio on Friday that the visit had been &ldquo;a page in a book &mdash; and we need to write the next page and the next page and keep the process moving on.&rdquo;        

In an article in The Guardian on Thursday, Mr. Adams said, &ldquo;The complete normalization of the relationships within Ireland and between Ireland and Britain can only be fully achieved by ending partition and reuniting our people and the country.&rdquo;        

In various guises, Mr. Adams spent decades at the heart of the republican movement in Northern Ireland and was one of the main figures in the 1998 Good Friday agreement that laid the groundwork for peace between the mainly Catholic republicans, who seek a united Ireland, and the mainly Protestant unionists, who stand for union with Britain.        
