
President Ali Abdullah Saleh of Yemen called for early presidential elections during a speech on Friday before tens of thousands of supporters in the capital, the state news agency reported, as negotiations to usher him out of office dragged into a second month.        

Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s renewed his call for a vote before his term ends in 2013 just days after he again balked at signing a deal to leave office early. After months of protests demanding that he step down, he said he objected to the most recent proposal, brokered by the six-nation Gulf Cooperation Council, because it demanded signatures of opposition figures.        

Since mid-April, Mr. Saleh and opposition groups have haggled over details of the council&rsquo;s plan, which calls for Mr. Saleh to end his 33-year rule in exchange for immunity from prosecution for himself and his family. An official of the governing party held open the possibility that Mr. Saleh might sign the deal over the weekend, Reuters reported on Thursday.        

But in his address on Friday to throngs of supporters in Sana waving Yemeni flags, Mr. Saleh appeared to back away from any promise of an imminent departure.        

&ldquo;We call for an early presidential election to prevent bloodshed, to protect our family dignity and for a smooth democratic path,&rdquo; he said, according to Reuters.        

Nearby, tens of thousands protested after noon prayers.        

Yemen, like much of the Arab world, has been rocked by popular uprisings calling for democracy, rule of law and an end to corruption. Mr. Saleh, who has clung to power in the face of the large protests and diminishing domestic and international support, had called for elections to be held at the end of the year, but later backed away from that timetable. He did not propose dates for elections during Friday&rsquo;s speech.        

&ldquo;We will remain steadfast,&rdquo; he told his supporters, The Associated Press reported. &ldquo;We have been steadfast for four months in the face of a coup movement and treason.&rdquo;        

Before the wave of protests undermined his government, Mr. Saleh was a crucial ally of the United States in fighting terrorist groups in Yemen. But United States support for his leadership waned as Mr. Saleh used lethal force while resisting protesters&rsquo; demands that he step aside. More than 130 protesters have died since the uprising began, according to Amnesty International.        

President Obama addressed the political stalemate in Yemen in his Middle East speech on Thursday, saying, &ldquo;President Saleh needs to follow through on his commitment to transfer power.&rdquo;        
