
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The revolutions and revolts in the Arab world, playing out over just a few months across two continents, have proved so inspirational to so many because they offer a new sense of national identity built on the idea of citizenship.        

But in the past weeks, the specter of divisions &mdash; religion in Egypt, fundamentalism in Tunisia, sect in Syria and Bahrain, clan in Libya &mdash; has threatened uprisings that once seemed to promise to resolve questions that have vexed the Arab world since the colonialism era.        

From the fetid alleys of Imbaba, the Cairo neighborhood where Muslims and Christians have fought street battles, to the Syrian countryside, where a particularly deadly crackdown has raised fears of sectarian score-settling, the question of identity may help determine whether the Arab Spring flowers or withers. Can the revolts forge alternative ways to cope with the Arab world&rsquo;s variety of clans, sects, ethnicities and religions?        

The old examples have been largely of failure: the rule of strongmen in Egypt, Syria, Libya and Yemen; a fragile equilibrium of fractious communities in Lebanon and Iraq; the repressive paternalism of the Persian Gulf, where oil revenues are used to buy loyalty.        

&ldquo;I think the revolutions in a way, in a distant way, are hoping to retrieve&rdquo; this sense of national identity, said Sadiq al-Azm, a prominent Syrian intellectual living in Beirut.        

&ldquo;The costs otherwise would be disintegration, strife and civil war,&rdquo; Mr. Azm said. &ldquo;And this was very clear in Iraq.&rdquo;        

In an arc of revolts and revolution, that idea of a broader citizenship is being tested as the enforced silence of repression gives way to the cacophony of diversity. Security and stability were the justification that strongmen in the Arab world offered for repression, often with the sanction of the United States; the essence of the protests in the Arab Spring is that people can imagine an alternative.        

But even activists admit that the region so far has no model that enshrines diversity and tolerance without breaking down along more divisive identities.        

In Tunisia, a relatively homogenous country with a well-educated population, fault lines have emerged between the secular-minded coasts and the more religious and traditional inland.        

The tensions shook the nascent revolution there this month when a former interim interior minister, Farhat Rajhi, suggested in an online interview that the coastal elite, long dominant in the government, would never accept an electoral victory by Tunisia&rsquo;s Islamist party, Ennahda, which draws most of its support inland.        

&ldquo;Politics was in the hands of the people of the coast since the start of Tunisia,&rdquo; Mr. Rajhi said. &ldquo;If the situation is reversed now, they are not ready to give up ruling.&rdquo; He warned that Tunisian officials from the old government were preparing a military coup if the Islamists won elections in July. &ldquo;If Ennahda rules, there will be a military regime.&rdquo;        

In response, protesters poured back out into the streets of Tunis for four days of demonstrations calling for a new revolution. The police beat them back with batons and tear gas, arrested more than 200 protesters and imposed a curfew on the city.        

In Cairo, the sense of national identity that surged at the moment of revolution &mdash; when hundreds of thousands of people of all faiths celebrated in Tahrir Square with chants of &ldquo;Hold your head high, you are an Egyptian&rdquo;&mdash; has given way to a week of religious violence pitting the Coptic Christian minority against their Muslim neighbors, reflecting long-smoldering tensions that an authoritarian state may have muted, or let fester.        

At a rally this month in Tahrir Square to call for unity, Coptic Christians were conspicuously absent, thousands of them gathering nearby for a rally of their own. And even among some Muslims at the unity rally, suspicions were pronounced.        

&ldquo;As Muslims, our sheiks are always telling us to be good to Christians, but we don&rsquo;t think that is happening on the other side,&rdquo; said Ibrahim Sakr, 56, a chemistry professor, who asserted that Copts, who make up about 10 percent of the population, still consider themselves &ldquo;the original&rdquo; Egyptians because their presence predates Islam.        

Anthony Shadid reported from Beirut, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Cairo. Heba Afify contributed reporting from Cairo, and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria.
