
MEXICO CITY &mdash; The former president of Honduras, Manuel Zelaya, who was ousted and expelled in a 2009 coup, signed an agreement with the current president on Sunday that clears the way for him to return home after two years in exile, Honduran officials said.        

The accord also clears the last obstacle to Honduras&rsquo;s return to the Organization of American States. The country was expelled from the regional group after Mr. Zelaya was removed from power by an alliance of military officers and civilian politicians from both Mr. Zelaya&rsquo;s party and the main opposition.        

Mr. Zelaya and the current president, Porfirio Lobo, traveled to Cartagena, Colombia, to sign the accord, which was mediated by the Venezuelan and Colombian governments. The agreement guarantees the safe return of Mr. Zelaya and his supporters, and it recognizes their right to return to politics.        

The Honduran government also promises to allow the political movement that sprung up to support Mr. Zelaya to register as a political party.        

President Juan Manuel Santos of Colombia, who witnessed the accord&rsquo;s signing, said that he expected the O.A.S. to move Monday to readmit Honduras. &ldquo;And hopefully it&rsquo;s done without a single vote against so that Zelaya can enter Honduras as he deserves, through the main gate,&rdquo; he added.        

In the months after soldiers stormed into Mr. Zelaya&rsquo;s house, arrested him and put him on a plane to Costa Rica, Honduras was treated as a pariah state.        

When Mr. Lobo won regularly scheduled elections in November 2009, though, the United States began to press the rest of the hemisphere to recognize the new government and end its isolation.        

The key sticking point has been Mr. Zelaya&rsquo;s return to Honduras, where a series of corruption investigations had meant that he would be arrested on arrival. The courts dropped those investigations, and under the accord, the Lobo government promised not to appeal.        

Mr. Zelaya&rsquo;s supporters have said he would return by Saturday.        
