
CAIRO &mdash; A Cairo court sentenced a rank-and-file police officer to death after trying him in absentia for the killings of unarmed protesters during the Egyptian revolution, the harshest sentence given to date as the military-led interim government grapples with calls for retribution against members of the former government.        

The sentence, which Interior Ministry officials said was given to an officer named Mohamed Ibrahim Abdel Monem, is not final and reflects in part his failure to appear at trial. If he is found or appears, he will have the right to appeal and will probably receive a new trial, where he can present evidence in his own behalf.        

But the sentence is the latest indication that Egyptian courts are willing to deal severely with former officers and officials of the government of Hosni Mubarak, the ousted president.        

As many as 100 police officers have been detained on allegations of having shot protesters during the revolution, and dozens of senior Mubarak government officials are in custody awaiting hearings on charges of stealing public money, including the former president and his two sons.        

Habib el-Adly, a reviled former interior minister, has already been sentenced to 12 years in prison for corruption and awaits trial for ordering the killing of civilians. Many protesters have called for the execution of Mr. Adly, who oversaw the police, and some Egyptians have displayed nooses in the back of their cars to indicate the sentence they hope he receives.        

About 800 people are believed to have died during the revolution, Egyptian officials have said. Officer Abdel Monem was convicted of killing 23 and injuring 15 by firing live bullets into a crowd on Jan. 28, known here as the Day of Rage. Tens of thousands of unarmed protesters surging toward Tahrir Square ultimately overwhelmed the police and began the sit-in that brought down Mr. Mubarak.        

Under Egyptian law, Mr. Abdel Monem&rsquo;s sentence must still go to the mufti for religious approval, but that is usually a formality.        

The interim government has faced public protest since corruption investigators released Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s wife, Suzanne, from detention last week. She was still to be tried, but she signed over to the government millions of dollars in questionable assets.        

Another outcry arose over the arrests of dozens of others at a demonstration last week outside the Israeli Embassy. In response, human rights lawyers said, the interim government began releasing, on suspended sentences, hundreds of protesters arrested since the revolution.        

Although public calls for retribution against members of the security forces continue, some people worry that police officers have become timid in enforcing the law since the detention of officers accused of using force under the orders, or the expectations, of the old government. One result, these people say, is the wave of crime and disorder that Egypt is now experiencing.        
