
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; Catherine Ashton, the European Union&lsquo;s foreign policy chief, visited Benghazi on Sunday, providing support and a burst of confidence to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&lsquo;s opponents, who said the high-profile trip was evidence of growing international recognition for their cause.        

That Ms. Ashton, who traveled to the rebel stronghold to officially open a European Union diplomatic office, was not able to provide any sort of formal recognition for the rebels&rsquo; governing body, the Transitional National Council, did not seem to bother the rebels. Recognition, she pointed out, was up to the 27 countries in the union, but she said that Europe recognized the council as an &ldquo;interlocutor.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;These are the people with whom we have a strong dialogue,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s for the people of Libya to determine the future of the country.&rdquo;        

On Monday, Jeffrey D. Feltman, the American assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern Affairs, started a two-day visit to Benghazi, where he will meet with members of the Transitional National Council, the rebel&rsquo;s governing body and its leader, Mustapha Abdul Jalil. The trip represented the highest level visit by an Obama administration official to the rebel&rsquo;s de facto capital and by its timing signaled a growing international effort to bolster the rebels diplomatically as they struggle against Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces on the battlefield.        

The rebels have pressed the United States for financial aid and weapons. The Obama administration has not recognized the rebel council, but has sent an envoy to Benghazi.        

Meanwhile, NATO warplanes attacked another Libyan warship early Sunday as part of a series of overnight airstrikes that also bombed two tanks in western Libya and an administrative barracks that military officials said was being used as a command-and-control site to direct fire against Libyan civilians.        

The ship bombing, against a Libyan missile patrol boat in Surt harbor, came two days after allied warplanes struck eight Libyan naval combatant vessels in three ports, including Surt, that allied commanders said were threatening humanitarian relief efforts as well as NATO ships enforcing a maritime embargo against the Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government.        

In the past three weeks, Libyan vessels had mined the harbor in the contested port city of Misurata, and twice sent out small inflatable boats packed with high explosives in apparent efforts to attack allied warships.        

Stormy weather over the southern Mediterranean Sea and Libyan coast hampered the air campaign late Saturday and early Sunday, forcing NATO to cancel some strikes on predetermined targets and hampering pilots&rsquo; ability to confirm that other suspected targets were Libyan military equipment or weaponry.        

The rebels, desperate for foreign recognition and the financial aid that they hope accompanies it, have been recognized by a few countries, including France, Italy, Qatar, Gambia and the Maldives. The United States and Britain, while not offering recognition, have sent envoys to Benghazi.        

Seeking a longer list of allies, the rebels have worked to assuage misgivings about their movement: on Saturday, for example, they detailed for reporters the efforts they were making to train rebel fighters to treat prisoners of war humanely.        

And though it remains unclear who will lead Libya if Colonel Qaddafi leaves power, the rebel leaders have promised rewards for wavering allies. Mustapha Abdul Jalil, who heads the rebel council, said that friendly countries &ldquo;would have the best opportunity in future contracts,&rdquo; The Associated Press reported.        

&ldquo;The United States and the European Union should know that we&rsquo;re righteous people,&rdquo; Mr. Jalil said. &ldquo;We are fighting for a better future, and they will not regret helping us.&rdquo;        

Speaking at a packed news conference at the Tibesti Hotel in Benghazi, where the European Union office was being set up, Ms. Ashton praised the rebels and said the new office represented the commitment and support of the union&rsquo;s member states.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re here for the long term,&rdquo; said Ms. Ashton, who had come under criticism this year for what was seen as her slow embrace of Arab revolutionaries in Egypt and Tunisia. &ldquo;Qaddafi must leave, and we must have a future for Libya that belongs to the people of Libya.&rdquo;        

Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Trapani, Italy.        

More in Africa (6 of 44 articles)        

In Belated Inauguration, Ivory Coast&rsquo;s President Urges Unity        

Read More &raquo;        

Close        
Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Trapani, Italy.
