
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Insurgents wearing police uniforms and vests laced with explosives stormed a police compound in eastern Afghanistan early Sunday morning, engaging in a firefight that lasted several hours before Afghan and NATO forces regained control of the complex, government officials said.        

Three police officers and two Afghan National Army soldiers were killed in the attack, which occurred about dawn. A civilian who was walking by the compound was also wounded and died at a hospital, officials said.        

The attack occurred in Khost, a volatile province bordering the tribal areas of Pakistan that have served as a haven for militants crossing into Afghanistan. It followed a pattern of assaults this spring in which insurgents wearing Afghan military or police uniforms have struck fortified government compounds. On Saturday, a suicide bomber who was believed to be wearing an army uniform blew himself up in a tent on the grounds of the national military hospital in Kabul, the capital, killing 6 people who were training to be medics and wounding more than 20 others.        

The attack on Sunday, about a mile east of the city of Khost, the provincial capital, began when a group of men in Afghan Border Police uniforms rushed out of a station wagon and toward a traffic police building, killing the guard at the gate, said Abdul Jabar Naeemi, the governor of Khost Province.        

There were conflicting accounts about the number of attackers. The governor said there were three, but a police officer who witnessed the assault just as he was coming on duty said he saw four men rush the building.        

&ldquo;They were in A.B.P. uniforms,&rdquo; said the officer, who was not authorized to speak publicly. &ldquo;I thought, &lsquo;What do they want this early in the morning at the traffic police department?&rsquo; Then they shot the guard.&rdquo;        

The militants killed two more police officers as they ran into the two-story compound and began firing from the top floor at a police base that housed a detachment of quick-reaction forces, said Mohammed Yaqoob Noorzia, the deputy provincial police chief. The men wore vests laden with explosives and were armed with rocket-propelled grenades and AK-47s, he said.        

Afghan and NATO security forces surrounded the compound, and the firefight began. Two soldiers were killed trying to enter the building, which caught fire, Governor Naeemi said. The shooting finally stopped about 2:30 p.m. after one of the suicide bombers detonated his vest and the other two were shot to death, Mr. Naeemi said.        

The recent attacks have raised concerns about Taliban infiltration of Afghan national security forces, but they have also underscored the ease with which militants, posing as soldiers or police officers, can blend in and bypass security checkpoints.        

Government officials were still investigating the attack on Saturday on the heavily guarded national military hospital in Kabul. Gen. Zahir Azimi, a spokesman for the Defense Ministry, said investigators had not confirmed that the attacker was wearing an army uniform. But a military doctor at the hospital who was among the first on the scene said that remains of the person believed to be the bomber &mdash; only the legs were left &mdash; were clothed in an army uniform.        

Attacks by militants wearing government uniforms have continued despite efforts to crack down on the illegal sales of such clothing. The Taliban also claim to have recruited young people to join the security forces and carry out attacks. The Afghan defense forces, aided by NATO trainers, have stepped up recruitment screening and counterintelligence efforts to find such infiltrators.        

Meanwhile, two women were killed and five other people were wounded in Zabul Province in southeastern Afghanistan on Sunday when their vehicle hit a roadside mine, officials said.        
An employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Khost, Afghanistan.
