
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; The Sudanese Army invaded the flashpoint town of Abyei over the weekend, alarming Western and United Nations diplomats who warned Sunday that it was a provocative act that risked all-out war with the southern Sudanese.        

The unresolved status of Abyei, the center of an ethnically mixed, oil-producing area of the same name that straddles northern and southern Sudan and is claimed by both sides, has been the thorniest issue confronting Sudan as it prepares to break into two in July. The southern Sudanese have fought for independence for decades, and in January, nearly 99 percent of the region&rsquo;s voters approved a split from northern Sudan in an internationally backed referendum.        

After an air campaign on Friday, the north&rsquo;s ground forces staged a full-scale invasion of Abyei on Saturday night, with artillery, dozens of tanks and thousands of soldiers sweeping in from several directions.        

Four shells struck a United Nations compound there, and southern Sudan called the invasion &ldquo;a declaration of war.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We will respond in self-defense,&rdquo; said Barnaba Marial Benjamin, the information minister for the south&rsquo;s semiautonomous government.        

The Sudanese government said the invasion was a response to recent attacks by southern forces in Abyei that have killed dozens of northern soldiers.        

The assault seemed well planned, with northern aircraft preparing the way by bombing, but missing, a strategic bridge leading into Abyei the day before. The bridge&rsquo;s destruction could have crippled the southern army&rsquo;s ability to send reinforcements.        

On Saturday, northern commanders unleashed a flurry of artillery. Two Egyptian peacekeepers were wounded when the shells hit the United Nations compound, an agency official said. The shelling pinned down the peacekeepers at their base and rendered them ineffective.        

Dozens of civilians have been hurt, aid workers said, but it was unclear whether anyone had been killed.        

Tens of thousands of Abyei residents fled in an exodus that began Friday night when news filtered in that northern forces were approaching. It accelerated after the tanks rolled in on Saturday, according to residents reached by phone on Sunday.        

Many of the them stayed on the run through miles of arid thorn bush until they reached the town of Agok early Sunday morning. Agok is within the Abyei region but south of the main town.        

The Sudanese Army claimed control of the town of Abyei late Saturday night, but sporadic gunfire was heard throughout the night. On Sunday, a tribal militia aligned with the north went on a rampage of looting and burning of huts, a witness said; the Sudanese Army did nothing to stop them.        

As of Sunday evening, sporadic machine-gun fire could still be heard.        

&ldquo;If not de-escalated, this could be the shot heard round Sudan,&rdquo; said John Prendergast, co-founder of the Enough Project, an anti-genocide organization that helped set up a satellite monitoring program that showed a steady military build-up by both sides over the past few weeks around Abyei. &ldquo;On July 9, the Republic of South Sudan could be born in a state of war.&rdquo;        

Diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis faltered on Sunday. Delegates from the United Nations Security Council were in Khartoum, Sudan&rsquo;s capital, on Sunday on a planned trip to the region to discuss north-south issues, including Abyei. But a Western official in Khartoum said a Sudanese vice president who had been scheduled to meet with the delegates stood them up, signaling that northern Sudan had nothing more to say on the matter.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a sense this could quickly escalate,&rdquo; said the Western official, who works closely on north-south issues in Sudan and is not authorized to speak publicly. &ldquo;This is the danger in the countdown to independence. Khartoum is doing everything it can to sabotage the prospects of peaceful independence, and the south can retaliate by stirring up Darfur&rdquo; and other parts of Sudan, especially along the contested border.        

But Western diplomats have also been clear that this is a two-sided conflict, and southern forces in Abyei may have provoked the northern assault. Twice this month, most recently on Thursday, southern forces have ambushed northern troops in Abyei, killing dozens.        

Under an American-backed peace agreement struck in 2005, Abyei is supposed to be administered by a committee of northern and southern Sudanese, with security provided by so-called Joint Integrated Units, groups of soldiers from both sides. According to Western diplomats, the northern troops who were attacked were part of the Joint Integrated Units and were following all proper protocols when the southern forces struck.        

The handful of southern soldiers who were part of the joint force appear to have fled the town in the face of the north&rsquo;s overwhelming military advantage.        

Northern Sudanese officials accused the south of having violated the agreement by attacking their forces, and insisted they were within their rights to defend Abyei.        

Jeffrey Gettleman reported from Nairobi, and Josh Kron from Kampala, Uganda.
