
SHINKAY, Afghanistan &mdash; Zabul Province, one of Afghanistan&rsquo;s poorest, is mainly known for being a transit route for Taliban insurgents and NATO supply convoys.        

But recently Zabul, in southeastern Afghanistan, has become important for another, better reason: as a small but overlooked corner of the Afghan war that offers a glimpse of what a stable future might look like as Afghans take over their own security and administration by 2014.        

Afghan Army battalions have deployed in the districts of Zabul, and are the first in the country to operate independently. They are emerging as a real authority acceptable to local people and as an alternative to both the Taliban and international forces, which are still received ambivalently. Increasingly, they are handling security, relations with the people and even dispute resolution.        

In Zabul, at least, there has never really been any permanent authority beyond the provincial capital, Qalat: Taliban, government officials and Americans would come and go. But Afghan forces have steadily established themselves.        

The success of the Afghan Army in getting out among the people has shifted the security environment. As people have warmed to the Afghan forces, the Taliban found themselves less welcome and moved away.        

&ldquo;I think we are having one of those eureka moments,&rdquo; said Lt. Col. Andy Veres, the Air Force officer who commands the Provincial Reconstruction Team in Zabul, now on his second tour in the province. In the Afghan military, he said, &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a growing sense of, &lsquo;Yeah, we can do this.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

Zabul has started to work because of a convergence of good leadership and years of combined experience of the Afghan and American partners, both civilian and military. This exists elsewhere, but is not easily replicated in each of Afghanistan&rsquo;s 34 provinces.        

In interviews conducted away from Afghan or foreign troops, residents of Zabul generally approved of the Afghan National Army, a multiethnic force that has been built up from scratch since 2002.        

Yet they showed a lingering fear of criticizing the Taliban and complained openly about government officials and the police.        

&ldquo;Our government is very corrupt, but the A.N.A. still has a clean and trustworthy face,&rdquo; one Zabul elder, Hajji Sayed Agha, said.        

Such sentiment points to both the progress here and the myriad challenges that still face coalition forces across the country as they try to train Afghan police and army forces to eventually take over security.        

The Afghan National Army is set to reach over 300,000 by the end of this year, but its quality and leadership vary. The Afghan National Police and the Afghan Border Police are way behind, plagued with corruption and unruliness.        

In larger, more volatile provinces, where more is at stake and where the insurgency is more concentrated and intense, responsibility for security remains overwhelmingly in NATO hands, even as the American commander in Afghanistan, Gen. David H. Petraeus, uses Afghan soldiers, police officers and local village militias to solidify security gains.        

In that light the progress in Zabul may seem slight. But because it is Afghan-led, the achievements here look more sustainable than what has been done by larger, more aggressive operations in the southern provinces of Kandahar and Helmand, where progress has depended on tens of thousands of American troops, some scheduled to begin leaving this summer.        

In Zabul, the presence of coalition forces &mdash; consisting of American and Romanian troops &mdash; is confined to small teams of Special Forces soldiers, civil affairs officers, engineers and military mentors. They maintain a base in Qalat, mostly to ensure security along the main national artery, the Kabul-Kandahar highway.        

Beyond that, two Afghan Army battalions are responsible for security, with Afghan commandos taking the place of American Special Forces soldiers in one area to provide extra muscle.        

Col. Gadda Muhammad Dost, 43, has been the Afghan battalion commander in this district, Shinkay, for two years. A Tajik from Kabul, he has learned Pashto, the language spoken in Zabul Province, and has worked hard to counter what he calls the &ldquo;black propaganda&rdquo; of the insurgents.        

Muhib Habibi contributed reporting from Zabul Province, Afghanistan, and Ruhullah Khapalwak from Kabul, Afghanistan.
