
WASHINGTON &mdash; Yemen&rsquo;s political stalemate flared into violence on Monday when forces loyal to President Ali Abdullah Saleh fought opposition tribesmen for six hours in the heart of Sana, the capital, with guns, tanks and rocket-propelled grenades.        

The battle, coming a day after the collapse of the latest round of negotiations aimed at ushering Mr. Saleh from power, was the deadliest clash between the government and its armed political rivals since the start of street protests in January. Although there have been violent crackdowns on peaceful demonstrators in recent months that left dozens dead, Monday&rsquo;s clash &mdash; in which only a few people appear to have been killed &mdash; raised the prospect of a broad factional conflict in which both sides are heavily armed.        

Mr. Saleh has resisted intense international pressure to step down, and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton issued a stinging rebuke late Sunday, saying the United States was &ldquo;deeply disappointed&rdquo; by his continued refusal to sign an agreement under which he would leave office in 30 days in exchange for immunity from prosecution.        

She also said the United States was &ldquo;outraged&rdquo; by the events on Sunday, when hundreds of armed Saleh loyalists trapped the United States ambassador and other diplomats for hours as they waited in vain for Mr. Saleh to sign the agreement at the United Arab Emirates Embassy in Sana.        

The six-nation Gulf Cooperation Council, which has been mediating the negotiations, suspended its efforts indefinitely after Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s latest maneuver, and its secretary general left Yemen.        

The violence on Monday broke out near the home of Sadeq al-Ahmar, the titular leader of Yemen&rsquo;s most powerful tribal confederation, whose family supports the opposition. There are also a number of government buildings in the neighborhood, which is known as Hasaba.        

It was unclear how the fighting started between Mr. Ahmar&rsquo;s tribesmen and the government security forces, but both sides want control of a local school that occupies a strategic location, witnesses and Yemeni officials said.        

Scattered gunfire near the school erupted into a street battle as the two sides also fought for control of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, the Saba News building and the headquarters of the national airline, Yemenia, which was soon in flames.        

Several dozen journalists were trapped inside the Saba News building, witnesses said. By day&rsquo;s end a mediation session was under way, and the journalists escaped.        

Some Yemenis considered the violence to be a deliberate and cynical political ploy on the part of the government. &ldquo;Saleh wants to say, &lsquo;See &mdash; this is not a peaceful revolution,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said one Yemeni official, speaking on the condition of anonymity.        

But tensions have grown so bad that fighting could break out even without government provocation.        

The fighters on Monday were tribesmen, but the opposition also includes forces loyal to Yemen&rsquo;s highest-ranking officer, Gen. Ali Muhsin al-Ahmar, who defected along with other senior military figures in March. (General Ahmar is not a member of Sadeq al-Ahmar&rsquo;s family.)        

The street protesters who began the Yemeni uprising in January are increasingly caught between Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s followers and the official opposition coalition. Although there is significant overlap between the formal opposition and the protesters who are camped out in parts of Sana and other major cities, the protesters have opposed the terms of the agreement that would allow Mr. Saleh to step down with immunity. They say he should be prosecuted for the killings of demonstrators and for longstanding accusations of corruption.        

The protesters also have insisted that their movement is a nonviolent one. But as tensions grow between Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s supporters and the tribesmen allied with the political opposition, the prospects of a nonviolent transfer of power grow dimmer.        

&ldquo;We are very upset about what happened today,&rdquo; Khaled Alansi, a leader of the street protests, said in a phone interview from Sana. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want conflict between the military and the tribes, and we fear this scenario could happen again soon.&rdquo;        

The United States, which has cooperated extensively with Yemen on counterterrorism operations in recent years, has grown increasingly concerned about rising levels of jihadist activity in outlying provinces that have slipped out of the government&rsquo;s control. Yemen is home to an active branch of Al Qaeda that has aimed attacks at the United States, including the December 2009 attempt to blow up a Detroit-bound jetliner and the plot last year to send explosive-laden packages by courier to Chicago.        

One leading member of the opposition, Muhammad al-Mutawakkil, said the movement was trying to organize a separate government that would unite several provinces that are outside government control.        

The United States Embassy, meanwhile, said it was closing its consular section for at least two days because of the violence.        
