
LONDON &mdash; Resisting pressure from a senior minister and some of his own backbenchers, the Irish prime minister, Brian Cowen, said  Sunday that he would not resign as leader of the governing Fianna Fail party. Instead, he called a secret ballot of the party&rsquo;s parliamentary bloc on Tuesday to decide the issue.        

But dissatisfied with that decision, Foreign Minister Micheal Martin announced that he would challenge Mr. Cowen for the position. Mr. Martin, who said he had resigned from the cabinet, said he had &ldquo;reluctantly concluded&rdquo; that Mr. Cowen would have to be forced from office since he refused to go voluntarily.        

In the weeks since Ireland agreed to a harsh austerity program as a condition for a $113 billion international bailout of its debt-burdened economy in December, Fianna Fail&rsquo;s support in opinion polls has collapsed, to around 15 percent in recent surveys.        

Support for Mr. Cowen in the polls has fallen even lower, to 10 percent or less. So the issue has become less whether Mr. Cowen will step aside, but rather when &mdash; in particular, whether he should lead the party into a general election expected in the spring and resign if it loses, or quit sooner and make way for a new leader before the vote.        

At a news conference in Dublin on Sunday, Mr. Cowen, 50, said that in the national interest he had decided to call a vote of Fianna Fail legislators after consulting with party colleagues. &ldquo;My total focus must remain with discharging my duties to the people,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;For Fianna Fail, the party is important but the interests of the country are paramount.&rdquo;        

He said that he was not motivated by personal ambition, and that there was &ldquo;not an ounce of difficulty&rdquo; between him and his colleagues in Parliament over the issue. He also spoke of his plans to lead Fianna Fail, the dominant party in Irish politics through most of the republic&rsquo;s history, into the election, and to win a record seventh straight victory for the party.        

Mr. Cowen has been prime minister since 2008, after serving previously as finance minister. Pressure for him to quit has mounted recently in the wake of revelations about a meeting he held with Sean Fitzpatrick, one of Ireland&rsquo;s top bankers, at a golf course outside Dublin a few weeks after becoming prime minister. Mr. Fitzpatrick was then chairman of Anglo-Irish Bank, which had been rocked by a sharp downturn in the property market.        

Later that year, Anglo-Irish was one of three Irish banks rescued by the Cowen government&rsquo;s decision to guarantee the liabilities of Irish banks. The decision led to a $40 billion taxpayer bailout of Anglo-Irish and, indirectly, to the financial crisis that made the bailout in December necessary.        

Mr. Cowen has said that the meeting was solely for a golf game and that the difficulties of Anglo-Irish were not discussed, although the get-together was also attended by another director of Anglo-Irish and a director of Ireland&rsquo;s central bank. Opposition members of the Irish Parliament have demanded Mr. Cowen&rsquo;s resignation over the affair, and some lawmakers in Mr. Cowen&rsquo;s own party have called on him to resign and hand over his post to Mr. Martin, the foreign  minister.        

But Mr. Cowen&rsquo;s closest ally in the government, Deputy Prime Minister Mary Coughlan, who is also a potential contender for the Fianna Fail leadership, has said that the golf course encounter was called to discuss donations to the party, not the banking crisis, and she has supported Mr. Cowen&rsquo;s continuing leadership.        
