
SANTIAGO, Chile &mdash; Isabel Allende long ago accepted that her father, former President Salvador Allende, took his own life with an assault rifle just minutes before troops stormed the presidential palace in a coup on Sept. 11, 1973.        

Even as leftist supporters like Fidel Castro declared that Mr. Allende had died in a gun battle, his suicide became a source of pride, rather than shame, for the surviving family members, she said.        

&ldquo;It was an extremely courageous act for someone who loved life as he did,&rdquo; Ms. Allende said.        

But doubts have lingered, and while witnesses from that day have long supported the suicide conclusion, after nearly 38 years Mr. Allende&rsquo;s death remains, for some, Chile&rsquo;s greatest unsolved mystery.        

Early Monday, at the behest of the Allende family and a judge investigating 726 unresolved human rights cases related to Chile&rsquo;s 17-year dictatorship, Mr. Allende&rsquo;s remains were exhumed. Forensic experts will perform a second autopsy to try to determine once and for all how the Socialist leader died.        

For Ms. Allende, 66, it will be yet another traumatic event in a life filled with tragedy. Since her father&rsquo;s death, three close family members have taken their own lives, she said: a sister, an aunt and, last December, her only son.        

Despite worldwide affection for the former president, the weight of being descendants of Salvador Allende &ldquo;has taken a toll on the family,&rdquo; Ms. Allende said.        

While grief-stricken, Ms. Allende, a Chilean senator, has publicly supported the latest investigation as a way to bring &ldquo;judicial certainty&rdquo; to her father&rsquo;s death. Ultimately, &ldquo;we believe it will confirm what we have long believed,&rdquo; she said.        

On Monday, Ms. Allende stood with other family members at the General Cemetery in Santiago as medical examiners removed the metallic gray coffin, adorned with a Chilean flag, from the towering white stone mausoleum where Mr. Allende&rsquo;s remains have been since 1990. From there it was driven, with family members trailing in the early morning light, a half-block to a laboratory where a team of Chilean and international forensic experts and anthropologists will conduct a C.S.I.-type analysis of the remains.        

On the day of the coup, Mr. Allende addressed the nation three times on a loyal radio station before it was bombed, vowing in his last speech: &ldquo;Placed at a historical crossroads, I will pay with my life for the loyalty of the people.&rdquo;        

A few hours later, after forces loyal to Gen. Augusto Pinochet bombarded the palace and the military began entering the first floor, Mr. Allende asked his staff members to surrender.        

The last man to descend the stairs, Dr. Patricio Guij&oacute;n, one of the president&rsquo;s doctors, turned back to get a gas mask. At that instant, he later recounted, he saw Mr. Allende fall back on a couch. When the doctor came closer, he said, he saw Mr. Allende&rsquo;s head thrown back from an apparent gunshot from under his chin, an AK-47 between his legs.        

Survivors of the attack on the presidential palace that day, including palace detectives and doctors, have consistently said that Mr. Allende was already dead when the military entered.        

An analysis by a police forensics laboratory completed at 7:30 p.m., more than five hours after Mr. Allende died, concluded that he could have died from two rapid and successive gunshots. The report said the evidence pointed to suicide, and it discarded the possibility of homicide. No ballistic analysis was done, the analysis showed.        

A military-ordered autopsy that evening concluded that Mr. Allende died of a gunshot fired at close range &ldquo;that could have been fired by himself.&rdquo; The next day the military buried him in an unmarked grave in Vi&ntilde;a del Mar, about 75 miles from Santiago.        

While family members believed the accounts of his inner circle that pointed to his taking his own life, suicide did not sit well with Mr. Allende&rsquo;s followers. Two weeks after the coup, Mr. Castro, in a speech in Havana, said Mr. Allende had been killed battling invading soldiers. He apparently got the idea from a member of Mr. Allende&rsquo;s personal security guard who escaped to Cuba, according to Juan Seoane, the chief of detectives in the palace at that time.        

After the coup Ms. Allende, then 28, went into exile in Mexico. Her sister, Beatriz, went to Cuba, becoming the leader of the Chilean solidarity movement there.        

&ldquo;She fell into depression, feeling as if there was no more space for her,&rdquo; Ms. Allende said. In 1977, Beatriz shot herself, leaving behind two children, ages 4 and 6.        

Laura Allende, the former president&rsquo;s sister, was initially imprisoned, then went into exile in Mexico and Cuba. Terminally ill with cancer, she tried to return to Chile to die, but was denied entry by the Pinochet government. In 1981 she jumped out of a hotel window in Havana.        

Taking her own life &ldquo;was an act of rebellion, of protest, because she knew she was going to die anyways,&rdquo; Ms. Allende said.        

In 1989, Ms. Allende returned to Chile, along with her mother, Mr. Allende&rsquo;s widow. With the return to democracy in 1990, Mr. Allende&rsquo;s remains were exhumed and placed in the newly constructed mausoleum in Santiago. No autopsy was done.        

Pascale Bonnefoy contributed reporting.
