
MONEYGALL, Ireland &mdash; President Obama may not be related to everybody in this postage-stamp Irish hamlet of 300, which claims him as its native son. But on Monday, Mr. Obama appeared determined to hug, kiss, shake hands or raise a glass with every last one of them.        

&ldquo;He held my hand, he drew me close and he kissed me on the cheek,&rdquo; said an ecstatic Anne Maher, 50, who was wearing a red cap with the words &ldquo;Obama Moneygall 2011&rdquo; on it. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not going to wash that cheek for a lifetime.&rdquo;        

In a jubilant visit that included a pint of Guinness at a local pub &mdash; the first lady, Michelle Obama, had a half-pint &mdash; a stop at a house once lived in by his great-great-great grandfather and quite possibly the most garrulous rope line he has ever worked, Mr. Obama made a familiar pilgrimage for an American president: going back to his Irish roots.        

It was the emotional highlight of a 12-hour visit to Ireland by the president, as he kicks off a six-day tour of Europe that will also take him to Britain, France and Poland &mdash; and immerse him in thorny issues like the military campaign in Libya and upheaval elsewhere in the Arab world.        

Mr. Obama&rsquo;s itinerary is already under threat from an ash cloud spewed by an erupting volcano in Iceland. To get ahead of the cloud, the White House said the president would fly to London late Monday rather than stay overnight in Dublin.        

With fierce winds and sudden downpours, Mr. Obama did not escape the weather. But he did get a breather from geopolitics, delivering a speech at Trinity College in Dublin that celebrated the bond between the Irish and Americans, one unblemished by rifts over peace negotiations or counterterrorism policy.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m Barack Obama, from the Moneygall Obamas,&rdquo; he said to a fired-up crowd of 25,000. &ldquo;And I&rsquo;ve come home to find the apostrophe that we lost somewhere along the way.&rdquo;        

After poking fun at the questions back home about where he was born, Mr. Obama told the story of his great-great-great grandfather, Fulmouth Kearney, a shoemaker&rsquo;s son from Moneygall, who sailed for New York at the age of 19.        

In going to Ireland&rsquo;s bucolic hinterland, Mr. Obama was retracing the steps of Presidents Kennedy, Reagan and Clinton. But he learned of his Irish connection only in 2007, when a curious churchman looked up his mother&rsquo;s family records. Those old papers were shown to Mr. Obama on Monday.        

For flesh-and-blood evidence, he was introduced to Henry Healy, a gangly man with pronounced ears said to be an eighth cousin of Mr. Obama&rsquo;s. Mr. Healy has become something of a local celebrity, earning the nickname Henry VIII. He waited for his moment with crowds, four deep, stretching a quarter of a mile up Moneygall&rsquo;s main street, which was lined with Irish and American flags.        

Ireland had just finished taking down the Union Jacks that greeted Queen Elizabeth during her visit last week. Mr. Obama cited that as evidence of the progress Ireland and Britain had made in putting the violence of the past behind them.        

&ldquo;The economy needs a lift, the people need a lift, and this brings a big lift,&rdquo; said John Kennedy, a county official named after the president who visited Ireland in 1963, the year he was born.        

Nearby, John Donovan, 44, waited to welcome Mr. Obama to his well-kept, pebbledash house, where Mr. Kearney once lived. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m so nervous I can&rsquo;t talk,&rdquo; said Mr. Donovan, who listed his occupations &mdash; in &ldquo;descending order&rdquo; &mdash; as shopkeeper, funeral director and farmer.        

Moneygall&rsquo;s link with Mr. Obama has transformed it into an instant tourist destination. Or, as Susan Wallace, a lifelong resident said optimistically, &ldquo;The name might change to Money-all.&rdquo;        

At Ollie Hayes&rsquo;s Bar, the president&rsquo;s heaviest task was waiting to let the foam on his pint subside before drinking it. &ldquo;You tell me when it&rsquo;s properly settled,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said to Mr. Hayes, after he drew the pint. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to mess this up.&rdquo; Plunking money on the bar, he added, &ldquo;I just want you to know the president pays.&rdquo;        

Standing in the pub&rsquo;s low-ceiling room, surrounded by distant relatives and those who claimed they were, Mr. Obama said: &ldquo;There are millions of Americans who trace their ancestry back to this beautiful island. Part of what makes it so special is because the Irish influence on American culture is so powerful in the arts, in politics, in commerce.&rdquo;        

Earlier in the day,
 Mr. and Mrs. Obama were welcomed by President Mary McAleese, a lawyer and a native of Northern Ireland, who watched as Mr. Obama helped plant an Irish upright oak tree in a garden behind the presidential residence in Dublin (a sequoia planted by Kennedy swayed nearby).        

In a private meeting, a senior White House official said, Mrs. McAleese told Mr. Obama that her son, then living in the United States, woke her by phone early one morning in 2004 to tell her he was canvassing for a young politician that he believed would one day be elected president.        

&ldquo;Did he tell you it was a Gaelic name?&rdquo; Mr. Obama replied.        

Meeting Prime Minister Enda Kenny, Mr. Obama voiced solidarity with Ireland as it struggles with the economic fallout caused by a collapsing real estate market and insolvent banks. &ldquo;For the United States, Ireland carries a blood link,&rdquo; the president said.        

For his part, Mr. Kenny presented Mr. Obama with an Irish hurling stick &mdash; a sort of flattened field-hockey stick, which the president joked he could use on unruly members of Congress &mdash; as well as a three-volume set of children&rsquo;s stories by a 1920s Irish author on the myths and legends of Hawaii, for his daughters, Sasha and Malia.        

Thanking him, Mr. Obama said, &ldquo;It just confirms that if you need somebody to do some good writing, hire an Irishman.&rdquo;        
