
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The Taliban said Monday that their reclusive leader, Mullah Muhammad Omar, was still very much alive and &ldquo;leading the mujahedeen in all aspects,&rdquo; disputing reports from inside Afghanistan&rsquo;s intelligence agency indicating that he had been killed in Pakistan last week.        

A senior Afghan official said the Afghan intelligence service, the National Directorate of Security, had the information on his death from a good source, but it remained unconfirmed. The source had not seen Mullah Omar&rsquo;s body, but the agency trusts the source, the official said. The official spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was discussing an intelligence issue. Afghan officials have reported Mullah Omar&rsquo;s death erroneously before.        

Zabiullah Mujahid, a Taliban spokesman, called the information &ldquo;enemy propaganda.&rdquo;        

Referring to the spring offensive the Taliban announced late last month, Mr. Mujahid said in a statement to reporters, &ldquo;The enemy, with these kinds of rumors, is trying to halt the devastating waves of the &lsquo;Badar&rsquo; operation and create confusion amongst the mujahedeen.&rdquo;        

Privately, Western officials in Kabul also expressed skepticism, and some American diplomats in the region said there was no truth to the reports.        

Rumors of Mullah Omar&rsquo;s death spread quickly in Kabul after Tolo TV, a major news channel here, citing an unnamed source inside the intelligence agency, reported Monday that the Taliban leader was shot dead late last week. According to the news report, the killing occurred as he was being moved from Quetta &mdash; the southern Pakistani city where he and other senior Taliban leaders known as the Quetta Shura are suspected of hiding &mdash; to North Waziristan by a former Pakistani intelligence chief, Lt. Gen. Hamid Gul.        

A source inside the security directorate, speaking on the condition of anonymity, provided similar details to The New York Times. But reached by telephone in Pakistan, General Gul laughed at the reports and called them baseless. &ldquo;Was I killed too?&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Am I speaking to you from heaven?&rdquo;        

General Gul said he was in Rawalpindi at the time. But it was unclear whether Afghan intelligence sources meant General Gul was on the ground escorting Mr. Omar or directing the move from afar because officials here often use his name as a shorthand for the Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence, or ISI, the military spy service he once led.        

Taliban fighters and civilian residents of North Waziristan contacted by telephone said they had not heard of Mullah Omar&rsquo;s death occurring in their region.        

American intelligence officials suspect that Mullah Omar and other Taliban leaders have been harbored for years in Quetta with the support of part of the ISI. General Gul, who American officials believe has maintained close links to Afghan militant groups in Pakistan, insisted he had never met Mullah Omar.        

Speculation about Mullah Omar&rsquo;s whereabouts has become something of a preoccupation in Kabul, the Afghan capital, since American commandos killed Al Qaeda&rsquo;s leader, Osama bin Laden.        

In the days that followed, rumors spilled out of the Afghan intelligence service that the ISI, under pressure to show that its country was not a terrorist safe haven, was trying to move Mullah Omar from his Quetta hide-out to Afghanistan.        

Those rumors appear to have spawned Monday&rsquo;s reports that he was killed during the move.        

At a news conference on Monday, Lutfullah Mashal, a spokesman for the Afghan intelligence service, stood by reports that Mullah Omar had been moved from Quetta to North Waziristan, but said he could not confirm that Mullah Omar had been killed.        

&ldquo;According to information from our sources, Mullah Omar has disappeared from Quetta,&rdquo; Mr. Mashal said.        

Even as Mr. Mashal spoke, though, an agent in the service pulled aside a pair of reporters and insisted that ISI had killed Mullah Omar while escorting him to North Waziristan.        

Brig. Gen. Josef Blotz of Germany, a spokesman for the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force in Kabul, said NATO was looking into the reports of the Taliban leader&rsquo;s death. &ldquo;We do not know if it is true or not,&rdquo; General Blotz said.        

Afghan intelligence officials, meanwhile, say they have learned the true identity of Mr. Mujahid, the Taliban spokesman. His true name is Haji Ismail, 42, and he lives the Chaman region of Pakistan near the Afghan border, they said. Mr. Mashal, the intelligence service spokesman, did not say how they had learned that information or what they planned to do with it. Mr. Mujahid could not be reached Monday evening for comment.        

As reports of Mullah Omar&rsquo;s death circulated, scattered violence occurred across Afghanistan. Four NATO service members were killed in an explosion in eastern Afghanistan, NATO said, providing no further details. NATO does not provide the nationalities of the casualties. Most forces in the east are American.        

A suicide bomber blew himself up in a restaurant in Qala-e-Najeel, a village in the northeastern province of Laghman, killing four civilians and wounding more than a dozen others, said Faizanullah Patan, spokesman for the Laghman governor&rsquo;s office.        

Taj Mohammad, the restaurant&rsquo;s owner, said several people inside were former mujahedeen commanders, including himself, who were discussing forming local police units in coordination with NATO and Afghan forces.        
Ray Rivera reported from Kabul, and Carlotta Gall from Islamabad, Pakistan. Reporting was contributed by Sharifullah Sahak and Sangar Rahimi from Kabul, an employee of The New York Times from Pakistan, and an employee of The Times from Laghman Province, Afghanistan.
