
MOSCOW &mdash; Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, a former billionaire whose prosecution by the Russian government has come to symbolize the country&rsquo;s legal failings, lost an appeal on Tuesday to overturn a second conviction.        

A Moscow court did reduce his latest sentence and that of his business partner, Platon Lebedev, by a year, meaning they will remain in prison until 2016 and will have spent 13 years in jail if released as currently scheduled.        

But the decision did little to dampen the widely held perception that Russian courts remain at the mercy of the authorities, who can manipulate them for political gain.        

Few, including Mr. Khodorkovsky, expected the appeal to be successful. At the hearing on Tuesday, Mr. Khodorkovsky referred to prosecutors and the judge as &ldquo;criminals&rdquo; and denounced the case as a sham.        

&ldquo;In what dusty cellar did they dig up that poisonous Stalinist spider who wrote this drivel?&rdquo; Mr. Khodorkovsky said, according to a transcript of his courtroom remarks. &ldquo;The authors of the verdict have shown both themselves and the judicial system of Russia in an idiotic light.&rdquo;        

Mr. Khodorkovsky, the owner of Yukos Oil, once Russia&rsquo;s largest energy company, was arrested and imprisoned in 2003 after challenging the authority of Vladimir V. Putin, then Russia&rsquo;s president.        

After Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s arrest, Yukos was bankrupted and its assets absorbed by government-owned companies whose executives were allies of Mr. Putin. Mr. Khodorkovsky was tried and convicted of tax fraud and was due to be released this year. But late last year he was convicted again, this time of large-scale embezzlement.        

The case has long provoked international condemnation. President Obama and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. have urged Russian leaders to rethink the continued prosecution of Mr. Khodorkovsky. On Tuesday, Amnesty International released a statement referring to Mr. Khodorkovsky and Mr. Lebedev as &ldquo;prisoners of conscience.&rdquo;        

Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s supporters have accused Mr. Putin, now the prime minister, and his allies of orchestrating the second trial to keep a potential political rival out of the way. His continued imprisonment has been seen as a sign that Mr. Putin continues to operate as Russia&rsquo;s paramount leader ahead of presidential elections in March 2012.        

It also appears to have undermined Mr. Putin&rsquo;s successor, Dmitri A. Medvedev, who has vowed repeatedly to overhaul the country&rsquo;s legal system but has achieved few concrete results.        

Mr. Putin and Mr. Medvedev have ruled out competing against each other in next year&rsquo;s elections.        

But disagreements between the men appear to be mounting, and Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s case seems to be particularly divisive.        

Mr. Putin has long been said to despise Mr. Khodorkovsky and in public has frequently derided him as a thief and a murderer, though he has never been charged with killing anyone.        

Mr. Medvedev, however, seems less threatened by him. Speaking frankly at a news conference last week, he said the release of Mr. Khodorkovsky &ldquo;would constitute no danger whatsoever.&rdquo; Yet, while the president has often acknowledged the failings of Russian courts, he has refused to intervene in the case.        
