
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; A top Sudanese minister resigned in protest on Tuesday over the northern Sudanese military assault on the border town of Abyei, as worrisome signs emerged that the area was descending into chaos.        

Luka Biong Deng, minister of cabinet affairs and an influential southern politician from the Abyei region, said he was quitting because he had lost all faith in Sudan&rsquo;s president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir.        

&ldquo;I came to a conclusion that the way you are leading Sudan is making you not only a liability to the Sudanese people and your party, but also to the continent and indeed to the world at large,&rdquo; Mr. Deng, a member of the unity government between the north and south, told Mr. Bashir in his resignation letter.        

Mr. Deng also said there had been &ldquo;barbaric attacks&rdquo; on civilians in Abyei that resulted in &ldquo;massive displacement of thousands of people.&rdquo;        

Clear portraits of what exactly is happening in Abyei are difficult because most residents fled, along with aid organizations and many United Nations employees, before northern troops took control of the town on Saturday.        

Since then, thousands of militiamen allied with northern forces have been swarming into Abyei, burning down huts and looting stores and warehouses, including United Nations warehouses, according to United Nations reports.        

&ldquo;The looters were using pickups to carry the pillage,&rdquo; read one United Nations report, which implied a certain degree of organized banditry. &ldquo;Sporadic firing arms were heard time to time all around the township.&rdquo;        

Abyei is one of the most contested, combustible areas in Sudan as the country prepares to split into two in July, with the southern part of Sudan forming its own nation.        

Abyei is essentially a microcosm of Sudan &mdash; and many of its problems. It is a dusty, poor, oil-producing area, home to rival ethnic groups and heavily armed militias. It straddles the north-south border and is claimed by both sides.        

Under an American-backed peace treaty struck in 2005, northern and southern Sudan agreed to administer Abyei jointly until a referendum could be held to determine whether Abyei would join the north or south. That referendum never happened because of divisions over who was eligible to vote.        

But southern Sudan went ahead with its own independence referendum, which was also stipulated in the peace accord, in January. Nearly 99 percent of the voters chose to separate from the north.        

Since then, Abyei has been racked by hit-and-run clashes between northern and southern forces. On Saturday, a few days after southern forces ambushed northern troops, Mr. Bashir gave the orders for his army to seize the town with an overwhelming number of tanks, soldiers and artillery pieces.        

Most residents of Abyei town &mdash; Abyei is both the name of a town and a larger, mostly rural area &mdash; first fled south to Agok, a small town where truckloads of southern soldiers were regrouping. According to a United Nations report, gunfire rang out Monday afternoon in Agok&rsquo;s market and people panicked after southern soldiers tried to steal goods from a shop.        

By Tuesday, aid workers said that the security was fraying even further and that all the displaced people in Agok &mdash; and many aid workers helping them &mdash; had fled farther south, fearing that the northern army would continue to push in that direction. There were conflicting reports on Tuesday night on whether the northern army had actually done that.        
