
LONDON &mdash; They were shown around their rooms at Buckingham Palace by their hostess, Queen Elizabeth herself. They got to meet and have an actual conversation with one of the few couples in the world even more famous than they are: Prince William and his wife, the Duchess of Cambridge (formerly known as Kate Middleton).        

And when the time came to exchange gifts with the royal family, an exercise fraught with potential public-relations perils, President Obama and his wife, Michelle, were more than prepared.        

But what do you give a monarch who has everything? Last time, the Obamas gave the queen an iPod, a gesture regarded as shockingly slapdash by a nation hypersensitive to even the slimmest suggestion that the so-called special relationship is perhaps not so special. (The present was arguably better than what the Obamas gave the hapless Gordon Brown, then prime minister: 25 American movie DVDs that were reportedly incompatible with British DVD players).        

Older and wiser now, the Obamas this time gave the queen a handsome collection of memorabilia from her parents&rsquo; historic visit to America in 1939. And they gave Prince Philip a collection of items related to the sport of carriage driving, including some horseshoes formerly worn by a retired champion carriage horse from America named Jamaica.        

For their part, the Obamas received a collection of letters sent between Queen Victoria and several American presidents. (They were just facsimiles, but still.) Mrs. Obama also got an antique gold-and-coral brooch.        

Not that heads of state do nothing but stand around bestowing fancy presents on one another all the time. The Obamas, obliged to leave Ireland for London a day earlier than scheduled on account of the Icelandic ash cloud (they slept at the American ambassador&rsquo;s residence, since their palace rooms were not yet ready), had a full day. They spent it meeting, greeting, touring, admiring, exclaiming, making deft small talk, and &mdash; in deference to the sensitivities of their host nation &mdash; trying to look presidential while not looking superior.        

Traveling in a lengthy motorcade that closed roads throughout central London, they experienced plenty of royal pomp, including Camilla, the Duchess of Cornwall, in a large hat. The Obamas gave her and her plant-loving husband, Prince Charles, some seeds and plants from famous American presidents&rsquo; houses &mdash; Mount Vernon, Monticello and the White House &mdash; and some White House bees&rsquo; honey.        

The first couple toured the palace picture gallery, paying special attention to documents chronicling Britain&rsquo;s loss of the American Colonies, otherwise known as the American Revolution. These included a handwritten manuscript by George III from 1783 in which the king proclaimed, &ldquo;America is lost.&rdquo; (&ldquo;That was only a temporary blip in the relationship,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said.)        

They went to Westminster Abbey, where Mrs. Obama was heard by the Press Association, the British news agency, to say, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a pleasure to be here again,&rdquo; while Mr. Obama reportedly said, &ldquo;She gets to come to all the fun places.&rdquo; (Mr. Obama apparently became confused about what year he is living in when he signed the visitors&rsquo; book, dating his entry &ldquo;24 May 2008.&rdquo;)        

They went to Downing Street, where Prime Minister David Cameron and his wife, Samantha, met them. The body language between the couples was good, if not special: everyone kissed one another on both cheeks, except for the two men, who shook hands. The two leaders are to have substantive talks, focusing on foreign policy, on Wednesday.        

Mr. Obama and Mr. Cameron traveled together in the president&rsquo;s bomb-, bullet- and everything-proof limousine to a school in south London.        

There was some initial spatial awkwardness when the two leaders, both left-handed, teamed up for a game of table tennis doubles against two boys. But the prime minister demonstrated his Etonian insouciance by hitting the ball with one hand while his other was in his pocket; the president demonstrated his keen athletic instincts by appearing to blatantly poach one of Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s shots.        

They did not appear to be keeping score against their opponents, but they did appear to be losing.        

Mr. Obama wore a suit and tie; Mrs. Obama wore several different outfits during the day, including a floral dress for her visit to the palace. But it hardly mattered; the only outfit anyone cared about belonged to the Duchess of Cambridge, making her first public appearance since returning from her honeymoon.        

&ldquo;The first lady was in girlish, almost princessly sheeny florals,&rdquo; wrote Jess Cartner-Morley, a fashion writer for The Guardian. &ldquo;The new princess, by contrast, looked a vision of modern, trans-Atlantic glamour. The dress, the blow-dry, the deep tan: this could be Victoria Beckham at a Los Angeles luncheon.&rdquo;        

The last event of the day was a state banquet featuring Windsor lamb, home-grown vegetables and wine from Sussex, England &mdash; a 2004 Ridgeview Cuv&eacute;e Merret Fitzrovia Ros&eacute;. Guests included Tom Hanks and his wife, Rita Wilson, who was assigned the seat next to Sir John Sawers, the head of the Secret Intelligence Service, also known as MI6.        
Mark Landler contributed reporting.
