
PARIS &mdash; Airlines canceled about 500 European flights on Tuesday as the ash cloud from the Grimsvotn volcano in Iceland drifted into northern Britain and Ireland, but a senior European official predicted that the disruption would not reach the scale of a year ago, when millions of travelers were inconvenienced.        

&ldquo;We are still looking at a very challenging week for passengers and for the airlines,&rdquo; Siim Kallas, the European Union transportation commissioner, said in a statement. &ldquo;Although we are partly dependent on the weather and the pattern of ash dispersion, we do not at this stage anticipate the widespread airspace closures and the prolonged disruption we saw last year.&rdquo;        

Eurocontrol, the agency based in Brussels that coordinates air traffic management across the region, said about 500 of 29,000 flights scheduled across Europe were canceled.        

In London, the weather service&rsquo;s Volcanic Ash Advisory Center warned that low-pressure systems expected across northern Britain this week mean &ldquo;wind direction is likely to be quite variable,&rdquo; making forecasting the progress of the cloud difficult.        

The eruption led President Obama, in Europe on a six-day visit that will include a Group of 8 meeting in France, to shorten a visit to Ireland on Monday and fly to London a day early.        

Airlines urged travelers, particularly those headed to Scotland or Iceland, to verify the status of their flights before leaving for airports.        

In April and May last year, the eruption of another Icelandic volcano, Eyjafjallajokull, grounded more than 100,000 flights, leaving millions of travelers stranded.        

The authorities ban travel through airspace when the density of ash in the atmosphere is enough to damage jet engines. Brian Flynn, chief of network operations for Eurocontrol, said that the experience last year had led European officials to study regulations governing flight in ash-contaminated airspace and that carriers are now allowed to operate in substantially higher ash concentrations, making a repeat of the mass grounding of 2010 much less likely.        

Mr. Flynn said the flight disruptions on Tuesday were expected to be confined to Scotland, Northern Ireland and possibly Scandinavia, but he added, &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t expect any of the major European airports to be closed.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;There is no major disruption expected in the London area within the next 24 hours,&rdquo; he said.        

The Grimsvotn volcano lies beneath the Vatnajokull ice cap in southeast Iceland. The eruption shut down Reykjavik-Keflavik International Airport on Sunday morning and curtailed flights at the country&rsquo;s three other international airports.        

In April, the European Aviation Safety Agency, the International Civil Aviation Organization and Eurocontrol staged a two-day joint exercise with more than 70 airlines and more than a dozen air traffic control bodies to test their updated procedures. The exercise, which simulated a significant ash cloud event from the Grimsvotn volcano, determined that more than 70 percent of European flights would have been able to take off as scheduled under the new procedures &mdash; three times more than during the Eyjafjallajokull eruption.        
Nicola Clark contributed reporting.
