
PARIS &mdash; Two women have brought sexual harassment suits against a junior minister here, with one saying explicitly that she was spurred by the accusations of sexual assault against the French economist Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the newspaper Le Parisien reported Wednesday.        

A state prosecutor and a lawyer for the women confirmed that formal complaints had been filed against Georges Tron, state secretary for civil service and also mayor of Draveil, near Paris. A preliminary judicial investigation has been opened.        

The two women, 34 and 36, accuse Mr. Tron of repeated sexual assaults between 2007 and 2010, when they worked for him at the Draveil City Hall. They said the assaults began with foot massages. The newspaper said both women had attempted suicide.        

Mr. Tron called the accusations &ldquo;outrageous,&rdquo; Le Parisien said, noting that he acknowledged giving the women foot massages, but only in the context of &ldquo;sharing knowledge&rdquo; about reflexology, an alternative massage that is often focused on the feet.        

One plaintiff said the example of the &ldquo;little cleaning woman&rdquo; who accused Mr. Strauss-Kahn had encouraged her to file suit.        

Mr. Strauss-Kahn was taken off an Air France plane at Kennedy Airport and arrested May 14 after a maid at the Sofitel New York said she had been attacked in his room. He resigned as director of the International Monetary Fund last week, paid $1 million bail and a $5 million bond, and is essentially under house arrest in a townhouse in Tribeca.        

Mr. Tron said the complaints were probably politically motivated, adding that he was unsurprised, &ldquo;given the current context&rdquo; of Mr. Strauss-Kahn&rsquo;s case.        

The accusations against Mr. Strauss-Kahn have prompted some hand-wringing in the French news media over their unwillingness to publish information about what they consider the private lives of public figures.        

But Le Canard Encha&icirc;n&eacute;, a respected weekly, defended the traditional approach in an editorial last week. &ldquo;For &lsquo;Le Canard,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; it wrote, &ldquo;news always stops at the bedroom door.&rdquo;        
