
MORELIA, Mexico &mdash; Gunmen who were believed to be from two rival drug gangs battled Wednesday along a highway in a western Mexico state in a gunfight that killed 28 men, the authorities said.        

The attorney general&rsquo;s office in the Pacific coast state of Nayarit said the gunfight started about 5 p.m. near the town of Ruiz, about 500 miles northwest of Mexico City.        

The police initially responded to a citizen&rsquo;s complaint of a kidnapping by a group of armed men who reportedly fled on the highway, the prosecutors office said. As the officers headed to the scene, they heard a second report of a shootout involving the same men, it said.        

Police found 28 men lying dead and four others wounded when they arrived. Ten vehicles were abandoned, and bullet casings from high-powered weapons were scattered about.        

The attorney general&rsquo;s statement, which was released late Wednesday, gave no further details about who the victims were or the drug gangs involved.        

Earlier in the day, an official in nearby Michoacan State said drug cartel violence had led as many as 700 frightened villagers to take refuge at five shelters set up at a church, an event hall, a recreation center and schools.        

It was at least the second time in a year that a large number of rural residents had been forced to flee their homes by drug violence in Mexico. In November, about 400 people in the northern border town of Ciudad Mier took refuge in a neighboring city to escape gun battles involving drug cartels.        

Michoacan&rsquo;s civil defense director, Carlos Mandujano, said about 700 people spent Tuesday night at a water park in the town of Buenavista Tomatlan, with most of them sleeping under open thatched-roof structures.        

Mr. Mandujano said state officials were providing sleeping mats, blankets and food for those in the shelter.        

Residents told the local authorities that violent disputes between rival drug cartel factions had made it too dangerous for them to stay in outlying hamlets.        

&ldquo;We saw S.U.V.&rsquo;s with armed men driving by very fast and shooting at each other," said a woman who did not want to be named because she feared for her safety.        

Several people said they would stay at the shelters all week before considering going back to their villages. &ldquo;I am not scared, but my children are,&rdquo; another woman said.        

The fighting in Michoacan is believed to involve rival factions of La Familia drug cartel, some of whose members now call themselves the Knights Templar.        

The violence there has increased in the last few days. On Tuesday, suspected cartel gunmen opened fire on a Mexican federal police helicopter, hitting two officers and forcing the craft to land, though officials insisted it had not been shot down.        
