
JERUSALEM &mdash; Senior Israeli government officials and dignitaries on Wednesday attended the dedication ceremony of a Jewish apartment complex in a hotly contested, predominantly Palestinian neighborhood of the city across the 1967 boundary.        

Participants saw the event as a triumphant affirmation of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu&rsquo;s declaration in an address to the United States Congress a day earlier that Jerusalem must never be divided again, and must remain the united capital of Israel.        

The ceremony observed the recent completion of residences for 110 religious Jewish families in the Ras al-Amud neighborhood on the Mount of Olives, close to the Old City in Jerusalem and its holy sites. The first phase of the project, known as Maale Hazeitim, was completed about eight years ago. Families have been moving into the newer buildings over the past few months.        

&ldquo;We in the government of Israel are committed to continuing to strengthen Jerusalem,&rdquo; Gilad Erdan, a minister from Mr. Netanyahu&rsquo;s Likud Party, said at the ceremony, &ldquo;to keeping it whole and united, and to continue building in all parts of the city.&rdquo;        

The Likud speaker of Parliament, Reuven Rivlin, and the mayor of Jerusalem, Nir Barkat, also attended the dedication.        

The future of Jerusalem has long been at the core of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with the areas east of the 1967 boundary coveted by both sides. Israel conquered the eastern, Arab part of Jerusalem from Jordan in the 1967 war and annexed it in a move that has never gained international recognition. The Palestinians claim East Jerusalem as the capital of their future state. In neighborhoods like Ras al-Amud, the competing historical, religious and political claims have proven an explosive mix; young Palestinian stone-throwers have often clashed with Israeli security forces here on Fridays.        

Mr. Rivlin, the Parliament speaker, told reporters that eight generations of his family were buried in the ancient Jewish graveyard on the Mount of Olives. &ldquo;This,&rdquo; he said of the new neighborhood, &ldquo;is the test of whether we can live together.&rdquo; Any new division of the city would, he said, turn it into &ldquo;Belfast.&rdquo;        

The private development was financed by the American hospital magnate Dr. Irving I. Moskowitz of Miami, who bought the land that was first purchased by Jews when the city was still controlled by the Ottoman Empire. Ateret Cohanim, a group dedicated to settling Jews and establishing religious seminaries in Arab neighborhoods in the heart of Jerusalem, gave logistical support.        

Daniel Luria of Ateret Cohanim noted that Mr. Netanyahu, who did not attend the dedication, had &ldquo;not bent&rdquo; on the Jerusalem issue. He added that the days were over when Jews only arrived at the Mount of Olives &ldquo;horizontally&rdquo; &mdash; to be buried.        

Israeli leftists who oppose Jewish settlements, especially in Arab neighborhoods, held a noisy protest outside the compound. They held placards reading, &ldquo;Moskowitz, this is Ras al-Amud, Palestine,&rdquo; among other things.        

Masyoun Bahdawan, 48, a Palestinian who lives next to Maale Hazeitim, said she felt &ldquo;sorrow.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This is our land, and they do not belong here. Give me one reason why we should live together,&rdquo; she said, arguing that the arrangement was not reciprocal, and that Arabs face difficulties in obtaining permits to build homes in Jerusalem.        

The project got under way despite American objections in the mid-1990s. More recently, tensions between Israel and the Obama administration have flared over Jewish construction in East Jerusalem.        

Nevertheless, as Mr. Netanyahu was leaving for Washington last Thursday, Israel&rsquo;s Interior Ministry advanced plans for about 1,550 new housing units in Har Homa and Pisgat Zeev, two Jewish areas of Jerusalem beyond the 1967 border.        
