
PARIS &mdash; A dense cloud of volcanic ash that forced the brief morning closings of airports in Berlin and other German cities blew farther east on Wednesday, allowing most commercial air traffic to resume as the second major eruption of an Icelandic volcano in two years appeared to be sputtering to an end.        

But officials warned that winds could still blow some of the densest part of the plume back over Britain and northern France at the end of the week, possibly leading to fresh travel disruptions.        

Eurocontrol, the Brussels-based agency that coordinates air traffic management across the region, said around 450 flights had to be canceled on Wednesday &mdash; a small fraction of the roughly 29,000 scheduled flights.        

Iceland&rsquo;s weather agency, the Met Office, said the eruption of the Grimsvotn volcano had &ldquo;paused&rdquo; in the early hours of Wednesday, and observers said the crater was now emitting only a small puff of steam.        

&ldquo;The worst is over,&rdquo; Iceland&rsquo;s prime minister, Johanna Sigurdardottir, said in a statement. &ldquo;Our geoscientists say that the eruption is waning day by day.&rdquo;        

Kyla Evans, a Eurocontrol spokeswoman, said air traffic controllers expected few if any disruptions within the next 24 hours but noted that if current weather patterns hold, further flight cancellations could be in store.        

The latest forecast maps from the Volcanic Ash Advisory Center of the Met Office, the British weather service, showed plume over Germany dissipating entirely by early evening. The highest concentrations of ash were limited to Arctic regions.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a large chunk of ash that, right now, is way up in the north,&rdquo; Ms. Evans said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s possible that could start to blow back down over the U.K. and the north of France by Friday&rdquo; before dissipating. That ash was likely to remain at relatively high elevations, however, which could mean that flights would still be permitted at lower altitudes.        

Airports in Berlin, Hamburg and Bremen, in northern Germany, were closed for between three and four hours on Wednesday, prompting the cancellation of hundreds of flights before operations returned to operation around mid-day.        

Lufthansa, Germany&rsquo;s largest airline, said that while its Berlin, Hamburg and Bremen flights had resumed, many were still facing significant delay.        

Passengers expecting to travel to or from those airports Wednesday were advised to contact the airline before heading to the airport.        

Lufthansa said it planned to operate a normal schedule on Thursday.        

Air traffic in Britain had returned to normal as of Wednesday morning.        

Eurocontrol said that low concentrations of ash were likely to drift into Polish airspace on Thursday, but that it was too early to say whether this would affect air traffic.        

There were no restrictions on flights in any other part of Europe on Wednesday, Eurocontrol said.        

On Tuesday, airlines canceled about 500 European flights as the ash cloud drifted into northern Britain and Ireland.        

Another Icelandic volcano, Eyjafjallajokull, erupted in April and May 2010. It grounded more than 100,000 flights, leaving millions of travelers stranded.        

The European Aviation Safety Agency, the International Civil Aviation Organization and Eurocontrol last month staged a two-day joint exercise with more than 70 airlines and more than a dozen air traffic control bodies to test their updated procedures.        

The exercise, which simulated a significant ash cloud event from the Grimsvotn volcano, determined that more than 70 percent of European flights would have been able to take off as scheduled under the new procedures &mdash; three times more than during the Eyjafjallajokull eruption.        
