
LONDON &mdash; Britain and the United States remain &ldquo;indispensable&rdquo; partners, President Obama declared Wednesday in an address to the British Parliament, even as he and Prime Minister David Cameron revealed subtle differences over issues like the military campaign in Libya and the Middle East peace process.        

&ldquo;The time for our leadership is now,&rdquo; Mr. Obama proclaimed, asserting the relevance of the British-American alliance in a world of rising powers and new threats. He rejected the argument that emerging titans like China, India and Brazil &ldquo;represent the future, and the time for our leadership has passed.&rdquo; The United States and Britain, he said, &ldquo;remain the greatest catalysts for global action.&rdquo;        

The president&rsquo;s speech, to a rare joint session of Parliament under the vaulted timbers of ancient Westminster Hall, was the capstone of a two-day state visit to Britain in which Mr. Obama was greeted with great pomp and personal warmth. Yet earlier, after a backyard barbecue at 10 Downing Street, Mr. Obama and Mr. Cameron demonstrated that even those in a &ldquo;special relationship&rdquo; fail to agree on everything.        

Speaking at a news conference, Mr. Cameron refused to rule out British support for the Palestinians as they push for United Nations recognition of an independent state. He suggested that the threat of European support could force the Israelis and Palestinians back to peace talks. Mr. Obama, however, reiterated his opposition to the campaign, saying, &ldquo;What the United Nations is not going to be able to do is deliver a Palestinian state.&rdquo;        

The president struck a cautious note about the American military role in Libya, which contrasted with Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s pledge to intensify the pressure on Libya&rsquo;s leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. While Mr. Obama said he was committed to the operation, even if it took a long time, and voiced confidence that Colonel Qaddafi would be forced out, he rejected calls for the United States to deploy more aircraft.        

&ldquo;I think there may be a false perception that there are a whole bunch of secret, supereffective air assets that are in a warehouse somewhere that could just be pulled out and that would somehow immediately solve the situation in Libya,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said, after raising the issue himself. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s not the case.&rdquo;        

Mr. Cameron, while seeking to project unity on Libya, said each country had to ask itself, &ldquo;What is it that we can all do to make sure the pressure is really brought to bear&rdquo; on Colonel Qaddafi. Britain, he said, would look at all options, though he did not confirm reports that it planned to escalate the air campaign by following France&rsquo;s lead in sending Apache attack helicopters to Libya.        

Calling each other Barack and David, Mr. Obama and Mr. Cameron strived for the easy familiarity of previous leaders like George W. Bush and Tony Blair. Mr. Cameron praised Mr. Obama for his proposal to use Israel&rsquo;s pre-1967 borders, with land swaps, as a starting point to break a deadlock between Israelis and Palestinians. But both drew a clear distinction between the &ldquo;special relationship&rdquo; that existed during the Bush-Blair years, and the relationship today.        

&ldquo;We are doing things in a different way,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said. &ldquo;We have ruled out occupying forces, invading armies.&rdquo;        

For Mr. Obama, Wednesday was a day of business after the high ceremony of Tuesday, when he attended a state dinner with Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace and was honored with a 41-gun salute. He spent two hours at the Downing Street residence of Mr. Cameron, and also met with Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg.        

The two leaders discussed the timetable for withdrawing troops from Afghanistan, efforts to help Arab countries achieve democracy and how each was addressing spiraling deficits. Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s Conservative-led coalition government has undertaken deeper budget cuts than the Obama administration, but Mr. Obama deflected suggestions of a philosophical divide, saying it was natural that they would devise their own remedies.        

Those discussions complete, Mr. Obama and Mr. Cameron dropped in on a barbecue hosted by their wives, Michelle Obama and Samantha Cameron, for war veterans and their families. They were put to work flipping hamburgers and sausages, which prompted Mr. Cameron to joke that it was the first time a British prime minister had given an American president &ldquo;a bit of a grilling.&rdquo;        

Formality returned in the afternoon, when Mr. Obama was escorted into Westminster Hall in the Houses of Parliament, a majestic 900-year-old building where King Richard I had his coronation banquet in 1189, Sir Thomas More was tried for treason in 1535 and Winston Churchill&rsquo;s body lay in state in 1965. Mr. Obama was the first American president invited to speak in the hall, joining a rarefied list that includes Charles de Gaulle, Nelson Mandela and Pope Benedict XVI.        

Taking note of his illustrious company, Mr. Obama said it was either &ldquo;a very high bar or the beginning of a very funny joke,&rdquo; cracking up an audience that included Mr. Cameron and his predecessors, Gordon Brown and Mr. Blair.        

The president did not sketch out a new vision for the British-American alliance, sticking to a familiar list of challenges including nuclear nonproliferation and the Middle East peace process. The two countries faced years of hard work in dealing with the Arab uprisings, since, he said, &ldquo;Power rarely gives up without a fight.&rdquo;        

Though the address was not as soaring of some of his best-known speeches, it had its moments, most strikingly when Mr. Obama spoke of the &ldquo;patchwork heritage&rdquo; of the United States and Britain as a common strength. That heritage, he said, made it &ldquo;possible for the sons and daughters of former colonies to sit here as members of this great Parliament, and for the grandson of a Kenyan who served as a cook in the British Army to stand before you as president of the United States.&rdquo;        

The audience, which had been listening in respectful silence, erupted in applause, and afterward, he needed 30 minutes to make his way out of the hall, as the crowd mobbed him for handshakes and pictures.        
