
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; NATO and Afghan forces pushed back hundreds of Taliban fighters from a district center in northeastern Afghanistan on Wednesday, sending them fleeing into the rugged mountainside just hours after the fighters had seized control over a portion of that same area, Afghan officials said.        

About 300 insurgents began surrounding the district center of Do Ab in Nuristan Province four days ago, engaging in sporadic gunfights with the local police as they approached, said Jumaluddin Badar, the provincial governor. The militants overran the eastern part of the town late Tuesday night, destroying a government building, a mosque and a health clinic with rocket strikes, he said.        

The Taliban victory may have been short-lived but represented a continuing effort by militants to grab and hold land in the province left vacant by American forces, who have been steadily withdrawing from remote outposts in the region in favor of protecting population centers as part of their counterinsurgency strategy. Mr. Badar said he doubted the government could maintain control in the future, without a permanent presence of NATO or Afghan forces.        

&ldquo;We did not have enough weapons and ammunition to defend&rdquo; against the attack, Mr. Badar said. &ldquo;The enemy had heavier and more developed weapons with them, that&rsquo;s why our police had to withdraw.&rdquo;        

Badly outgunned and running low on ammunition, the police initially fled across the river that divides the district center to regroup on the other side. The counterstrike began when NATO helicopters dropped about 100 Afghan commandos and an undisclosed number of NATO troops into the center on Wednesday afternoon, said Gen. Zahir Azimi, a spokesman for the Ministry of Defense.        

The forces immediately came under fire. They returned fire and called in airstrikes, killing more than 10 insurgents, NATO said in a statement. Gunfire continued into the evening, but NATO and Afghan officials said the district center was back under government control.        

No NATO or Afghan forces were killed in the counterattack, officials said.        

Mr. Badar said at least an additional five Taliban fighters were killed in the fighting before coalition forces arrived. Mr. Badar said that three police officers were also killed, but Allah Dad, the provincial police chief, said none were killed or wounded. NATO did not say how many of its forces took part or what countries they were from, though mainly American forces are in the region.        

In other regions, particularly in the country&rsquo;s volatile east and south where NATO maintains large numbers of troops, the militants have relied largely on suicide attacks, roadside bombs, and quick-strike raids on government compounds and civilian contractors since the Taliban announced the launch of its offensive late last month.        

Militants were still holding onto Waygal district in Nuristan nearly two months after seizing control, Mr. Badar said, warning that more districts were at risk.        

&ldquo;Waygal district is still under Taliban control and there are Kamdesh, Barg-e-Matal and Wama districts under Taliban threats, and we may face attacks on these district centers as well,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Badar has complained that police forces in the province are poorly trained and ill-equipped, leaving them vulnerable to militant attacks. Militants overran Barg-e-Matal and held it for a few days last summer before American Special Operations forces and Afghan commandos were brought in to restore it to Afghan control.        

Most of the districts that Mr. Badar said are vulnerable lie near the Pakistan border and serve as virtually unrestricted transit routes for militants crossing into Afghanistan. But Do Ab, a district of steep jagged mountains, is farther west, making it an attractive target for insurgents hoping to launch attacks from there to interior provinces, a prospect that perhaps influenced NATO&rsquo;s decision to move quickly to restore government control. But Mr. Badar expressed doubts about the district&rsquo;s ability to defend itself in the future.        

&ldquo;Right now 50 percent of the police in Do Ab don&rsquo;t have weapons and most of them are not even trained,&rdquo; Mr. Badar said. &ldquo;They are local police. We hire them as police and they start working, but when they face threats or get attacked they leave their check posts and quit their jobs because they are from the same village and they don&rsquo;t want to create personal enmity for themselves and their families.&rdquo;        
Sharifullah Sahak and Sangar Rahimi contributed reporting.
