
MOSCOW &mdash; An opposition protest in the Georgian capital of Tbilisi was violently broken up by riot police officers late Wednesday, scattering about a thousand demonstrators who had occupied a viewing stand where President Mikheil Saakashvili was scheduled to preside over a military parade on Thursday.        

As the crowds were dispersing in clouds of tear gas, a car in a three-car motorcade fleeing the violence ran down and killed a policeman, according to news agencies. The news agencies reported that the car was carrying Georgia&rsquo;s most prominent opposition leader, Nino Burdzhanadze, or her bodyguards.        

Rustavi 2, a pro-government television channel, reported the death of the policeman, citing Interior Ministry officials. Aides to Ms. Burdzhanadze could not immediately be reached for comment. Some 20 protesters were hurt in the police action.        

The organizers of Georgia&rsquo;s protest movement had been modeling their demonstrations on popular uprisings in the Middle East, and were demanding the ouster of Mr. Saakashvili. A former defense minister living in exile, Irakli Okruashvili, had called on supporters to come out in force on Wednesday in what he called a &ldquo;day of wrath.&rdquo; But on Tuesday, he canceled the demonstration after he had a falling out with Ms. Burdzhanadze. Then, of some 2,000 who came out anyway, rain in the late evening on Wednesday sent many home.        

The protest blocked Tbilisi&rsquo;s central thoroughfare, Rustaveli Avenue, but the police action came as a surprise to those who remained in the street after a rally permit expired at midnight.        

Riot police officers swept into the crowd, grabbing those who did not run, witnesses said. Two local journalists left bleeding.        

Several protesters said the police beat them as they lay on the ground. Police officials could not immediately be reached for comment. The authorities had stressed that they would allow the protest but would clear the street for the parade once the rally permit expired.        
Mzia Kupunia contributed reporting from Tbilisi.
