
BEIJING &mdash; President Hu Jintao of China praised North Korea and its ailing leader, Kim Jong-il, for giving &ldquo;top priority to improving people&rsquo;s lives,&rdquo; according to a report on Thursday night by Xinhua, the state news agency. Mr. Hu made his remarks during a six-day tour of China by Mr. Kim, and they reflected China&rsquo;s hopes that North Korea would move toward major economic reforms.        

The same Xinhua report commented on Mr. Kim&rsquo;s reaction to the economic prosperity he saw throughout China, where he traveled in a private armored train: &ldquo;He said the Chinese people are now engaged in economic and social development and he marveled at the amazing changes he saw during the visit.&rdquo;        

China is North Korea&rsquo;s closest ally, and Mr. Kim&rsquo;s visit, his third since May 2010, comes at a critical time. North Korea is facing a severe food shortage and is casting about for aid. A team of officials from Washington is in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, to assess the extent of the crisis.        

Mr. Kim is also seeking to shore up Beijing&rsquo;s support for his heir apparent, Kim Jong-un, his third and youngest son. The trip also gives Mr. Kim an opportunity to talk to Chinese officials about moving his nation&rsquo;s command economy more toward market reforms, but it is unclear how sincere Mr. Kim is about pushing such changes.        

In his frequent trips to China, Mr. Kim has often toured prosperous coastal areas. But he has not put in place fundamental changes to the North Korean economy, and some analysts believe his interest in China stems primarily from his desire for cheap, reliable supplies of food and energy and diplomatic protection from the United States, Japan and South Korea, which are seeking to roll back North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear weapons program.        

Last Sunday, South Korean officials said Prime Minister Wen Jiabao of China had commented during a summit meeting in Japan that Mr. Kim was visiting China to study its model of economic development. Mr. Wen made those remarks to President Lee Myung-bak of South Korea.        

&ldquo;Kim Jong-il&rsquo;s visit is a resounding demonstration of how strong China-North Korea ties are at present,&rdquo; John Delury, a China scholar at Yonsei University in Seoul, South Korea, said in an e-mail. &ldquo;The clear emphasis on China&rsquo;s economic development is a signal of renewed interest by Pyongyang in some kind of reform and opening with North Korean characteristics &mdash; although by no means does it guarantee that we&rsquo;ll see a real push along those lines upon Kim Jong-il&rsquo;s return.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kim has said that North Korea will become a &ldquo;strong and prosperous&rdquo; nation by 2012, a promise that, under the current circumstances, would be difficult to meet. The question is whether Mr. Kim will overhaul policies to begin moving the country toward that goal.        

He started his visit last Friday, when his train rolled across the China-North Korea border in the northeast. Mr. Kim met with Mr. Hu on Wednesday, and Xinhua first confirmed Mr. Kim&rsquo;s trip on Thursday. A photograph posted on the Xinhua Web site of the two men shaking hands shows Mr. Kim as a frail man, his skin sagging and his eyes staring dimly into the distance.        
