
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Yemen degenerated further into bloody conflict on Thursday as clashes beyond the capital drew in more tribal factions and threatened to widen the fighting between government forces and opposition tribesmen.        

In Sana, the capital, the Defense Ministry said at least 28 people had been killed in a large explosion at a weapons storage facility belonging to tribal fighters, but did not provide details on those killed. The tribesmen denied that the cache belonged to them.        

The death toll has approached 100 since fighting began Monday after Yemen&rsquo;s president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, refused for a third time to sign a deal to transfer power in the face of vast street protests.        

The battles in the capital have pitted Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s security forces against his tribal rivals, led by the Ahmar family, whose members play leading roles in the political opposition. The two sides are struggling for control of important government buildings, including the Interior Ministry, which are near the Ahmar family compound.        

For a fourth day, battles flared around those buildings. Mortar fire blasted the headquarters of an opposition television station, Suhail, owned by the Ahmar family, which Mr. Saleh had accused of supporting the antigovernment protests. After the attack, the station was reduced to playing music and still images from earlier demonstrations.        

A government official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the news media, said security forces had surrounded all the entrances to the Ahmar compound.        

Fear gripped the capital as residents hoarded cash from banks and thousands packed into cars and taxis to flee. While residents were allowed to leave, tribesmen from surrounding villages who descended on Sana from the south, east and north faced government roadblocks, effectively sealing off the capital. Tribesmen, speaking to the local news media, have avowed to avenge the deaths of men from their tribes who had been killed in the fighting.        

By the afternoon, fighting in the capital had reached an eerie lull, with mortars and artillery falling silent through evening. Though Yemen has had its share of conflicts over the past 20 years, including a bloody civil war in 1994 and a drawn-out war against Houthi rebels in the north, most battles were fought outside Sana.        

Sadiq al-Ahmar, the oldest of the Ahmar brothers and the leader of the Hashid tribal confederation, said he would not accept any mediation with the government and sought to rally Yemen&rsquo;s tribes against Mr. Saleh. &ldquo;Ali Abdullah Saleh is a liar, liar, liar,&rdquo; Mr. Ahmar said, according to a witness and a Reuters report. &ldquo;We are firm. He will leave this country barefoot.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ahmar&rsquo;s efforts to widen the struggle appeared to be working as a battle broke out between tribal fighters loyal to Sheik Abdul Majid al-Zindani, an ally of the Ahmar family, and government forces in Arhab, a village north of the capital. Six people were killed in clashes late Wednesday, when fighters for Mr. Zindani tried to prevent security officers from leaving two bases in Arhab to reinforce government troops in the capital, about 20 miles away, according to witnesses in the town.        

The United States includes Mr. Zindani, a spiritual leader, on a list of &ldquo;specially designated global terrorists,&rdquo; and his entry into the worsening conflict is likely to stoke fears that a power vacuum in Yemen could provide an opportunity for militants. Arhab was the site of airstrikes against militants in 2009 after American officials, working closely with Yemeni authorities, obtained information about sites there that were suspected as training camps for Al Qaeda.        

Mr. Saleh has been an ally of the United States on counterterrorism, but now American officials are considering pushing for United Nations resolutions or even sanctions in order to press him to put an end to the violence by signing the agreement and leaving power.        

That outcome appeared to recede Thursday as the government issued an arrest warrant for Sadiq al-Ahmar and his brothers, accusing them of leading an armed rebellion.        

The State Department released a statement urging Americans not to travel to Yemen and warning those already there to leave &ldquo;while commercial transportation is available.&rdquo; Sana International Airport, in the northern part of the capital close to the fighting, could be closed by the violence.        

The State Department also ordered all eligible relatives of United States government employees and some nonessential personnel to leave the country. The British Embassy in Sana issued a similar statement on Thursday.        

Protesters at the main antigovernment sit-in remained divided over how to react to the violence. Some insisted that the demonstrations, which began in January, remain peaceful. &ldquo;We will keep our revolution peaceful whatever happens,&rdquo; said Najeeb Abdul Rehman, a protest leader.        

But a larger group, including many from the country&rsquo;s Islamist party, which has ties to the Ahmar family, called for protesters to join the fight. &ldquo;We must take weapons now and go to fight with those who helped us,&rdquo; said Ameen Hefdhallah, another protest leader. &ldquo;Otherwise we will be crushed in the battles of the big guys.&rdquo; There is also a third, smaller group: those protesters who have left the sit-in and given up on the idea of a revolutionary, but peaceful, struggle for justice and freedom.        
Nasser Arrabyee reported from Sana, and J. David Goodman from New York. Laura Kasinof contributed reporting.
