
BAGHDAD &mdash; Marching in lockstep as they shouted &ldquo;No, no, America,&rdquo; tens of thousands of Iraqis loyal to the anti-American Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr poured into the streets on Thursday to warn Iraq&rsquo;s government against extending the United States military presence here.        

The march and its overtones of violence were Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s latest attempt to inject himself into the politically volatile debate over whether American soldiers should stay in Iraq. Questions about the military&rsquo;s future here grow more and more urgent as American troops take apart their bases and get ready to head home ahead of a Dec. 31 withdrawal deadline.        

As Iraqi leaders negotiate the issue, often in private, Mr. Sadr has been turning up the volume in the streets.        

Thursday&rsquo;s march was the second major anti-American protest in two months organized by Mr. Sadr, an insurgent leader who joined the political process and now commands nearly 40 lawmakers in Iraq&rsquo;s Parliament, as well a huge following in many of Iraq&rsquo;s poorer Shiite communities.        

Although organizers had promised that the demonstration would be &ldquo;peaceful, civilian and Islamic,&rdquo; it was less a popular protest than a martial parade aimed at showing that Mr. Sadr could reconstitute his militia, the Mahdi Army, whenever he pleased. Mr. Sadr has threatened to do so if any American troops remain in Iraq after the agreed-on withdrawal deadline.        

&ldquo;We will be obliged to fight and do our best to liberate our country,&rdquo; said Salah al-Obeidi, a spokesman for Mr. Sadr. &ldquo;Not only by protests, but also by fighting.&rdquo;        

About 50,000 to 75,000 men, from skinny 17-year-olds to paunchy retirees, strutted through the sweltering streets of the downtrodden Shiite neighborhood of Sadr City, unarmed and identically dressed in black slacks and T-shirts emblazoned with the red, white and black Iraqi flag.        

They flowed past a tent filled with politicians and a gallery of bleachers crowded with Shiite clerics, swinging their arms in unison and shouting &ldquo;Mahdi! Mahdi!&rdquo; Many had traveled to Baghdad from Shiite cities like Kut, Basra or Karbala in the south, and slept in mosques the night before the demonstration.        

&ldquo;Our message is to tell the occupier to leave the country,&rdquo; said Said Mohammed Tahi al-Hussein, a Shiite cleric from Najaf. &ldquo;They have left a mess.&rdquo;        

Demonstrators burned American and Israeli flags, stomped across star-spangled plastic tablecloths and shouted anti-American slogans. But the true target audience of the display seemed to be the Iraqi government.        

Under a security agreement signed by Iraq and the United States, all of the 46,000 remaining American troops are due to leave Iraq unless Iraqi leaders request otherwise.        

Iraq&rsquo;s prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, who six months ago said there would be no additional need for United States troops, shifted course earlier this month and said he would support asking American forces to stay if a significant majority of lawmakers and other leaders wanted to keep troops here.        

Iraqi leaders and American military officials say Iraq has made significant progress in fighting terrorism and curbing violence, but they warn its borders are sparsely protected, and its air defenses virtually nonexistent.        

Mr. Maliki announced he would convene meetings to discuss the issue, and warned the Sadrists that they would have to swallow the outcome, even if that meant an extended American military presence. &ldquo;If they want to break the law or withdraw from the political process that will be up to them,&rdquo; he said at a May 11 news conference.        

On Thursday, militiamen and members of the crowd blanched at predicting what would happen if the Iraqi government made such a move. Should the Sadrists withdraw from the government or stick with the political process? Should they choose peaceful resistance or violence?        

&ldquo;We follow Moktada al-Sadr,&rdquo; said Morteza Furaiji, a high-school student who watched the march from the sidelines. &ldquo;We cannot decide on our own.&rdquo;        
