
KABUL, Afghanistan &ndash; Eight NATO soldiers were killed in Afghanistan on Thursday, seven of them in a single incident in the southern part of the country that was the deadliest involving hidden explosive devices so far this year, officials said.        

The seven soldiers were part of a foot patrol and were killed in two individual improvised explosive device explosions that struck the patrol as part of the same attack, according to Major Tim James, a spokesman for NATO.        

In addition, an unrelated helicopter crash in eastern Afghanistan Thursday killed another soldier, Maj. James said.        

The nationalities of the victims in both cases were withheld as part of standard NATO policy, pending notification of next of kin. NATO soldiers in both southern and eastern Afghanistan are predominantly but not entirely American.        

NATO said the cause of the helicopter crash was under investigation, and would not say whether or not it resulted from hostile action. Similarly, a helicopter crash that killed one soldier last April 24 in eastern Afghanistan is also still under investigation, and authorities have not said whether or not the helicopter was downed by fire from insurgents. Such investigations typically take two months to complete, Maj. James said.        

On Tuesday, a French Mirage jet crashed near the western Afghan city of Herat, but the pilot ejected safely. Authorities said that incident is also under investigation.        

Thursday&rsquo;s attack was the deadliest involving improvised explosive devices this year, according to statistics compiled by icasualties.org, an independent reporting organization. On May 16th, four American servicemen were killed in an I.E.D. attack in Zabul province, where Afghan forces recently have taken greater responsibility for security.        

Thursday was also was the worst loss of life for NATO since April 27, when eight American airmen and a civilian contractor were killed by an attacker in Afghan air force uniform at the Kabul airport. The Taliban quickly claimed responsibility.        
