
BEIJING &mdash; At least two people were killed and six wounded by three explosions within an hour on Thursday at government office buildings in a city in southern China, according to state news media and a provincial government Web site.        

The blasts occurred in the city of Fuzhou in Jiangxi Province between 9 and 9:45 a.m., according to the government posting, which appeared on the province&rsquo;s propaganda bureau Web site. The first one was at the Fuzhou Procurator&rsquo;s Office, the second at the Linzhuan District government building and the third in a parking lot at the Linzhuan Food and Drug Administration office.        

Xinhua, the state news agency, reported Thursday afternoon that the attacker was Qian Mingqi, 52, an unemployed man. He was killed in one of the explosions, the report said. It was unclear whether he had been counted in the official death toll.        

A photograph posted on a Chinese social networking Web site and on the Web site of Phoenix Television, based in Hong Kong, showed a large cloud of smoke rising above a cluster of buildings as scores of people watched from a wide avenue. Other photos and a short video on the Phoenix Television Web site showed government buildings with windows blown out, shattered glass on sidewalks and damaged cars.        

The Web site of Xinhua earlier on Thursday had posted an item saying the explosives had been planted by a farmer who was angry with the handling of a court case, which could explain why the first explosion took place at the procurator&rsquo;s office. That office supervises legal matters in Fuzhou and is responsible for the prosecution and investigation of cases. That posting was deleted by 1 p.m.        

By late Thursday afternoon, several Chinese journalists were posting on weibo, the Chinese equivalent of Twitter, a link to what they identified as the weibo account of Mr. Qian, who had been publicly chronicling his battle against local officials.        

The feeds said that his home was demolished in 2002 to make room for highway construction. Since then, the feeds said, he had been lobbying for adequate redress, but growing more frustrated and desperate as officials ignored him. Illegal demolitions and land seizures by local officials are among the most common grievances in rural China.        

&ldquo;Ten years of seeking redress resulted in nothing,&rdquo; the feeds said. &ldquo;This is forcing me to walk a road I do not want to go onto.&rdquo;        

The shortcomings of China&rsquo;s legal system are an abiding source of frustration for ordinary Chinese, many of whom believe that true justice is elusive. Legal experts say China&rsquo;s efforts at legal reform have stalled in recent years, and in many cases have gone backward. The central government&rsquo;s disregard for legal proceedings has been evident during a broad crackdown this year on progressive speech and thought, as security officers have detained and interrogated hundreds of intellectuals, artists, dissidents and rights advocates without citing any legal basis.        

The deadly attacks on Thursday again raise a question that analysts who study China often pose: whether China needs to establish greater rule of law and enforce true accountability among officials in order to ensure stability.        

Deadly explosions have taken place in recent years in several Chinese cities. In May 2008, an explosion during rush hour on a public bus in Shanghai killed at least three people and wounded at least 12, according to official reports. In July 21, 2008, bomb attacks took place on two buses in Kunming, the capital of Yunnan Province, killing at least two people. The explosions in both cities, along with violence in Xinjiang, raised security concerns before the 2008 Beijing Summer Olympics.        

Five days after the Kunming attack, a shadowy group called the Turkestan Islamic Party, which claims to be a jihadist group working for the liberation of Xinjiang, where many ethnic Uighurs are frustrated by the policies of the ruling ethnic Han, put out a video taking credit for the explosions in Kunming and Shanghai. Chinese officials said their investigations showed the group was not responsible, but it was unclear who had carried out the attacks.        
Li Bibo contributed research.
