
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; To parse Ben Franklin, the only thing certain about life in Afghanistan is death. Taxes are another matter.        

The Ministry of Finance says its efforts to change that have run into robust resistance from the very people lecturing it about the rule of law: American and European allies who do not want to see their own contractors taxed.        

Those contractors respond that taxing them is an absurdity, because foreign companies are here spending military and other foreign aid money that, by United States law and plain common sense, ought to be tax exempt.        

&ldquo;The international community should be happy we are implementing the rule of law,&rdquo; said Said Mubin Shah, deputy minister of finance for customs and revenue. &ldquo;We should work together to solve this problem and impose the rule of law, because a lot of foreign contractors are evading their taxes.&rdquo;        

The controversy is a complex one, but Finance Ministry officials bristle at suggestions that this is another example of efforts by the administration of President Hamid Karzai to provoke yet another confrontation with the United States government. United States officials are also locked in dispute with the Afghans over Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s order to disband all private security companies, and over what American officials see as efforts by his government to hobble anticorruption investigators.        

The effort to tax foreign contractors was first reported by The Washington Post on Monday. The newspaper said that while prime contractors were explicitly exempted by law from taxation on aid contracts, the Afghan government was sending tax notices to subcontractors, many of them American and other foreign companies, claiming they were not covered by that provision.        

However, Finance Minister Omar Zakhilwal on Monday disputed that in a brief interview, saying the government had made no tax demands on contractors or subcontractors working on aid or defense projects, who are exempt from taxes under a bilateral understanding called the Military Technical Agreement. However, he said, foreign contractors have received tax notices for income not covered by their military or aid contracts. &ldquo;We respect the M.T.A.,&rdquo; he said.        

In a country where tax evasion, smuggling and bribery of customs officials practically amount to a national pastime, increasing Afghanistan&rsquo;s revenue base has been a major policy goal for the international community. Afghanistan&rsquo;s revenue totals only $1.8 billion annually, compared with $13 billion just in United States foreign and military aid in the current fiscal year.        

Mr. Shah said that many contractors were using their tax-exempt status to work on non-aid business that should be taxed. He gave the example of fuel oil importers working for the military, who are allowed to bring fuel into Afghanistan without paying tax, but who in many cases sell a portion of their imports into the private market. He says officials know this happens because a far greater amount of fuel is consumed privately than is ever taxed. Mr. Shah conceded that outright smuggling of fuel was also a factor, but not the only one.        

&ldquo;They are evading billions of afghanis this way, but when we ask them for proof about how much they brought in, they won&rsquo;t say,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The military won&rsquo;t tell us how much either.&rdquo; One dollar is equivalent to about 43 afghanis, the local currency.        

Furthermore, Mr. Shah said, when Finance Ministry tax inspectors have approached foreign contractors at their offices here, demanding to see their books, they have been turned away at gunpoint and, in some cases, beaten. He declined to provide specifics of such attacks, nor would he name any of the foreign contractors the ministry believes are tax evaders.        

Mr. Shah said that his department&rsquo;s own advisers, who he said include representatives from the United States Treasury Department and the United States Agency for International Development as well as the World Bank, have been encouraging the ministry to increase its revenues, and in some areas it has been able to do that.        

The problem goes beyond trying to tax military contractors for their private business, however. The Afghan government considers certain subcontractors, on all but military projects covered by the Military Technical Agreement, to be subject to income tax on the profits they make in Afghanistan, and have notified them to this effect, according to Ahmad Shah Zamanzai, the director general for revenue in the Ministry of Finance.        

&ldquo;This applies only to subcontractors on other entities outside of ISAF,&rdquo; Mr. Zamanzai said, referring to the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force. &ldquo;Afghan subcontractors are not exempted. They have to pay taxes on their profits, so why should a foreign company not have to pay taxes? If it would pay taxes for that work in the United States, we say they should pay tax in the first country where they have the earnings.&rdquo; He said such tax demands had recently been sent to &ldquo;a few tens&rdquo; of foreign companies.        

An American official, speaking anonymously because of diplomatic delicacies, confirmed that American and Afghan officials disagreed on whether subcontractors were subject to taxes in Afghanistan, but was unwilling to comment further.        

&ldquo;It is a little issue,&rdquo; Mr. Zamanzai said. &ldquo;And it is very complicated. We are having a lot of meetings about it and we are working on it.&rdquo;        

Stan Soloway, president of the Professional Services Council, a trade group based in Arlington, Va., that represents companies doing business for the American government and has many members active in Afghanistan, said it was an issue that needed to be sorted out.        

&ldquo;The U.S. government position on subcontractors is that they are by derivation not taxable,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;At the same time there&rsquo;s a plethora of agreements, diplomatic, military, status of forces, statutory prohibitions on paying taxes to foreign entities. The key point is it is a growing problem that is crying out for clarity and consistency.&rdquo;        

Normally, American companies would not object to taxation by a foreign government &mdash; they would just be able to deduct that tax from their United States tax bill. If the United States government says that taxes should not be paid, then such deductions might be disallowed, he said.        

&ldquo;You can&rsquo;t put the companies in a position where their tax status is unclear,&rdquo; Mr. Soloway said, &ldquo;especially in situations where the amounts are potentially very large.&rdquo;        
