
SANA, Yemen &mdash; More than 100 tribal fighters overran a military checkpoint northeast of the Yemeni capital on Friday, killing several soldiers and taking control of a strategic gateway to the city, according to tribesmen and witnesses. Five tribesmen were also killed, they said.        

The Yemeni military responded with helicopter airstrikes on areas around the checkpoint, known as Al Fardha &mdash; the first time it has used air power in several days of fighting with tribesmen who support opposition calls to oust the country&rsquo;s longtime ruler, President Ali Abdullah Saleh. Located on a mountain, Al Fardha is the main checkpoint between Sana, the capital, and Mareb Province in the east and is important to the government&rsquo;s attempts to prevent tribal fighters from joining battles in Sana.        

By evening, opposition tribesmen said the checkpoint remained in their control. But the route to the city was blocked by armed tribesmen loyal to Mr. Saleh who took up positions closer to the capital.        

Later in the day, the government denied that the tribesmen had taken over the checkpoint, saying the soldiers were chasing after those who had attacked the post, state-run television reported. It was not possible to independently confirm the government&rsquo;s statement.        

Even as fighting raged outside Sana, the violence that has gripped Yemen&rsquo;s central city since Monday appeared to ebb, at least temporarily. Mr. Saleh canceled his weekly rally, which had drawn thousands of government supporters from outside the capital, and opposition protests were not as large as in previous weeks amid continuing fears of violence.        

Representatives of Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s government, meanwhile, engaged in mediation with tribesmen loyal to the Ahmar family, whose members play leading roles in the political opposition. The two sides fought fierce street battles this week after Mr. Saleh refused for a third time to sign a deal to transfer power in the face of vast street protests. More than 100 people have died in the clashes. Tribesmen, speaking to the local news media, have vowed to avenge the deaths of men from their tribes who have been killed in the fighting.        

Previous efforts at mediation between government forces and Ahmar fighters broke down this week after a group of tribal sheiks came under fire almost immediately after arriving at the Ahmar compound. Tribal mediators were again at the Ahmar home on Friday, and talks appeared to be proceeding without any violent interruption.        

Any mediated deal between the two sides is likely to include the withdrawal of Ahmar tribesmen from several government buildings near the family compound that have been taken in fighting this week, according to a witness to the negotiations. In exchange, the government would grant immunity to Sadiq al-Ahmar, the leader of the Hashid tribal confederation, and his younger brothers. On Thursday, the government issued an arrest warrant accusing the Ahmar brothers of leading an armed rebellion.        

An end to the street fighting could also pave the way for the six-nation Gulf Cooperation Council to return to Sana and again try to persuade Mr. Saleh to sign the deal it brokered that would have him hand over power after 30 days. A high-ranking ruling party official, Sultan al-Barcani, said the council&rsquo;s chief mediator was expected to travel to Yemen on Sunday if the violence stopped.        

Mr. Ahmar spoke at an opposition protest on Friday and confirmed efforts to end the violence. He also defended the actions of his fighters, which he said proved to Mr. Saleh that the opposition would fight if necessary.        

&ldquo;We wanted our revolution to be peaceful but were forced to use the weapons,&rdquo; said Mr. Ahmar, who had sought to rally Yemen&rsquo;s tribes against Mr. Saleh. &ldquo;Now we would say we are ready for anything peaceful or not peaceful.&rdquo;        

Protesters at the main antigovernment sit-in remained divided over how to react to the violence. Some were angered by Mr. Ahmar&rsquo;s comments.        

&ldquo;He introduced himself as a leader for our peaceful revolution,&rdquo; said a protester at Friday&rsquo;s rally, Tawfik al-Ammari. &ldquo;We want Saleh to go, but we do not want the al-Ahmar family to replace him.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ahmar&rsquo;s efforts to widen the struggle appeared to be working, with Friday&rsquo;s fighting at the checkpoint and battles on Wednesday in Arhab, a village north of the capital.        

Mr. Saleh has been an ally of the United States on counterterrorism, but now American officials are considering pushing for United Nations resolutions or even sanctions to press him to end to the violence by signing the agreement and leaving power.        

Amid the fighting this week, residents in the capital hoarded cash from banks and thousands packed into cars and taxis to flee. Though Yemen has had its share of conflicts over the past 20 years, including a bloody civil war in 1994 and a drawn-out fighting against Houthi rebels in the north, most of those battles were fought outside Sana.        

Violence flared Friday in the coastal city of Zinjibar, known as a stronghold of Al Qaeda. Tribesmen there fought government forces, setting a government building on fire and killing at least five people, state television reported, in fighting that appeared unconnected to the situation in the capital.        
Nasser Arrabyee reported from Sana, and J. David Goodman from New York. Laura Kasinof contributed reporting.
