
BANGKOK &mdash; An American citizen has been arrested in Thailand and accused of insulting the country&rsquo;s monarchy in the latest in a string of cases highlighting the strict and controversial laws protecting the ailing king.        

The American, Lerpong Wichaicommart, has been charged with using the Internet to disseminate information that insults or threatens the monarchy, the Thai authorities said on Friday.        

&ldquo;He violated the law by writing articles and posted them on a Web site,&rdquo; Tharit Pengdit, the director of Thailand&rsquo;s Department of Special Investigation, said in an interview. Mr. Tharit declined to disclose the contents of the posted material but said the case involved three offenses &ldquo;which violate state security.&rdquo;        

Mr. Lerpong, 54, is being held without bail. Taken together, the charges against him could add up to a 22-year prison term.        

King Bhumibol Adulyadej, 83, has commanded enormous respect during his six decades on the throne. But he has been hospitalized for the past 20 months, a time of deep political divisions and soul-searching about the monarchy&rsquo;s future.        

The country is preparing for parliamentary elections on July 3, and campaigning has underlined the deep political fissures in Thai society. One of the issues in the campaign is the increasingly aggressive use of the l&egrave;se-majest&eacute; law, which bans anyone from defaming, insulting or threatening the king, queen and crown prince.        

The military has taken a leading role in bringing charges against suspects in such cases, including leading opposition figures. The Thai authorities have also become more forceful in policing the Internet, with thousands of Web sites shut down in recent years for insults against the royal family.        

Among the charges against Mr. Lerpong is that he provided a link on a Web site to a digital version of &ldquo;The King Never Smiles,&rdquo; a book by Paul M. Handley, an American journalist. The book, published by Yale University Press and banned in Thailand, is a critical look at the reign of King Bhumibol.        

Mr. Lerpong was arrested on Tuesday, but the case was not made public until Friday, when a Thai Web site, prachatai3.info, published details of his case.        

Mr. Lerpong was born in Thailand and settled in Colorado three decades ago. He returned to Thailand about a year ago, the authorities said.        

He met Friday with a United States consular official, said Kristin Kneedler, a spokeswoman for the United States Embassy in Bangkok.        

&ldquo;We are still gathering information about the arrest and the charges,&rdquo; Ms. Kneedler said. &ldquo;We just visited him this morning. We are in contact with his family.&rdquo; Mr. Lerpong also goes by the name Joe W. Gordon.        

The number of l&egrave;se-majest&eacute; cases has sharply increased in recent years although the exact number is not known. Some cases have gone largely unreported and, like Mr. Lerpong&rsquo;s case, often involve Internet postings.        

Similar to Mr. Lerpong&rsquo;s case is that of Anthony Chai, another naturalized American citizen from Thailand who owns a computer store in Southern California. Mr. Chai was detained during a trip to Thailand in 2006 and questioned about postings he made on the Internet from the United States. Mr. Chai was released but has been warned that he will be arrested if he returns to Thailand, according to the World Organization for Human Rights USA in Washington, which believes that the case sets troubling precedents.        

The group says the Thai authorities obtained Mr. Chai&rsquo;s identity through his Internet provider, Netfirms, which was based in Canada but had offices in the United States.        

&ldquo;This case will serve as an example and convince other U.S. companies to think twice before releasing customers&rsquo; personal information to governments that have poor human rights records, especially when doing so means placing a U.S. citizen at peril of unjust imprisonment,&rdquo; the group said in an e-mailed statement.        
