
BELGRADE, Serbia &mdash; The tall building that served as the headquarters for the late Slobodan Milosevic&rsquo;s political party, bombed by an American cruise missile in the 1999 Kosovo war, has been privatized and rebuilt, covered now in blue-green glass. Before 1990, it was home to the Communist Party Central Committee; now it houses offices, including Western banks, and a modish shopping center.        

The building is a kind of metaphor for Serbia&rsquo;s steady move toward reintegration into Europe and the West, but also for its painful and incomplete transition. The sale of the building was considered by many to be corrupt, a political gift to a crony of a former prime minister, Zoran Djindjic.        

The arrest on Thursday of the wanted war crimes suspect Ratko Mladic after 15 years of quiet protection and hiding is also regarded as a mixed blessing. It is a major victory for Serbia&rsquo;s democratic president, Boris Tadic, and his supporters, who see it as vindication of moral values and the closing of another chapter of a bloody past.        

Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s inevitable extradition to face charges of genocide is bound to jump-start Serbia&rsquo;s request to join the European Union. That could pay off politically for Mr. Tadic, who reorganized intelligence gathering and deployed the police on a nationwide manhunt for Mr. Mladic, in an attempt to remove that barrier to membership.        

But for many Serbs, who are struggling with a very weak economy and high joblessness rates of some 20 percent, the arrest of Mr. Mladic is an ambivalent, even irrelevant moment for their near future.        

European Union membership would be years away in any case, and Serbs have been watching the financial crises that have rocked the union.        

&ldquo;We see that the Europeans don&rsquo;t want to pay for the Greek unemployed, let alone for the Serb unemployed,&rdquo; said Aleksandar Mitic, chairman of a Belgrade research institute, the Center for Strategic Alternatives. Mr. Mitic says that Mr. Tadic will get a boost from the Mladic arrest and consequent steps by the European Union, but that they may not make a very big difference electorally with Serbs hit hard by an economic crisis and unhappy about further concessions to the United States and Europe.        

And while Serbia has moved closer to the West by satisfying the demands for retribution for Balkan war crimes, it remains apart on issues crucial to Europe: Bosnia and Kosovo, which prompted NATO&rsquo;s bombing of the Serbs.        

In Kosovo, Serbia is firmly opposed to independence for a state that it legally considers a province of Serbia. And in Bosnia, Serbia backs the Serbian entity within Bosnia, the Republika Srpska, to maintain its strong autonomy. These nationalist tensions lead some Western experts to worry that the Dayton Accords that ended the Bosnian war &mdash; in which Mr. Mladic was the Bosnian Serb commander &mdash; are being undermined.        

Mr. Tadic has made some symbolic progress, especially on Kosovo. He began talks in February, mediated by the European Union, with the Kosovo government in Pristina.        

While these talks are covering supposedly technical issues, such as whether Belgrade will recognize Kosovo postage stamps, license plates and tax documents, for many in Serbia&rsquo;s vocal opposition this is a slippery slope toward tacit recognition of Kosovo&rsquo;s independence.        

As for the arrest of Mr. Mladic, who had been kept secretly in a house owned by his cousin, Serbs were somewhat ambivalent.        

To some, it is a clear triumph. &ldquo;I believe political will was demonstrated to get rid of the past, to close that chapter for those who not only want to face the past, but who want Serbia to be a modern, democratic European country, said Sonja Licht, a well-known advocate for democracy here and president of the foreign affairs council of the Foreign Ministry. &ldquo;With Mladic free, we couldn&rsquo;t do that.&rdquo;        

But others see a mixed picture.        

&ldquo;For a lot of people here now, Mladic was a symbol, almost a myth, considered neither a hero nor a criminal,&rdquo; said Srdjan Bogosavljevic, a noted pollster here. &ldquo;People didn&rsquo;t see him as a real person. When relations were good with the international community, he was less popular, and when they were bad, he was more popular.&rdquo;        

At the same time, Serbs are not fans of the International Court of Justice in The Hague.        

&ldquo;The Hague is extremely unpopular, perceived as inefficient, biased and an anti-Serb political institution,&rdquo; with judges and prosecutors viewed similarly, Mr. Bogosavljevic said.        

These sentiments are unlikely to derail Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s extradition, however. No one would object to Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s facing Serbian justice, he said, but even Serbs who hate the court in The Hague will not make a major protest over Mr. Mladic.        

&ldquo;For people what is important is how to survive, month to month,&rdquo; he said. Polls show that if they rank their key concerns, Mr. Mladic is not among them, while the status of Kosovo often is.        

The most nationalist opposition party, the Serbian Radical Party, whose leader, Vojislav Seselj, is facing charges in The Hague, has come out strongly against the arrest of Mr. Mladic.        

Dragan Todorovic, the party&rsquo;s deputy president, said that the arrest &ldquo;was one of the most shameful things this traitor government led by Tadic has done.&rdquo; He called for a demonstration in Belgrade on Sunday evening, but few expect a large turnout.        

The feelings of most Serbs were probably well expressed by Bozo Prelevic, who served for a time as a co-minister of police after the fall of Mr. Milosevic. Mr. Mladic, he said, &ldquo;was a heavy stone&rdquo; on Serbian backs, and now it is nearly gone.        
