
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; A roadside bomb struck a United Nations convoy near a southern Lebanese port on Friday, wounding six Italian peacekeepers and a Lebanese passer-by in the first attack on the force in more than three years, Lebanese and Italian officials said.        

They said the blast was caused by a homemade bomb placed behind a low concrete barrier lining the highway. The blast damaged two of the four cars in the convoy as it traveled south on the main highway in Sidon. The police said that the bomb, which left a crater in the road, contained up to 25 pounds of explosive material.        

The Italian defense minister, Ignazio La Russa, said during a news conference in Milan shortly after the blast that two of the peacekeepers were badly hurt.        

There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the attack on the United Nations forces, a longtime presence in southern Lebanon that was reinforced after the 2006 war between Israel and Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shiite Muslim movement.        

But Lebanon&rsquo;s weak government, ineffective military and combustible mix of political and sectarian forces with foreign paymasters has often made it an arena for geopolitical vendettas. Many in Lebanon have been bracing for possible strife amid a 10-week uprising in neighboring Syria. There, international pressure has mounted on President Bashar al-Assad to institute democratic changes.        

Mr. La Russa, the defense minister, said that Italian officials &ldquo;were not too surprised by this terrorist action&rdquo; given the situation in Lebanon. The country has been without a government since January, when Hezbollah ministers and their allies walked out of the cabinet.        

Anger has also risen in the Palestinian camps over the United Nations force&rsquo;s perceived lack of intervention in preventing Israeli forces from firing on crowds who headed to the Israeli border earlier this month to commemorate the Nakba, or catastrophe, a day that marks for Palestinians the creation of Israel in 1948. Lebanese officials said that Israeli troops killed 10 people on the Lebanese side of the border.        

&ldquo;The incident intersects with what&rsquo;s happening in the region,&rdquo; said Rafic Nasrallah, the head of the International Center for Media and Studies in Beirut.        

The last attack on United Nations forces in Lebanon was in January 2008, when a roadside bomb struck United Nations vehicles traveling along the same road south of Beirut, lightly wounding two peacekeepers. The deadliest attack in recent years was in 2007, when six peacekeepers were killed by a bomb that hit their armored personnel carriers near the fortified Israeli border.        

The United Nations peacekeeping force, known here by its acronym, Unifil, was first deployed to southern Lebanon in 1978 after an Israeli invasion. The force now employs more than 12,000 members of the military under the command of a Spanish general. About 2,500 of the soldiers are Italian.        

The Italian foreign minister, Franco Frattini, said in a statement on the ministry&rsquo;s Web site that the Unifil mission provided &ldquo;a decisive contribution to the stability of one of the most sensitive areas of the Middle East.&rdquo;        

In a television interview with RaiNews, Mr. Frattini reiterated the government stance that Italy was going to gradually withdraw its missions from &ldquo;Kosovo, the Balkans and Lebanon even though in Lebanon the situation is anything but calm.&rdquo;        

The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, condemned the attack and said the organization would work closely with the Lebanese authorities to investigate the attack and bring the perpetrators to justice.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, Elisabetta Povoledo from Rome, and Dan Bilefsky from New York.
