
MOSCOW &mdash; President Dmitri A. Medvedev on Friday offered to leverage Russia&rsquo;s relationships in Libya to try to persuade Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi to leave power, an act of long-shot diplomacy that for the first time casts Russia as a central player in events unfolding in North Africa.        

Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s announcement, which came a day after a 90-minute bilateral meeting with President Obama at the Group of 8 meeting in France, represents a pronounced shift in Russia&rsquo;s tone on Libya. Russia&rsquo;s criticism of NATO attacks had become increasingly tough over the last months, reviving a longstanding critique of American unilateralism that had quieted since Mr. Obama took office.        

By signing on to the effort, Mr. Medvedev is taking a gamble. If Colonel Qaddafi could be persuaded to leave, Russia would win international plaudits but would also bear some responsibility for guaranteeing his safety. If he cannot, Mr. Medvedev might find it more difficult to keep his distance from the military campaign, which is not popular in Russia.        

But all those risks may be mitigated by the prestige of being asked to defuse a violent standoff on behalf of world powers.        

&ldquo;Russia in the post-Soviet era has all these ideas about its influence and consequence in the world, and it is very sad for Russian politicians if it does not exist,&rdquo; said Dmitri Oreshkin, an analyst with the Mercator Group, a Moscow-based advisory group. &ldquo;In this case, it seems like it exists. This is a reason to feel strong and respected.&rdquo;        

Mikhail V. Margelov, Russia&rsquo;s special envoy to the Middle East and Africa, said he had been ordered to fly to Benghazi, the rebel stronghold, to conduct negotiations with the Libyan opposition, with an eye to assessing their vision of a post-Qaddafi government. He has mentioned Qatar and Saudi Arabia as countries that might possibly offer Colonel Qaddafi asylum, and said Group of 8 allies have proposed a variety possibilities for his future, &ldquo;from a quiet life as a simple Bedouin in the Libyan desert, to the fate of Milosevic in the Hague.&rdquo;        

Russia is in a unique position to negotiate, he said, because &ldquo;Russian soldiers have never fought against African countries and against the African people.&rdquo;        

Mr. Margelov added: &ldquo;We have preserved our embassy in Tripoli, and have preserved contacts with people in Qaddafi&rsquo;s circle. And we are developing our contacts with the Libyan rebels. This is why I am going there.&rdquo;        

Earlier in the day, when a reporter asked him who his negotiating partner was likely to be, Mr. Margelov was evasive.        

&ldquo;Can you imagine, if I give you this person&rsquo;s name, and his head were to be cut off the next day?&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But yes, we do have people in Qaddafi&rsquo;s camp.&rdquo;        

In Tripoli, the Russian move prompted a testy response from the government, which has repeatedly rejected demands for Colonel Qaddafi to quit, saying that it is up to &ldquo;the Libyan people,&rdquo; not foreign powers or the rebels, to decide the role Colonel Qaddafi will play in the country&rsquo;s future. The deputy foreign minister, Khalid Kaim, said at a news conference that Libya expected solidarity from Russia after 40 years of close commercial and political links, not a deal made in France that aligned Moscow with Western powers in their attempt to unseat Colonel Qaddafi.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t think that Russia will stray into the position in which it will be siding with NATO,&rdquo; he said. Then, as if to snub President Medvedev&rsquo;s offer for Russia to act as a diplomatic intermediary, he said that the Qaddafi government would not, in any case, accept any diplomatic approach from Moscow unless the Russians chose to approach Libya through a body that has long been a Qaddafi ally, the African Union.        

In the face of the strong restatement of demands for Colonel Qaddafi to go that have come in recent days from President Obama, Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain and President Nicolas Sarkozy of France, the Tripoli government appeared to have circled its diplomatic wagons, and to be holding out for a lifeline from the African nations Colonel Qaddafi has courted, and supported financially.        
John F. Burns contributed reporting from Tripoli, Libya, Mark Landler from Deauville, France, and Michael Schwirtz from Moscow.
