
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton warned Friday that relations between the United States and Pakistan had reached &ldquo;a turning point,&rdquo; and called on Pakistan&rsquo;s leaders to take urgent measures against Islamic extremists in the wake of the killing of Osama bin Laden.        

Mrs. Clinton, the highest-ranking American official to visit Pakistan since a Navy Seal team found Bin Laden hiding in a garrison town 35 miles from the capital, did not get public pledges of cooperation from the Pakistanis. But she argued that it was in the interest of both countries to jointly pursue terrorists operating from havens in Pakistan.        

&ldquo;We will do our part,&rdquo; she said in remarks at the American Embassy here, &ldquo;and we look to the government of Pakistan to take decisive steps in the days ahead.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Clinton was joined by the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Mike Mullen, who traveled to Pakistan separately. The carefully orchestrated diplomatic encounter was intended both to cajole the Pakistanis and to reassure them of political support at a time when Congress has threatened to cut economic and security aid. Pakistan has received $20 billion in aid from the United States since 2001.        

The Pakistanis promised &ldquo;some very specific actions&rdquo; in the near future to show their commitment to fighting terrorism, Mrs. Clinton said in her public remarks, without elaborating.        

A senior official traveling with her later, speaking only on condition of anonymity, following diplomatic protocol, said the actions included &ldquo;specific operations&rdquo; against individuals. The official said that for security reasons, their names could not be disclosed in advance, and might never be made public.        

It remains to be seen whether the meetings eased the tensions and suspicions that have haunted relations with Pakistan so badly that American officials dared not notify its leaders in advance of the raid against Bin Laden. Many people in Pakistan see that raid less as a victory in fighting Al Qaeda than as an affront to the country&rsquo;s sovereignty and pride.        

&ldquo;They had no idea we could or we would do what we did,&rdquo; said another senior administration official traveling on Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s airplane. &ldquo;That has changed their perspective in ways that we&rsquo;re still evaluating, and they&rsquo;re still trying to come to grips with.&rdquo;        

Friday&rsquo;s meetings did not appear to go well at first. Mrs. Clinton and Admiral Mullen appeared awkward and unsmiling when they met at the presidential palace with President Asif Ali Zardari, Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani and the army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani.        

In brief remarks directed to Mr. Zardari, Mrs. Clinton said the Obama administration recognized &ldquo;the sacrifice that is made every single day by the men and women of your military and the citizens of your country,&rdquo; according to a video of that initial encounter. Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s response was inaudible because his staff had banned microphones from the room and had strictly limited access for journalists traveling with Mrs. Clinton.        

The Americans and the Pakistanis did not otherwise appear together publicly or make a joint statement after the meetings, which also included the chief of Pakistan&rsquo;s intelligence service, Lt. Gen. Ahmed Shuja Pasha, who has denounced the killing of Bin Laden before Parliament as a &ldquo;sting operation.&rdquo;        

Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s office issued a brief written statement after Friday&rsquo;s meeting, saying the two countries agreed to &ldquo;work together in any future actions against high-value targets in Pakistan,&rdquo; The Associated Press reported from Islamabad. That appeared to reflect Pakistan&rsquo;s demand that the United States stop carrying out unilateral missions like the one that killed Bin Laden.        

For their part, Mrs. Clinton and her aides played down the initial awkwardness and said that in private both sides discussed their concerns frankly but constructively, displaying an eagerness to cooperate against a threat that afflicts both countries.        

She said again on Friday that she had &ldquo;absolutely no evidence&rdquo; to suggest that senior Pakistani civilian or military leaders knew Bin Laden was hiding in Abbottabad, north of the capital. But it was not clear whether the Pakistanis shared with Mrs. Clinton the results of the investigation they promised into who else might have known he was there.        

Mrs. Clinton had postponed the visit as the Obama administration gauged Pakistan&rsquo;s reactions to the raid. The delay allowed her to coordinate her visit with Admiral Mullen&rsquo;s to maximize the impact of the administration&rsquo;s message. In the end, their visit lasted six and a half hours.        

&ldquo;Now is not the time for retreat or for recrimination,&rdquo; Admiral Mullen said in remarks with Mrs. Clinton at the embassy. &ldquo;Now is the time for action and close coordination, for more cooperation, not less.&rdquo;        

Since Bin Laden was killed, Pakistan has taken steps that appeared intended to undercut cooperation, not increase it. In addition to a flurry of anti-American statements from senior government figures, officials in Islamabad leaked the name of the C.I.A.&rsquo;s station chief, and asked the Pentagon to withdraw some military advisers.        

Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s advisers decided to proceed with the visit after the Pakistanis allowed C.I.A. officers to interview Bin Laden&rsquo;s wives and then to scour the walled compound where Bin Laden was found for additional evidence. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve had some positive actions,&rdquo; another senior administration official aboard the secretary&rsquo;s plane said, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss diplomatic matters.        
