
JERUSALEM &mdash; As Egypt prepared to open its border with Gaza on Saturday, Israeli officials said they were worried about weapons and militants flowing into the Hamas-controlled strip and about what the move indicated for Egypt&rsquo;s future policies. The government did not issue a statement, saying it was in contact with the Egyptian authorities and wanted to see how the change played out in practice before reacting. Others did not wait.        

&ldquo;This is a dangerous development that could lead to the smuggling of weapons, explosives and Al Qaeda agents into Gaza,&rdquo; Silvan Shalom, a deputy prime minister from the right-wing Likud Party, said on Israel Radio.        

But some Israeli officials said the fear was overstated, and that the border opening might provide some benefit: It could ease international pressure on Israel over its treatment of Gaza, while increasing Egypt&rsquo;s responsibility for the enclave&rsquo;s 1.6 million residents. Militants and weapons, they added, were imported by Hamas through underground tunnels, not through legal crossings, and the border was being opened only to people, not goods, as it has been in practice since last June, with interruptions.        

&ldquo;Some think this is a good thing,&rdquo; one official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity because the policy is still in formation. &ldquo;Egypt says it will keep an eye on arms smuggling and it will end up taking more responsibility for Gaza. One question is what they will do about cash brought in suitcases.&rdquo;        

The new Egyptian plan will open the border six days a week to everyone except men between the ages of 18 and 40, who will need to pass a security clearance first. This means that thousands of Gazans seeking to study, shop, train or visit relatives abroad should find it much easier to do so than they had for the past four years. The reaction in Gaza was of relief and joy.        

&ldquo;I was born in Gaza and have never left it,&rdquo; said Abeer Ayoub, 24, a researcher for a human rights group. &ldquo;I never thought I could. Yesterday, I was thinking about going to Egypt and getting myself ready for a scholarship to the States. That could be the biggest change that could happen to me in my entire life.&rdquo;        

Abu Khalil al-Soosy, a retired merchant, said, &ldquo;For years we have been screaming and suffering every day.&rdquo; The new Egyptian government, he said, had heard their cries.        

After Hamas took over Gaza in 2007, Israel, with Egypt&rsquo;s help, imposed an embargo on the area, essentially trapping the population. It argued that Hamas was shooting rockets at Israel, that it was holding an Israeli soldier captive without Red Cross visits and that it pursued a policy of seeking Israel&rsquo;s destruction.        

When Hosni Mubarak was forced from power by the recent Egyptian revolution, the interim Egyptian authorities said they would end their part in that policy. They wanted to foster Palestinian unity between Fatah and Hamas, and as one inducement to Hamas they promised to reopen the border.        

Egypt is also planning to exchange ambassadors with Iran, another source of Israeli worry that a post-Mubarak Egypt will be far less amenable to its interests. What is causing concern in Israel is, in fact, as much what the opening portends about Egypt&rsquo;s new direction &mdash; and what next steps it might take toward Gaza &mdash; as the act itself.        

As the deputy defense minister, Matan Vilnai, said on Israel Radio, the expected opening of the Gaza-Egypt border &ldquo;is the first stage in a difficult situation that Israel will be facing.&rdquo;        

In truth, the border policy shift is a continuation of something that began a year ago when Israel faced international condemnation after its commandos killed nine activists aboard a Turkish vessel trying to break the Israeli siege of Gaza.        

In response, Egypt opened Rafah to pedestrian traffic, and in 2010, according to the Israeli Army, 162,000 people crossed into and out of Gaza through the crossing. All goods still come in from Israel only, although Egypt says it is considering allowing cargo in the future.        

Until Israel shifted its policy, its goal had been to create a palpable contrast between the Fatah-run West Bank and Hamas-run Gaza by helping the West Bank develop and suppressing economic growth in Gaza.        

That policy consisted of barring nearly all human movement into and out of Gaza and severely limiting the goods. But the approach was largely viewed as a failure. Hamas seemed no weaker and Israel faced condemnation, especially after its three-week war there starting in late 2008 that killed up to 1,400 people and destroyed thousands of buildings.        

Over the past year, it has greatly increased the amount and kind of goods permitted into Gaza. And most Gazans, who are refugees, are provided health care and education through the United Nations. Still, economic development and reconstruction are moving at a snail&rsquo;s pace.        

Gisha, an Israeli human rights group focused on freedom of movement for Palestinians, expressed satisfaction at the change in Egyptian policy but called it incremental progress because Israel should allow Gazans to cross into the West Bank, currently forbidden.        

&ldquo;Israel continues to restrict movement of goods to and from Gaza and block it to and from the West Bank,&rdquo; said Sari Bashi, executive director of Gisha. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want a situation where Palestinians in Gaza can travel anywhere in the world except to the West Bank.&rdquo;        
Ben Solomon contributed reporting from Gaza.
