
BEIJING &mdash; An American who had been detained for six months in North Korea arrived in Beijing on Saturday following his release a day earlier, a U.S. Embassy spokesman said.        

The American, Jun Young-su, who lives in Southern California, arrived in Beijing on Saturday with an American envoy who had visited the reclusive country this past week, said U.S. Embassy spokesman Richard Buangan. Mr. Jun was freed because a visiting American official had &ldquo;expressed regret at the incident,&rdquo; The Associated Press reported on Friday.        

Mr. Jun entered North Korea on a valid business visa but was detained for inappropriate or illegal religious activity, according to Friday news media reports in South Korea that cited the North&rsquo;s state news service.        

The United States official who was said to have expressed regret, Robert R. King, the special envoy for North Korean human rights issues, was leading an American delegation that was trying to verify food supply surveys by international charities.        

After arriving in Beijing on Saturday, Mr. King said that Mr. Jun had been released and would be reunited with his family within a day or two. &nbsp;        

"While we were there," Mr King said, "our team had three and a half days of very serious and thoughtful talks with the foreign ministry."&nbsp;        

Mr. King said they discussed several issues, but "did not negotiate or agree to any provision of food assistance,"apparently trying to stop speculation of a deal to free Mr. Jun, who did not appear before reporters        

&nbsp;"That is an issue that will have to be made in Washington," Mr. King said.&nbsp;&nbsp;        

&nbsp;After a trip to North Korea in late April, former President Jimmy Carter said he was disappointed that he did not win the release of Mr. Jun on humanitarian grounds. Mr. Carter made the trip as a member of the Elders, an independent group of world leaders established by Nelson Mandela.        

Mr. Carter said the Swedish ambassador in Pyongyang had visited Mr. Jun four times and reported that he was being treated well. Because the United States does not have diplomatic relations with North Korea, its interests are sometimes represented there by Sweden.        

At the time of Mr. Carter&rsquo;s trip, Mr. Jun&rsquo;s family issued an open letter to North Korea to appeal for the release of &ldquo;our loving father and husband.&rdquo;        

The letter said that Mr. Jun, who is said to be in his 60s, had medical issues. &ldquo;We strongly doubt that our father&rsquo;s health can withstand the stress of a trial or further detainment,&rdquo; family members wrote. &ldquo;Therefore, we beseech his release as an act of humanitarianism that your nation can bestow upon him and our family.&rdquo;        
Edward Wong reported from Beijing, and Kevin Drew from Hong Kong. Su-Hyun Lee contributed reporting from Seoul, South Korea.
