
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Thousands of Syrians took to the streets again on Friday in virtually every region of the country, but in some locales, Syrian security forces showed restraint in not firing on the demonstrations in a possible bid to keep down a death toll that has brought growing international pressure and strained relations with Syria&rsquo;s few allies.        

For weeks, Fridays have been the bloodiest day in the 10-week uprising against the rule of President Bashar al-Assad, as security forces, seemingly unaccountable in some parts of the country, have killed, wounded and beaten demonstrators.        

The death toll on Friday was seven: three protesters were killed in the central city of Homs, another three in the Damascus suburb of Qatana and one in the town of Zabadani, and though activists said the number would likely rise, it paled before the dozens killed in past weeks.        

Whether the degree of restraint was a shift in official policy was unclear. Syrian officials have banned most foreign journalists from operating in the country. But it suggested that Syrian officials were aware of the international pressure that had isolated the government; even Turkey, once one of Syria&rsquo;s closest allies, has called on it to institute reforms. Turkey&rsquo;s foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, warned of &ldquo;a vicious cycle of violence&rdquo; in an interview this week. &ldquo;Unfortunately, we are seeing every week, every Friday more people being killed,&rdquo; he said. Syrian state news media said Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, who had established a deep personal relationship with Mr. Assad, called him Friday.        

Group of 8 leaders meeting in Deauville, France, called on Mr. Assad to immediately halt the use of force and intimidation against the protesters and to release all political prisoners. &ldquo;Only the path of dialogue and fundamental reforms will lead to democracy, and thus to long-term security and prosperity in Syria, they said in a communiqu&eacute;. &ldquo;Should the Syrian authorities not heed this call, we will consider further measures.&rdquo;        

The leaders discussed the conflict in Syria at length behind closed doors. A European diplomat present at the meetings said there was a general feeling that Mr. Assad&rsquo;s initial promises of concessions and reform were nothing more than a bid to gain time for him to impose a crackdown on protesters.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve done everything we can to bring Syria back into the international community,&rdquo; President Nicolas Sarkozy of France said Friday. &ldquo;But they have taken a big step back, and we no longer have confidence&rdquo; in Mr. Assad.        

After erupting spontaneously on March 18 in the southern city of Dara&rsquo;a, the protests have spread, and activists have sought to improve their organization through local coordinating committees and their tactics, most notably shifting to protests at night, when they believe security forces are more reluctant to fire and may find it harder to identity demonstrators. Activists say their very resilience has demonstrated that the government&rsquo;s ferocious crackdown &mdash; with at least 1,000 dead and more than 10,000 people arrested &mdash; will not succeed in quelling the dissent.        

On Friday, the protests also appeared to spread to upscale neighborhoods in several cities for the first time. Throughout the uprising, the Syrian government has seen the country&rsquo;s religious minorities, the educated middle class and the business elite as the constituencies that are crucial to prolonging the four decades of rule by the Assad family.        

Activists reported demonstrations in the capital, Damascus, and its suburb; in Homs and Hama, in central Syria; in Aleppo and Idlib to the northwest; Qamishli and Hasaka to the northeast; Deir al Zour to the east; and villages and towns in the southern steppe of Houran; and the coastal cities of Latakia, Banias and Jableh. Though the numbers still pale before the mass demonstrations in Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen, the locales represent the breadth of the country. The protests in Damascus and Aleppo were reportedly small, and both cities &mdash; Syria&rsquo;s largest &mdash; have remained relatively quiet during the uprising.        

&ldquo;We will keep our demonstrations until we get our rights,&rdquo; said one protester in Medan, a neighborhood in Damascus that has seen small demonstrations in past weeks. Like others, he refused to give his name, fearing reprisals. &ldquo;We want freedom and democracy. No dialogue with Assad&rsquo;s regime. He should leave or change completely his regime.&rdquo;        

The Local Coordination Committees for Syria, an umbrella group that helps organize protests and documents them online, said that the government cut Internet service in the suburbs of Damascus and other cities in central Syria and in the north.        

In Homs, Syria&rsquo;s third largest city, activists said that several thousand people demonstrated, chanting &ldquo;Leave, Bashar, we are free without you,&rdquo; and &ldquo;The army and the people are one hand.&rdquo; They said that for the first time in weeks, security forces did not open fire at the protesters there.        

Activists said that demonstrations in Homs spread to the upscale neighborhood of Inshaat.        

&ldquo;The movement is growing and becoming bigger with wider participation,&rdquo; said Abdel Hakeem Bashar, an opposition figure in the coastal city of Latakia. &ldquo;The regime is in a very narrow corner, and people have broken the barrier of fear for good.&rdquo;        

Though demonstrators have sought to maintain a message of national unity, the protests have erupted along sectarian fault lines in the country &mdash; sometimes in cities with a Sunni majority and an Alawite minority or in regions with Sunni cities and an Alawite countryside. The specter of sectarian strife has worried many Syrians in a country that remains as diverse as neighboring Iraq and Lebanon, both victims of civil war.        

Some of the anger in the protests has been directed at Iran, a predominantly Shiite country and Syria&rsquo;s closest ally. In Albu Kamal, a town near the Iraqi border, protesters burned portraits of Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of Hezbollah, a Shiite Muslim movement in Lebanon that is allied with Iran and Syria. This week, Mr. Nasrallah delivered a speech urging Syrians to support their government, angering many activists there.        

Syrian security forces killed four antigovernment protesters during a demonstration on Thursday night in the southern village of Dael, residents and activists said. Last Friday at least 67 people died, according to the Local Coordination Committees. It was the third highest number of casualties on a single day since the uprising began.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and Liz Alderman from Deauville, France.
