
RAFAH BORDER CROSSING, Egypt &mdash; Hundreds of Palestinian residents of the Gaza Strip arrived here by the busload on Saturday to pass through the reopened border into Egypt, taking the first tangible steps out of a four-year Israeli blockade.        

&ldquo;I feel this is the start of freedom,&rdquo; said Hasna el-Ryes, 45, a Gaza resident waiting to cross into Egypt so she could travel to visit sons studying in Britain. &ldquo;You can&rsquo;t imagine how much we have suffered.&rdquo;        

While a gradual loosening of the border controls over the last year had allowed some Gaza residents to cross &mdash; including registered students or those seeking medical treatment &mdash; many of those making the trip on Saturday said they felt a new stirring of hope at Egypt&rsquo;s decision to stop enforcing Israel&rsquo;s blockade of the Palestinian territory.        

They cheered the decision as a humanitarian gesture to Gaza residents but also as an important concession to make possible the reconciliation deal that Egypt brokered between the militant group Hamas, which rules in Gaza, and the moderate Fatah faction, which governs the West Bank. And they saluted the Egyptian revolution that brought about a new spirit of independence.        

&ldquo;The people are taking their rights, and when the Egyptians rise it helps the Palestinians,&rdquo; said Faris Awad, 48, returning to visit family in Cairo for the first time since the start of the blockade, just in time for a wedding.        

The Rafah border crossing has for years been a kind of geographic emblem of Egypt&rsquo;s complicated relationship with Israel.        

For the Arab world, Egypt&rsquo;s determination under President Hosni Mubarak to secure the border came to represent its decision to put its partnership with Israel and the United States ahead of solidarity with its fellow Muslims languishing in of Gaza. Inside Egypt, the closed border was a projection of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s self-image as a bulwark against militant groups like Hamas. For Palestinians, it represented a betrayal.        

In Israel, Rafah was a reminder of the superficial quality of its partnership with Mr. Mubarak, because while his security forces closed the surface crossing, Hamas and its Egyptian sympathizers continued to carry in weapons and goods through a not-so-secret network of tunnels. Less acknowledged was the Rafah border&rsquo;s function as a kind of safety valve, helping to relieve enough of the humanitarian needs within Gaza to avoid a crisis that might shock the world &mdash; for example, by letting sick Gazans through for urgent medical care.        

But the opening on Saturday is a reminder of how things are changing between Egypt and Israel after Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s ouster. Both the Israeli government and the military council that rules Egypt now are quite aware that the vast majority of Egyptians loathe their country&rsquo;s support of Israel and are demanding a greater voice in foreign policy.        

Egypt&rsquo;s interim foreign minister, Nabil el-Araby, a driving force behind the Hamas-Fatah agreement and the border opening and who is about to leave his post to become director of the Arab League, has continued his efforts to tilt Egypt away from Israel and toward the Palestinians. In a statement on Thursday after attending a meeting of the so-called non-aligned movement, he urged its member countries to support the request for United Nations recognition of a Palestinian state to put pressure on Israel, and he condemned Israel&rsquo;s settlements as &ldquo;attempts to alter the character of the city of Jerusalem.&rdquo;        

Israel issued no statements on Saturday in response to the border opening, but its officials have made clear that they consider the looser controls a major security risk. It began its blockade of Gaza four years ago to keep Hamas, which consolidated control in Gaza after winning elections, from being resupplied with rockets and other weapons to use against Israelis.        

Musbah Mohamed Halawin, 59, waiting in a wheelchair to travel to Cairo for the first time in 30 years, called the Egyptians &ldquo;brothers.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Egypt is the only thing we have after God,&rdquo; he said.        

Samah Ahmad, 30, did a little dance as she raced down a hall holding out her freshly stamped Palestinian passport. She said she had tried to cross twice in the last 10 days &mdash; rejected once by the Palestinian authorities and once by the Egyptians.        

Fares Akram contributed reporting from Gaza, and Omniya Al Desoukie from Rafah.
