
KHARTOUM, Sudan (Reuters) &mdash; Northern and southern Sudanese representatives were to meet on Saturday to try to defuse tensions over the disputed Abyei region, officials said.        

Northern Sudanese armed forces seized the disputed region of Abyei last week, less than two months before the south is to formally declare its independence. The military action forced tens of thousands of people to flee and raised fears that the north and the south could return to full-blown war. The move drew sharp international criticism.        

Abyei, an oil-producing region, was a major battleground in Sudan&rsquo;s civil war and has importance for both sides. The region is used all year by the south-linked Ngok Dinka people and for part of the year by northern Arab Misseriya nomads. Its status has remained one of the most contentious issues in the weeks before the country is to be officially divided on July 9.        

South Sudan&rsquo;s vice president, Riek Machar, was scheduled to meet officials in Khartoum, Mangar Amerdid, a south Sudanese spokesman, said in Juba, southern&nbsp;Sudan&rsquo;s&nbsp;capital.        

Mr. Machar &ldquo;is seeing if there is any way to ease the tension between north and south,&rdquo; Mr. Amerdid said.        

The North Sudanese state news media and other news reports said Mr. Machar would meet Sudan&rsquo;s vice president, Ali Osman Mohamed Taha.        

Envoys from the north and the south were also expected to meet in the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa, on Saturday to try to end the crisis, an African Union official said.        

The United Nations mission in Sudan resumed land and air patrols in the Abyei area on Thursday, said Kouider Zerrouk, a spokesman. It had halted the patrols after the fighting began.        

Tensions rose in the region last week after an attack on a convoy of northern soldiers and United Nations peacekeepers. Southern Sudanese forces were blamed for the attack.        

Northern Sudan moved tanks into Abyei&rsquo;s main town last Saturday and has defied calls from the United States, the United Nations and south Sudan&rsquo;s president to withdraw, saying the land belongs to the north.        

Widespread fighting and looting forced tens of thousands of people to flee down muddy roads without their possessions. Entire villages were emptied, international organizations say.        

Mr. Kouider said looting and burning in Abyei appeared to have subsided by Friday, but sporadic gunshots could be heard. &ldquo;The situation remains volatile and tense,&rdquo; he said.        

Analysts fear a north Sudanese land grab could lead to a full-blown conflict, a development that would have a devastating impact on the region by sending refugees back across borders and creating a failed state in the south at its birth.        

Southern Sudanese voted overwhelmingly to secede in a January referendum that was guaranteed by a 2005 peace deal, which ended decades of civil war between the mainly Muslim north and the south, where most people are Christian or follow traditional beliefs.        

In Juba, about 100 people demonstrated on Saturday to pray for those killed in the violence in Abyei. The southern Sudanese president, Salva Kiir, said Thursday that there would be no war over the incursion and that it would not derail independence.        
