
WARSAW &mdash; For every foreign leader, a visit to Poland involves paying respects at the memorials to the country&rsquo;s tragic past. It was no different for President Obama, who landed here on Friday and made his way immediately to the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.        

But Mr. Obama&rsquo;s next stop carried an echo of a current struggle, one that the president confronted again last week before leaving on his weeklong tour of Europe. After placing a wreath at a monument to the heroes of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising, Mr. Obama met with Polish Jews, at least one of whom pleaded with him to protect Israel.        

&ldquo;It is the only Jewish state we have, and we trust you,&rdquo; a woman told him while shaking his hand.        

&ldquo;I will always be there for Israel,&rdquo; he replied.        

And in what seemed like another reference to American support for Israel, he said to a man: &ldquo;We will always be there. I promise.&rdquo;        

Last week, Mr. Obama was criticized by some Jews in Israel and the United States for his proposal to break the deadlock in the peace negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians. Critics said the plan &mdash; which would use the pre-1967 borders of Israel, with land swaps, as the starting point for negotiations over the contours of a Palestinian state &mdash; would grievously endanger Israel&rsquo;s security.        

The Warsaw Ghetto monument, made of bronze and granite, honors the leaders of the largest Jewish insurgency of World War II, in which thousands rose against Nazi troops who were trying to liquidate the ghetto and send its residents to death camps. Nearly 7,000 people were killed in the fighting, which began on April 19, 1943, and lasted nearly a month.        

White House aides said they had made plans for Mr. Obama&rsquo;s visit to the monument months before the speech last week in which he laid out his Middle East peace proposal. He seemed clearly moved by the memorial, lingering to talk to a line of people and posing for a group photo.        

The last time Mr. Obama planned to come to Poland &mdash; to attend the funeral of President Lech Kaczynski &mdash; he was foiled by a cloud of volcanic ash from Iceland, which grounded planes for weeks. It almost happened again, as plumes from another Icelandic volcano drifted across Northern Europe last week. But he was determined not to cancel, even leaving Ireland a day early to avoid being trapped there.        

Stage Management 2.0        

White House aides have a keen sense for their boss&rsquo;s image, and they scrambled to head off a moment of visual dissonance in one session at the Group of 8 gathering in Deauville, France.        

The session had been convened to discuss the role of the Internet in society, and President Nicolas Sarkozy of France invited luminaries like Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook and Eric Schmidt of Google to advise the leaders about whether, and how, to regulate the Web (both, not surprisingly, urged them not to impose new controls).        

Before Mr. Obama took his seat, an aide asked that two fax machines behind him be removed. The machines, which would have appeared in photographs just above his head, &ldquo;had the quaint feel of museum pieces,&rdquo; according to a pool report filed by a Washington Post reporter in the room &mdash; not the sort of image one would want in a meeting about the digital age. The offending machines were stashed on the floor, out of sight.        

Time&rsquo;s Up, Mr. President        

During the president&rsquo;s first visit to Britain in 2009, the protocol police faulted his wife for putting her arm around the waist of Queen Elizabeth II, and British commentators sniffed at the gifts the Obamas brought &mdash; an iPod for the queen and a box of DVDs for Prime Minister Gordon Brown. The faux-pas watchers were again on alert for this trip.        

All went off impeccably at the arrival ceremony at Buckingham Palace, during a tour of the palace portrait gallery and at lunch. Mr. Obama&rsquo;s toasts were eloquent and warm, even if some Irish felt betrayed when, fresh off a visit to his forebears in the village of Moneygall, Ireland, he told the queen: &ldquo;I bring warm greetings from tens of millions of Americans who claim British ancestry, including me, through my mother&rsquo;s family.&rdquo;        

The only cringe-worthy moment came during Mr. Obama&rsquo;s toast at the state banquet, when the president was winding up his testimonial. As he raised his glass, the string orchestra began playing &ldquo;God Save the Queen.&rdquo; Mr. Obama, like an Oscar winner going over his allotted 30 seconds at the dais, plowed on over the music, toasting, in the words of Shakespeare, &ldquo;This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England.&rdquo;        

Queen Elizabeth stared ahead fixedly, refusing to acknowledge her guest until the band had finished.        

Wind at Their Backs        

Volcanic ash was not the only challenge nature threw up; howling wind also buffeted Air Force One as it landed in Dublin. The winds, which blew at gale force the night before the president&rsquo;s arrival, raised fears among the Irish that he would have to scrub his visit to Moneygall; there were worries that a helicopter trip would be unsafe, and it would take too long to drive.        

But the military pilots decided to go anyway, and four helicopters took off with Mr. Obama and his retinue for a stomach-churning, 40-minute flight across the windswept countryside. When the president&rsquo;s aides climbed out back in Dublin, a fierce gust, combined with the wash from the helicopter&rsquo;s rotors, caught Mr. Obama&rsquo;s senior European adviser, Elizabeth Sherwood-Randall, and threw her to the ground.        

Ms. Sherwood-Randall got to her feet, but the wind ripped two bags out of her hands, scattering their contents &mdash; a sheaf of commemorative posters of Mr. Obama&rsquo;s visit &mdash; across a field. A dozen Irish police officers chased after the fluttering pieces of paper in vain.        

White House doctors on the scene examined Ms. Sherwood-Randall, who was shaken up, and she stayed on the trip. Later, she quipped about her mishap: &ldquo;There is an old Irish saying, &lsquo;May the wind be at your back.&rsquo; Well, it was.&rdquo;        
