
TEHRAN &mdash; Iranian officials said Monday that a woman convicted of adultery and sentenced to death by stoning may now face only a prison sentence for acting as an accessory to the murder of her husband.        

Apparently contradicting previous court documents, Zahra Elahian, the head of the Human Rights Committee in Iran&rsquo;s Parliament and a close ally of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, said that the stoning sentence against the woman, Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani, 43, had never been confirmed. Ms. Ashtiani was convicted of adultery in 2006.        

&ldquo;The stoning sentence has not yet been finalized,&rdquo; Ms. Elahian wrote in a letter to Dilma Rousseff,  the president of Brazil, that was published by Iran&rsquo;s semiofficial ISNA news agency. Brazil offered asylum to Ms. Ashtiani last summer after her story gained international attention.        

Ms. Elahian said that a death sentence for the murder charge had been suspended with the consent of Ms. Ashtiani&rsquo;s children. Under  the Islamic law of &ldquo;ghesas,&rdquo;  the family of a murder victim is permitted to  spare the guilty party from a death sentence.        

&ldquo;This woman faces only a public sentence of 10 years&rsquo; imprisonment,&rdquo; Ms. Elahian said in the letter.        

Later on Monday, a top regional judicial official repeated Ms. Elahian&rsquo;s statement, telling the official IRNA news agency that the stoning sentence had still &ldquo;not yet been finalized.&rdquo;        

The official, Malek Azhdar-Sharifi, the head of the East Azerbaijan provincial judiciary, said earlier this month that &ldquo;anything is possible&rdquo; in the final outcome of Ms. Ashtiani&rsquo;s case.        

However, there is a continuing conflict between Iran&rsquo;s judiciary and supporters of President Ahmadinejad &mdash; who in the past have tried to present a softer line on high-profile judicial cases &mdash; and on Monday a spokesman for the judiciary denied that there had been any significant change in Ms. Ashtiani&rsquo;s status.        

&ldquo;The case of Sakineh Ashtiani is still in the same phase that it was in before,&rdquo; the spokesman, Gholam-Hossein Mohseni-Ejei, said in comments  reported by IRNA.        

&ldquo;Nothing new has happened,&rdquo; Mr. Ejei said.        

After an international outcry arose as a result of widespread publicity about Ms. Ashtiani&rsquo;s case, Iranian authorities and official state news media mounted a  campaign that emphasized her role as an accessory to the murder of her husband, rather than the adultery conviction.        

This month, Ms. Ashtiani appeared at a news conference in the presence of foreign journalists and admitted to complicity in the murder of her husband. She denied that she had been pressured into making a public confession and denounced the protest over her sentence.        

Before that, she had appeared in a series of state-produced television programs in which she confessed to her crimes and distanced herself from the international human rights campaign for her.        
