
BELGRADE, Serbia &mdash; Serbian officials vowed on Saturday to track down all those who had helped hide Ratko Mladic and other fugitives accused of war crimes, but their prime interest now is to get the former Bosnian Serb general packed off to the war crimes tribunal in The Hague, which could happen as early as Tuesday.        

Bruno Vekaric, the deputy war crimes prosecutor here, said that Mr. Mladic was in relatively good health, aware of his surroundings, talkative and even emotional, tearing up when talking about his children.        

&ldquo;He understands everything, he speaks about everything,&rdquo; Mr. Vekaric said in an interview. &ldquo;My impression is that there is no problem for a trial.&rdquo; Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s family and lawyers, he said, are exaggerating his health problems in order to delay extradition.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a strategy of his defense, that he is so ill,&rdquo; Mr. Vekaric said. &ldquo;That is not true.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mladic is expected to appeal the extradition order on Monday, Mr. Vekaric said, with a three-judge panel likely to rule on the appeal by Tuesday. Security services will discreetly transfer Mr. Mladic to The Hague, he said, in order to avoid public demonstrations or violence.        

When Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb leader, was captured in 2008 living under an assumed name in Belgrade, the news media was told that he would be taken to the airport in a convoy, Mr. Vekaric said. But, in fact, he was moved &ldquo;in a simple, plain car.&rdquo;        

After Mr. Karadzic&rsquo;s capture, Mr. Vekaric and his colleagues received nearly 70 death threats, but there have been none since the arrest of Mr. Mladic on Thursday, he said, &ldquo;and that&rsquo;s interesting.&rdquo; He saw it as a measure of divisions in the Serbian nationalist movement and a sense of resignation among many Serbs about Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s fate.        

Another major difference, he noted, was that Mr. Karadzic was living openly, wearing a disguise of facial hair and odd glasses, with valid documents under his assumed name. But Mr. Mladic, he said, had no false documents, only his own expired identification card and military ID. And while Mr. Karadzic was &ldquo;interested in money and ladies,&rdquo; Mr. Mladic &ldquo;was a soldier alone,&rdquo; Mr. Vekaric said. &ldquo;But his motives on the horrible Srebrenica crime,&rdquo; when men under his command killed at least 7,000 Muslim men and boys, &ldquo;are very unclear to me.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mladic has not spoken of Srebrenica, Mr. Vekaric said, except to say that he does not accept the authority of the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague. But at his extradition hearings on Thursday and Friday, practically his first sentence was, &ldquo;I have nothing against Croats and Muslims,&rdquo; Mr. Vekaric said. &ldquo;Then he said, &lsquo;It was a terrible time.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

He also said: &ldquo;Listen, Bruno, I never killed anyone. But everyone who killed should be held responsible.&rdquo; At another point, Mr. Mladic told the court: &ldquo;You elected Milosevic, not me. It serves you right for what happened afterwards.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mladic gives the impression of someone who has been alone for a long time, Mr. Vekaric said, and who craves conversation. He is being kept in a one-room cell of just more than 100 square feet, with a door open to another room where two guards are present all the time, with two doctors close by. Mr. Mladic is given his glasses only when he asks for them, Mr. Vekaric said, and has asked for a plastic watch, saying he understood that the authorities would not want him to have a metal one.        

President Boris Tadic of Serbia has said he wants to punish the system that hid the fugitives, and the authorities would concentrate on &ldquo;those people from the state system&rdquo; who may have conspired to aid and shelter Mr. Mladic, Mr. Vekaric said. Those helpers, he said, are likely to include former military and intelligence agents, as well as priests from the Serbian part of Bosnia, which Mr. Mladic fought to create and defend during the Bosnian war.        

Serbian officials are stepping up the police presence and security measures before an antiextradition demonstration called for Sunday evening by the nationalist Serbian Radical Party, whose leader is in The Hague on war-crimes charges.        

But Mr. Mladic, through his lawyer and his son, Darko, said Saturday that he wanted no violence on his behalf.        

Mr. Vekaric credited the Tadic government with having increased the number of police officers assigned to hunt for Mr. Mladic and other accused war criminals by 50 percent. &ldquo;That made a big difference,&rdquo; he said. So did the prosecutors&rsquo; strategy of slowly cutting off possible sources of finances from known Mladic contacts, he said, reducing Mr. Mladic to having to live, in the end, in the house of an impoverished cousin.        

Mr. Mladic was seized about 5 a.m. Thursday at the cousin&rsquo;s home in Lazarevo, a town north of Belgrade.        

The Serbian press is full of versions of the arrest and of what Mr. Mladic is supposed to have done or said, some of them lavish. One tabloid reported that a deal between intelligence services had arranged for Mr. Mladic to be transferred from a hiding place in Russia. Mr. Vekaric called that nonsense.        

The arrest was a moment of great satisfaction for Mr. Vekaric, he said. He said he and his boss, Vladimir Vukcevic, had often dreamed of Mr. Mladic. He described one dream, of being in a restaurant and knowing Mr. Mladic was very close, and trying to make a call on his telephone.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re glad we&rsquo;ve come to the end of this sad chapter,&rdquo; said Mr. Vekaric, 44. &ldquo;We want to give an answer to the families of the victims of Srebrenica. We want to be the Serbia of Novak Djokovic,&rdquo; the tennis player, &ldquo;and not of Ratko Mladic.&rdquo;        
