
Arthur Goldreich, who helped lead the armed struggle against apartheid in South Africa and once posed as the operator of a farm where Nelson Mandela, masquerading as his houseboy, plotted revolt, died on Tuesday in Tel Aviv . He was 82.        

The Nelson Mandela Foundation announced his death.        

As opposition to apartheid shifted toward violence in the early 1960s, beginning with sabotage and progressing to guerrilla war, Mr. Goldreich, an artist and designer, became a leading planner. He traveled to China, the Soviet Union and East Germany seeking military aid and information on making weapons. He wrote a detailed plan for the overthrow of the South African state and a disciplinary code for guerrillas. He identified possible industrial targets for sabotage.        

Mr. Goldreich and his family lived on a farm called Liliesleaf in the Rivonia area, 10 miles north of Johannesburg. With the Communist Party paying the rent, it became the center of planning for Umkhonto we Sizwe, or Spear of the Nation, the military wing of the African National Congress, the liberation movement led by Mr. Mandela. Mr. Mandela wore blue overalls, sold produce by the road and was known as David Motsamayi.        

By July 11, 1963, the farm&rsquo;s occupants feared that the authorities were closing in on their hideout and were planning to move to another farm. But that day, a bakery van and a dry cleaner&rsquo;s van rumbled down the long driveway of the main farmhouse. The police and their dogs leapt out.        

Mr. Goldreich and 16 others, including top A.N.C. leaders like Walter M. Sisulu, the secretary general, were arrested. The British newspaper The Independent said the government called Mr. Goldreich &ldquo;the largest fish netted&rdquo; &mdash; in part because of his planning activities and in part because he was white; the government line was that left-wing whites were leading blacks, including Mr. Mandela, astray.        

Most of those arrested at Liliesleaf were tried in 1964, along with Mr. Mandela, who had been arrested in 1962. At what came to be called the Rivonia trial, after the farm&rsquo;s location, Mr. Mandela testified that the A.N.C. had been driven to violence by the police shooting of 69 demonstrators in 1960, in what became known as the Sharpeville massacre, and the banning of the party.        

He made his famous statement, &ldquo;I am prepared to die,&rdquo; before being sentenced to life imprisonment for sabotage and conspiracy to overthrow the government. He was released in 1990.        

Mr. Goldreich avoided prison when he and Harold Wolpe, a lawyer and A.N.C. leader, bribed a guard in a daring escape from the jail in which they were being held before the trial. They disguised themselves as priests as they fled to what is now Tanzania, sometimes hiding in the trunks of cars.        

Arthur Goldreich was born in 1929 in the South African town then known as Pietersburg, which he came to see as a bastion of intolerance. As an 11-year-old Jewish student, he was offended when his secondary school started teaching German to students during World War II, apparently in the belief that the Nazis would win. The instruction started with a Hitler Youth magazine.        

Young Arthur wrote Jan Smuts, the prime minister of South Africa, demanding to be taught Hebrew instead of German. He got his way.        

Mr. Goldreich moved to Israel after the war and fought with the Palmach, an elite fighting force, in Israel&rsquo;s war for independence. In 1954, he returned to South Africa to join the struggle against apartheid, the system of racial segregation put in place after the National Party defeated Mr. Smuts&rsquo;s government in 1948. He also returned to his studies of art and architecture. He painted abstract paintings and murals and won an award as South Africa&rsquo;s best young painter in 1955.        

Many sources, including &ldquo;Nelson Mandela: A Biography&rdquo; (1997) by Martin Meredith, say Mr. Goldreich joined the Communist Party. Mr. Mandela was said to value Mr. Goldreich particularly because of his fighting experience in Israel.        

Mr. Goldreich, who went on to head the design department of the Bezalel Academy of Arts and Design in Jerusalem, returned briefly to South Africa in 1994 to attend a reunion at Liliesleaf, which has since been turned into a museum. He eventually became a critic of what he viewed as Israel&rsquo;s belligerent policies toward the Palestinians, comparing them to South African apartheid.        

He is survived by his sons, Nicholas, Paul, Amos and Eden. He liked to tell about the time when Nicholas, at 8, recognized the fugitive Mr. Mandela.        

&ldquo;Nelson got up very quietly and took Nick for a walk around the grounds,&rdquo; Mr. Goldreich said. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what he told him &mdash; I didn&rsquo;t have the temerity to ask my son &mdash; but he never mentioned Mandela&rsquo;s name in the house again. If Mandela trusted you with a secret, you kept it.&rdquo;        
