
BELGRADE, Serbia &mdash; Groups of youths throwing stones and bottles clashed with riot police officers on Sunday evening in Belgrade, after thousands of Serbian nationalists rallied outside Parliament against the arrest and extradition of Ratko Mladic, the former Serbian military commander facing war crimes charges in The Hague for atrocities committed during the 1990s Balkans conflict.        

An estimated 10,000 protesters came out on a balmy evening to demand the resignation of the Serbian president, Boris Tadic, whom they called a traitor to Serbia for his willingness to hand over alleged war criminals to the United Nations tribunal in The Hague.        

&ldquo;Tadic is not Serbia,&rdquo; read a big banner over a stage used by the protest speakers, including Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s son, Darko, who attacked what they called the government&rsquo;s efforts to placate Washington and the West by extraditing &ldquo;a Serbian hero,&rdquo; Mr. Mladic.        

Last Thursday, the Serbian authorities arrested Mr. Mladic, who is in poor health after nearly 16 years of life as a fugitive.        

A theme of the evening at the rally, held by the Serbian Radical Party, whose leader is himself in The Hague facing war crimes charges, was &ldquo;the traitor Tadic and his puppet government.&rdquo; The crowd chanted for Mr. Tadic &ldquo;to save Serbia and kill himself.&rdquo;        

But the protest was not large by Belgrade standards, and the party is on the margins, having split into two. The Serbian Progressive Party, led by Tomislav Nikolic, had no part in the demonstration and has taken the position that Serbia &ldquo;must fulfill its international obligations, and one of them is the arrest of Ratko Mladic,&rdquo; said the party&rsquo;s deputy leader, Aleksandar Vucic.        

Rioters overturned garbage containers, and broke traffic lights and store windows. They threw stones at the police, who responded with batons. According to the police, about 100 people were detained and a dozen suffered light injuries. But the violence was sporadic and the damage relatively minor.        

&ldquo;Cooperation with The Hague tribunal represents treason,&rdquo; the Serbian Radical Party official Lidija Vukicevic, an actress, told the crowd. &ldquo;This is a protest against the shameful arrest of the Serbian hero.&rdquo;        

Darko Mladic made one of the most defiant speeches, saying that his father&rsquo;s &ldquo;illnesses are not illnesses, but they are wounds&rdquo; suffered in the defense of the Serbian people. His father is a hero who fought to save Serbs in a civil war, Darko Mladic said, adding: &ldquo;We will never accept that those who bombed us&rdquo; in the Bosnian and Kosovo wars &ldquo;will write our history.&rdquo;        

There was another rally on Sunday in Bosnia, where 3,000 supporters of Mr. Mladic arrived by bus from other parts of Bosnia to his hometown of Kalinovik, according to The Associated Press. Many wore black T-shirts with Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s picture and the words, &ldquo;Serbia in my heart.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mladic was captured in a small village in northern Serbia, in the house of a cousin. His lawyer, Milos Saljic, intends to appeal an initial extradition order, citing the ill health of his client. A three-judge court is expected to confirm extradition early in the coming week, but security concerns may delay Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s transfer to The Hague, because the Serbian government wants to move him with as little publicity and danger as possible.        

Earlier Sunday, Darko Mladic visited his father again in jail and told reporters that his father insisted that he had given no order for the killings of up to 8,000 Muslim men and boys in the village of Srebrenica in July 1995. The bodies were dumped in mass graves; Srebrenica is considered the worst atrocity in Europe since World War II.        

&ldquo;Whatever was done in Srebrenica, he has nothing to do with it,&rdquo; Darko Mladic said. Mr. Mladic made the same claim to the Serbian war crimes prosecutor after his arrest, the deputy prosecutor, Bruno Vekaric, said Saturday, when Mr. Mladic asserted: &ldquo;I never killed anyone. But everyone who killed should be held responsible.&rdquo;        

United Nations prosecutors in The Hague have said that they have evidence that Mr. Mladic, the Bosnian Serb commander at the time, ordered and oversaw the killings in and around Srebrenica and have charged him with genocide for that and the long siege and shelling of Sarajevo.        

Many Serbs have said they would prefer to see Mr. Mladic face trial in Serbia. They regard the Hague tribunal as biased against Serbs and an instrument of &ldquo;victor&rsquo;s justice,&rdquo; saying that Serbs are charged in disproportionate numbers compared with Muslims or Croats who also committed war crimes in what was a civil war in Bosnia.        
