
PARIS &mdash; A junior government minister resigned Sunday after two women filed sexual harassment suits against him last week, becoming the first clear political casualty here of the fallout from the arrest of the French economist Dominique Strauss-Kahn.        

Prime Minister Fran&ccedil;ois Fillon confirmed that he and President Nicolas Sarkozy had accepted the resignation of the official, Georges Tron, as the state secretary for civil service.        

The two women, ages 34 and 36, have accused Mr. Tron, 53, of repeated sexual assaults from 2007 to 2010 when they worked for him at City Hall in Draveil, near Paris, where he is mayor. The plaintiffs have said they were emboldened by the example of the New York City hotel maid who accused Mr. Strauss-Kahn of sexual assault.        

Mr. Strauss-Kahn was arrested on May 14 and resigned as managing director of the International Monetary Fund.        

The women have said that numerous episodes began as foot massages by Mr. Tron, but they say that he went much further. Mr. Tron has acknowledged touching the women&rsquo;s feet but only in the context of reflexology, an alternative massage practice.        

If the women&rsquo;s complaints are confirmed, Mr. Tron could face charges of sexual assault or rape, and not only sexual harassment, the state prosecutor has said.        

In a letter of resignation to President Sarkozy, Mr. Tron wrote that he would resign out of a sense of &ldquo;duty,&rdquo; and he denounced a &ldquo;press campaign&rdquo; against him.        

&ldquo;If a fault, however minor it might have been, had sullied my life as a citizen, a municipal official or parliamentarian, I would never have accepted the high ministerial duties that you accepted to entrust to me,&rdquo; he said in the letter, published on the Web site of the weekly news magazine L&rsquo;Express.        

Denouncing the &ldquo;vindictive accusations&rdquo; against him, he said that one of the plaintiffs had been dismissed from City Hall after embezzling money and that the other woman had left her post &ldquo;owing to an undignified behavior.&rdquo; The women have denied suing to take revenge.        
