
KATMANDU, Nepal &mdash; Nepal&rsquo;s political parties averted a crisis on Sunday by reaching a last-minute deal that extended the deadline for a new constitution. Prime Minister Jhalanath Khanal agreed to step down as part of the deal.        

Nepal has been embroiled in contentious political negotiations for more than a year over the shape of the constitution as well as the final details of a peace agreement that ended a bloody Maoist insurgency.        

Once a Hindu monarchy, Nepal is now a new democracy with power divided among several major parties, including the Maoists, who have joined the political process.        

The deal on Sunday prevented Nepal from tumbling into the political unknown. A special legislative body &mdash; known as the Constituent Assembly &mdash; that was charged with drafting a constitution was scheduled to adjourn if a deal had not been reached. Analysts warned of a political crisis if Nepal had been left without a constitution.        

But lawmakers finally agreed early on Sunday morning to extend the Constituent Assembly by three months. The rival parties agreed to introduce the draft of a new constitution during that period and to address questions about the fate of 19,000 former Maoist fighters and their weaponry.        

&ldquo;We have agreed to bring out a first draft of a new constitution and complete the main task of the peace process in the next three months,&rdquo; said Mr. Khanal, who said he agreed to step down as prime minister to allow the formation of a consensus government and to save the Constituent Assembly.        

The Constituent Assembly was elected in 2008 with a mandate to draft a constitution within two years. Yet lawmakers had been unable to reach a deal because of distrust and differences among the major parties. A year ago, a similar 11th-hour deal was required to prevent the dissolution of the legislative body.        

One of the biggest obstacles is the unresolved fate of former Maoist fighters who are living in camps around the country. Under the peace agreement, many of the fighters are to be integrated into Nepal&rsquo;s security forces, but the parties have been unable to agree on the details.        

While many people in Nepal were relieved that the political process was not derailed, some were skeptical about whether and when politicians would finally be able to compromise.        

&ldquo;There is enough room to doubt the implementation aspect of the agreement from the past experiences,&rdquo; said Subodh Raj Pyakurel, a human rights activist. &ldquo;The parties have not spelled out their road map in the agreement.&rdquo;        
Jim Yardley contributed reporting from New Delhi.
