
BELGRADE, Serbia &mdash; The arrest of war crimes fugitive Ratko Mladic, found hiding inside a darkened house in a Serbian village last week, came from methodically pressuring his waning network of supporters and draining his financial lifeline so thoroughly that his most bitter complaint when captured was a demand for his frozen military pension of 140 euros a month, according to investigators in Serbia.        

&ldquo;He asked for his pension three times: &lsquo;I need my pension. I need my pension,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said Bruno Vekaric, the deputy war crimes prosecutor, recalling the exchanges during a closed extradition hearing to transfer Mr. Mladic to The Hague to face charges for genocide in connection with the Srebenica massacre, the worst ethnically motivated mass murder on the Continent since World War II.        

Critical questions remain about precisely who protected Mr. Mladic. The pro-Western government of President Boris Tadic says it will investigate, a politically delicate examination that could lead to former government officials and perhaps even to religious authorities, since Mr. Mladic said after his arrest that he had been visited over the years by many priests.        

Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s demand for his pension &mdash; frozen in 2005 while he was on the run &mdash; reflected a calculated strategy by investigators to sever his ties with friends, supporters and cash in order to reduce his options for hiding, Mr. Vekaric said.        

That strategy was followed over three years, a period of growing impatience among Western nations and the international war crimes prosecutor, Serge Brammertz, who continually questioned Serbia&rsquo;s resolve in trying to find Mr. Mladic, the most wanted war crimes fugitive from the Balkans conflict.        

Mr. Brammertz had steadily raised his criticism of Serbia&rsquo;s manhunt. This month, he was poised to issue a report labeling the investigation as a failing effort, a step that could have delayed Serbia&rsquo;s ambitions to join the European Union.        

Even today, there are lingering questions about whether the Serbian government, long suspected of knowing Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s whereabouts, finally acted to capture him because of the combination of pressures: the critical report, a visit by a top European Union official, the jeopardy of Serbia&rsquo;s E.U. membership quest, and parliamentary elections next year.        

The Serbian intelligence agency, which cooperated on the case with war crimes investigators, said it was now working to reconstruct Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s precise movements since 2006.        

&ldquo;Our goal was to cut his financial support, and that wasn&rsquo;t in the newspapers,&rdquo; Mr. Vekaric said. &ldquo;For two or three years we worked on that. We cut off communications with his friends and some companies &mdash; everyone who could pay his expenses. So he could only go to certain houses at the end, and of course we started looking at his relatives. That is the back story.&rdquo;        

During the week of Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s capture, Mr. Vekaric said, prosecutors issued 10 search warrants of homes of supporters amid signs that the amount of suspicious cash they were finding was dropping. In a raid last year, by contrast, they uncovered 80,000 euros in cash in the suburban Belgrade home where Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s wife lives.        

The Mladic family lawyer, Milos Saljic, had complained for months that Mr. Mladic&rsquo;s relatives were facing unrelenting pressure, with his son losing contracts for his computer company and his daughter-in-law abruptly fired from a state-owned company despite good job reviews.        

When Mr. Mladic was arrested, investigators said, he had $800 in his possession.        

Mr. Vekaric said he tried to provoke Mr. Mladic into revealing himself with a public strategy of critical comments, learning later that the fugitive was so angry that during his closed-court appearances he taunted him, saying, &ldquo;I carried nine bullets in my gun and twice I could have killed you.&rdquo;        

Mr. Vekaric said that an informant told him that Mr. Mladic had passed by him while he was delivering a news statement in front of the courthouse steps, rolling by undetected in an undertaker&rsquo;s car.        

Mr. Mladic was paying close attention, with plenty of time to watch television, according to investigators who described him as a &ldquo;tired old man.&rdquo; His face carried some of the story of how he had lived, a frail image that startled close friends and the men hunting him. That image was hard to reconcile with the burly, commanding ex-general whose wanted poster hung in the offices of war crimes prosecutors.        
Dan Bilefsky contributed reporting from New York.
