
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The Syrian government deployed the military and security forces to four villages and towns on Sunday, killing at least eight people and wounding many others, in the latest attempt to crush a two-month-old uprising against the leadership of President Bashar al-Assad, human rights groups and activists said.        



Troops and security forces backed by tanks stormed the locales, all of them in a restive region of central Syria near Homs, Syria&rsquo;s third-largest city, they said.        

The attacks highlighted Mr. Assad&rsquo;s determination to crush any dissent against his regime, despite American and European sanctions and growing international criticism from foes and Syria&rsquo;s few friends, namely Turkey.        

Though American sanctions were largely symbolic, Syrian officials are believed to be worried about the impact of European penalties, which froze assets and imposed a ban on granting European visas to Mr. Assad and nine other top Syrian officials.        

The death toll in Friday&rsquo;s demonstrations &mdash; 12, according to human rights groups &mdash; was far lower than in past weeks, a possible sign of a government attempt to forestall more international pressure or isolation. But a crackdown that has led to an estimated 10,000 arrests has continued unabated.        

In Talbiseh, a village near Homs, security forces fired at a school bus driving on a main road, killing a driver and wounding several children, according to the Local Coordination Committees of Syria, an umbrella group of activists that helps organize and document protests. The circumstances of the firing were unclear. Four of the children who were wounded are in critical condition, the group said. Witnesses reported that the town is encircled and completely cut off, with a heavy security presence everywhere.        

&ldquo;They attacked the town this morning, shelling and shooting randomly at people,&rdquo; said a resident in Homs, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, fearing reprisals.        

On Sunday morning, tanks also surrounded the town of Rastan, 16 miles north of Homs, killing at least two people, according to activists.        

&ldquo;Rastan is now completely besieged and under fire,&rdquo; an activist in Homs said. &ldquo;There are a lot of wounded people who can&rsquo;t get to the hospital because of the firing.&rdquo;        

Another activist said that water, electricity, Internet access and phones had been cut off, a tactic that security forces have often used before entering other towns and cities.        

Security forces also raided the towns of Deir Ba&rsquo;albeh and Teir Ma&rsquo;alleh, near Homs, a region that has proved to be one of the most restive in the country. The region also has a combustible mix of a Sunni Muslim majority and a rural minority of Alawites, a heterodox Muslim sect that dominates the military and intelligence forces. Three people, including two children, died as a result of random firing, the activists said.        

The uprising against Mr. Assad, who inherited power from his father in 2000, has posed the most serious threat to the Assad family&rsquo;s four decades of rule. The movement started as a spontaneous demonstration calling for reforms but quickly grew into a more sophisticated and resilient uprising that now seeks the ouster of Mr. Assad.        

He has responded by ordering a ferocious crackdown that, human rights groups say, has claimed the lives of more than 1,000 protesters so far.        

Activists also reported night demonstrations in several towns and cities across the country on Saturday. Protesters have shifted their movement to nighttime hours during weekdays, deeming it safer because security forces would be more reluctant to shoot at them in the dark and it would be harder to recognize their faces for arrests.        

Anger is also growing over the killing of 13-year-old Hamza Ali al-Khatib from the village of Jeeza, near the southern revolt city of Dara&rsquo;a, and the mutilation of his body. The boy was arrested on his way to Dara&rsquo;a, carrying bread and food to the besieged town. His body was delivered to his family on Wednesday, bearing signs of extreme torture.        

Mr. Assad has ordered an investigation into the killing.        
