
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; The battered white sedan plunged forward, its engine whining and tires screaming, across the long, tiled plaza in a practiced routine of skids and slides. With a quick yank of the wheel, the driver narrowly missed other snaking cars, and with a tug of the hand brake jerked to a halt inches shy of a crowd of cheering spectators.        

The audience was riveted. Watching from parked cars and flashing their headlights, young men tried to coax the driver, Abadi al-Majberi, toward their corner of the plaza to perform for them. Other young men pushed in close, capturing on their cellphones the risky automotive ballet known as drifting.        

For these young men, there was no more war to watch &mdash; rebel leaders sealed off the battlefield weeks ago &mdash; and few outlets for rebellion other than meandering daily protests with uncertain aims. Watching the cars careen, speed and nearly crash filled a void. Muhammad Abu Khairad, a truck driver, said: &ldquo;It&rsquo;s very good. It&rsquo;s very dangerous. It&rsquo;s very extreme.&rdquo;        

Drifting, a freestyle sport that in recent years has won the enthusiasm of bored young men around the world, has long been a favored diversion in sleepy Benghazi, a city with lots of cars and young men. Before the February uprising, young men gathered in Kish Plaza on Thursday nights to watch drivers punish their rides with high-speed drifts and doughnuts, until the police would stop the show. In late February, the sessions stopped, for a time, as the same young men fought Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s security forces on the streets of Benghazi and, in the weeks that followed, in towns hundreds of miles away.        

Now, trapped in an angry, aimless space between revolt and liberation, the crowds have returned to watch the drifters, whose choreographed displays of controlled loss of traction seem more popular than ever. The police no longer bother the drifters; the few officers who have returned to the streets have bigger fish to fry.        

&ldquo;Something inside my heart pushes me to watch,&rdquo; said Mustafa Bakoush, 29. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s boring here. And he didn&rsquo;t leave,&rdquo; he said, referring to Colonel Qaddafi.        

In cars parked around the plaza, spectators smoked hashish cigarettes, blasted rap music or sat on hoods, sharing the latest war videos on cellphones. Mohammed Hussein, 25, sat in a truck with two neighbors &mdash; a truck driver and a hash dealer with jailhouse tattoos on his arms that said &ldquo;Love&rdquo; and &ldquo;Torture.&rdquo; On the side of the truck, a bird was airbrushed between the words &ldquo;Free&rdquo; and &ldquo;Libya.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hussein said he and his friends had joined rebel brigades, but for now there was little fighting and not much else to do. &ldquo;Entertainment is nonexistent,&rdquo; he said, blaming Colonel Qaddafi, whose name has become a shorthand explanation for all of life&rsquo;s ills. &ldquo;He crushed us.&rdquo;        

The city &mdash; the rebels&rsquo; de facto capital &mdash; is similarly restless, choked with mysterious traffic jams that form at odd hours for unknown reasons, since many people are still not working. Many people, waiting to start a new country, seem to be losing patience; fights break out after car accidents at intersections untended by the police. People now ignore news that once had people glued to cafe televisions, like trips by rebel leaders overseas or accounts of the fighting in the western mountains.        

Other people have tired of the waiting. On Thursday night, for the first time in months, the city was filled with wedding processions, accompanied by honking car horns and gunfire. And many young people, seizing new freedoms, are busier than ever, creating dozens of newspapers and magazines that have suddenly appeared in kiosks and coffee shops, and new civil society groups to lead the next phase of the revolt.        

But others drift, a sport referred to here in Arabic by a word that means &ldquo;entertaining.&rdquo; It is not confined to Kish Plaza: cars on city streets will suddenly lurch this way and that, then straighten out and keep driving.        

But the plaza remains the best-known spot. On one side sits a 19th-century Ottoman palace, on the other a long white arcade. Facing the plaza are the ruins of the Katiba, formerly Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s sprawling military garrison and the site of the uprising&rsquo;s epic battle for Benghazi, when thousand of protesters backed by defecting soldiers drove out government forces.        
(Page 2 of 2)
On Thursday night, spectators talked about the battle &mdash; a proud, distant memory &mdash; but focused on the driving. At about 11 p.m., Mr. Majberi sidled out of his white Daewoo, ending his performance with a punctured tire and a big grin.        

A Kenny Rogers song, &ldquo;Reuben James,&rdquo; drifted out of a nearby car stereo.        

A burgundy BMW roared into the arena, and the crowd cheered. A big yellow pickup followed. Behind nearby apartment towers, someone fired a machine gun into the air. On an asphalt road running alongside the plaza, another BMW spun in circles, kicking up a cloud of smoke. Grungy old BMWs, known as &ldquo;bunnies,&rdquo; with their small bodies, big engines and rear-wheel drive, are the drifters&rsquo; car of choice here.        

At 11:20, an intermission served as a reminder that Libya was still at war. In a solemn procession, four long-bed trucks flying rebel flags drove slowly through the plaza. There were other reminders, including several men in fatigues, one of whom said he was on a much-needed break from the front.        

(On another recent night, the language of revolution seeped into the plaza, as the crowd chided a particularly reckless driver. &ldquo;Get out!&rdquo; they chanted again and again, echoing the protest movement&rsquo;s call to dictators around the region.)        

As the intermission ended Thursday night, the trucks drove off, and after more gunfire, someone threw a small explosive device used in fishing near the crowd, a common prank that nonetheless sent dozens of people running.        

This was big-city excitement for Ali Idriss, 30, a refugee who worked as a driver for a Kenyan company in the oil refinery town of Ras Lanuf. The only entertainment there, he said, was playing basketball.        

The smoke, the noise and the cars provided a welcome distraction from recent traumas, especially his flight with his family from Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s soldiers, moving from town to town until they reached the safety of Benghazi. &ldquo;We are still sad,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I cannot express what&rsquo;s inside. We have many things to say, many things to do. I hope the next days will be better.&rdquo;        

At midnight, the performance ended and the plaza emptied. A driver, drunk on moonshine, tried to fix his car, and blamed Colonel Qaddafi for wrecking it.        

Nearby, a group of young men, still full of energy, sat around a truck, blasting a rap song called &ldquo;Martyrs of the Katiba.&rdquo; They had dead-end jobs and high hopes. &ldquo;We want salaries, and a wife,&rdquo; said Muhammad Faytouri, 17.        

&ldquo;And a BMW,&rdquo; his friend Ahmed Sheikhi added.        
