
BAGHDAD &mdash; Two American businessmen have been charged with giving Army officers airline tickets, spa vacations and more than $1 million in bribes to secure multimillion-dollar contracts to supply the American military and help rebuild Iraq, according to court documents.        

A federal indictment against the men, George H. Lee, and his son, Justin W. Lee, was unsealed on Friday. Both are charged with four counts of bribery and one count of conspiracy.        

The Lees are among nearly 60 contractors and military officers to face criminal charges stemming from the scramble for often poorly monitored government contracts in the early years of the Iraq war.        

Federal officials have also blocked 120 people and companies accused of fraud and corruption from doing business with the government. The Lees&rsquo; company, Lee Dynamics International, was suspended in July 2007.        

Justin W. Lee was expected to appear in federal court in Philadelphia as early as Tuesday, and George H. Lee is believed to be at large outside the United States, possibly in Kuwait or Dubai. A lawyer who has represented the company did not return phone or e-mail messages on Monday.        

The 25-page indictment describes a relationship between the Lees and military contracting officers, where lucrative contracts to build warehouses in Iraq or provide American troops with bottled water and blankets could be bought for the cost of a first-class plane ticket or a wire transfer of several thousand dollars.        

Court documents say that one Army major at Camp Arifjan in Kuwait received at least $225,000 in cash in exchange for funneling $14 million worth of military contracts toward the Lees&rsquo; business.        

The major is identified only as &ldquo;Person One&rdquo; in the indictment, but her description almost perfectly matches that of Maj. Gloria D. Davis, who shot and killed herself in Baghdad in December 2006 after telling investigators she had taken $225,000 in bribes from the company.        

The indictment portrays &ldquo;Person One&rdquo; and the Lees as working hand in hand. It says that the Lees secured a job for the son of &ldquo;Person One,&rdquo; and that she and George Lee flew to Thailand together to establish a bank account to receive wire transfers.        

She is quoted in a January 2005 e-mail to George Lee thanking him, &ldquo;for everything you have done for me and my family.&rdquo;        

The indictment also ties the case against the Lees to another major corruption inquiry involving Maj. John Cockerham, who was sentenced to 17 years in prison for taking $9.6 million in bribes while working at a contracting office in Kuwait. Seven other soldiers have been implicated in that investigation.        

Court documents say that Major Cockerham received &ldquo;at least $1 million&rdquo; from the Lees in exchange for steering them business to provide troops with bottled water, bunk beds and mattresses, among other things.        

In Iraq on Monday, one of the country&rsquo;s most prominent politicians, Adel Abdul Mahdi, signaled that he would step down from his largely ceremonial post as vice president. The move was portrayed as a swipe at Iraq&rsquo;s bloated ranks of ministers, vice presidents and deputies.        

Mr. Abdul Mahdi was one of three vice presidents. A statement from his political party, the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq, said Iraq&rsquo;s government needed to slim down.        

Public protests throughout the late winter and spring excoriated Iraq&rsquo;s government as unwieldy, inefficient and corrupt.        

Faced with those outpourings of public criticism, Iraqi politicians moved to cut their salaries and raise food and oil subsidies. But they have yet to decide crucial questions about whether American troops should extend their stay, or how to distribute revenue from vast oil fields in the north.        

Unemployment stands at about 25 percent, and the approach of the sweltering summer months (it was 110 degrees on Monday) is likely to once again lay bare the failures of Iraq&rsquo;s inadequate electrical power grid.        

Mr. Abdul Mahdi&rsquo;s own position even became a symbol of political paralysis. He served as vice president for the past five years, and was again nominated to the post in December. But Parliament did not vote to approve the three vice-presidential candidates until May 12.        
James Glanz contributed reporting from New York.
