
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The governor of Afghanistan&rsquo;s Central Bank angrily responded Monday to a presidential panel&rsquo;s criticism of his agency in connection with a scandal at the nation&rsquo;s largest private bank.        

&ldquo;This is ridiculous; this is nonsense,&rdquo; the Central Bank governor, Abdul Qadir Fitrat, said during a news conference he convened to dispute the report.        

On Sunday, a panel appointed by President Hamid Karzai to make recommendations and assess responsibility for large-scale fraud at the private bank had faulted the Central Bank as well as international auditors, financed by American aid money, for failing to uncover the deception sooner.        

&ldquo;I categorically reject the report,&rdquo; Mr. Fitrat said, calling it &ldquo;completely biased and completely invalid,&rdquo; and written without full consultation with the Central Bank. He also noted that some of the members of the panel Mr. Karzai appointed had refused to sign it in protest.        

The report itself was not made public, but the panel&rsquo;s chairman, Azizullah Ludin, read selectively from it, leveling strong personal criticisms at Mr. Fitrat.        

Noting that regulators in many Western countries had missed far bigger frauds, including Bernard L. Madoff&rsquo;s $50-billion scam, Mr. Fitrat said, &ldquo;It is particularly difficult to uncover fraud when the management of the bank is actively involved in it.&rdquo;        

The worst that could be said of the Central Bank was that it missed the growing problems at the private bank, known as Kabul Bank, Mr. Fitrat said. Loans totaling $925 million, including accumulated interest, were often made with no collateral or even documentation, and went to many members of Parliament, government ministers and politically connected figures, including the president&rsquo;s brother.        

&ldquo;The Central Bank had no part in the fraud; the fraud was by Kabul Bank,&rdquo; he said, saying the Ludin panel unfairly tried to shift the blame to his agency. He noted that the Central Bank had acted aggressively once it knew what had happened at Kabul Bank, replacing its management and breaking the bank up to allow receivers to pursue the bad loans.        

&ldquo;Kabul Bank was a very difficult job to do and it made our life very tough,&rdquo; he said, referring to political pressure on the Central Bank. &ldquo;Instead of rewarding us or praising our efforts, they are punishing people who help implement the law. It&rsquo;s hopeless in Afghanistan; if you work honestly it&rsquo;s really difficult.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ludin, interviewed by telephone after the news conference, defended the position his panel took. &ldquo;This is the problem in Afghanistan,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The government of Afghanistan appoints people to key positions who have no knowledge, who are uneducated, with lack of experience, and these kinds of problems happen.&rdquo;        

Asked if he was referring to Mr. Fitrat, an experienced banker who formerly worked for the World Bank, Mr. Ludin acknowledged he was. &ldquo;It is clear the whole problem was the Central Bank of Afghanistan,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They knew everything that was going on in Kabul Bank. He is the root of the problem and he knew everything.&rdquo;        

The presidential panel was made up of Mr. Ludin, who is head of the High Commission on Anticorruption, as well as another presidentially appointed anticorruption figure and a representative of the attorney general&rsquo;s office. An official from the Ministry of Finance was also appointed to it, but did not take part, Mr. Ludin said.        

Mr. Ludin formerly was appointed by Mr. Karzai to head the Independent Elections Commission during the 2009 presidential elections, which were widely regarded as fraudulent by international observers but were vigorously defended by Mr. Ludin.        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting.
