
MOSCOW &mdash; Authorities in Georgia on Monday charged the husband of a prominent opposition leader with organizing attacks on police, using paramilitary groups during violent anti-government protests last week.        

Prosecutors said Badri Bitsadze, the husband of Nino Burdzhanadze, a former parliament speaker and now a government critic, had organized attacks on the police during the protest, apparently in an effort to oust Georgia&rsquo;s president, Mikheil Saakashvili.        

In a statement, prosecutors said Mr. Bitsadze would remain at liberty pending a trial. Ms. Burdzhanadze has said she and her husband had done nothing wrong.        

Opposition forces led by Ms. Burdzhanadze and her husband held several days of demonstrations in Georgia last week, modeled in part after the popular uprisings in the Middle East. They have accused Mr. Saakashvili of consolidating power and seeking to eliminate opposition in the former Soviet republic.        

The situation turned violent last Thursday, when the police aggressively dispersed a rally in Georgia&rsquo;s capital, Tbilisi, using tear gas, water cannons and rubber bullets against protesters who refused to heed verbal warnings to move to another location. In the melee, one police officer and a protester were killed when struck by a car the government suspects belonged to the opposition.        

International human rights groups condemned what they called excessive force used by the police against largely peaceful protesters. But Georgian authorities have described the protesters, in particular Ms. Burdzhanadze and her husband, as the aggressors. They have released videos that they say show opposition leaders discussing how to provoke the police to use violence.        

Mr. Saakashvili, who has long been accused of failing to live up to the democratic ideals he cited when he took power in the 2003 Rose revolution, has suggested that the opposition had been colluding with Russia, though Moscow has denied this. The two neighbors fought a brief war in 2008, and tensions between them remain high.        

On Monday, Georgia&rsquo;s Interior Ministry said in a statement that it had arrested 24 armed men following last week&rsquo;s protest who had planned to &ldquo;conduct armed provocations in Georgia.&rdquo; It said the group was headed by a former Georgian interior minister, who now lives in Russia.        

The ministry also released video testimony in which members of the group speak of a plot to storm and burn government buildings in an effort to overthrow Mr. Saakashvili. In the video, which was posted to the ministry&rsquo;s Web site, one of the accused names Mr. Bitsadze as a coordinator of the alleged plot.        

Mr. Bitsadze has not spoken publicly since Thursday. But in a news conference in Tbilisi on Monday, Ms. Burdzhanadze challenged the government to offer concrete proof that her family had committed a crime.        

&ldquo;Saakashvili knows very well that he will not be able to buy me or intimidate me,&rdquo; she said according to InterpressNews, a Georgian media outlet. &ldquo;That is why he has decided to terrorize my family and discredit my political image, in order to neutralize me.&rdquo;        
Mzia Kupunia contributed reporting from Tbilisi, Georgia
