
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The Lebanese president on Monday postponed talks to form a new government as regional leaders convened in Syria to find a way out of one of Lebanon&rsquo;s worst crises in years.        

On the same day, an international prosecutor issued the first indictments in the case that set off the political crisis: the investigation into the assassination of a former prime minister of Lebanon. No details were disclosed, not even the names of the accused or the number of people indicted so far in the murder of the former prime minister, Rafik Hariri, in 2005.        

Although the indictments were sealed, the suspects are widely believed to include members of Hezbollah, the Shiite militant movement, which has strong links to Iran and Syria.        

It could be weeks before the details are made public; a pretrial judge on the tribunal first has to decide whether to endorse the charges, a process that could take a month or longer, said a spokesman at the court, which is based in The Hague  and backed by the United Nations. Arrest warrants may then follow, the spokesman said.        

The expectation that the prosecutor would seek indictments in the assassination of Mr. Hariri and 22 others led to the latest political turmoil in Lebanon. Hezbollah, which has denied any involvement in the attack and denounced the tribunal, had been urging Prime Minister Saad Hariri, Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s son, to end all cooperation with the tribunal, to denounce any indictments and to stop helping to finance the court. Lebanon contributes 49 percent of the court&rsquo;s budget. The court was created by the United Nations Security Council at Lebanon&rsquo;s request.        

When Mr. Hariri refused Hezbollah&rsquo;s demands, the militant movement and its allies withdrew last week from the national unity government.        

President Michel Suleiman&rsquo;s decision on Monday to postpone negotiations to form a new government appeared to signal the difficulties that Lebanon&rsquo;s politicians face in choosing a new prime minister. It also seemed to reflect a desire among Lebanese politicians for international mediation to succeed.        

&ldquo;We need to sort out our problems before we nominate a new prime minister,&rdquo; said the minister of economy and trade, Mohammad Safadi, a Sunni leader and a potential compromise candidate for prime minister. &ldquo;You can&rsquo;t move forward with such a big split in the country.&rdquo;        

Lebanon is often a battleground where other countries settle their disputes, and this crisis is no different. Hezbollah&rsquo;s patrons, Iran and Syria, have sought to influence the negotiations, as have Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s supporters, which include France, Saudi Arabia and the United States.        

On Monday, Lebanon&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry summoned the United States ambassador, Maura Connelly, whom it criticized for &ldquo;interfering in Lebanon&rsquo;s internal affairs&rdquo; after she visited a lawmaker who was undecided about his choice for prime minister.        

That visit soon became the butt of jokes on Lebanese television. The lawmaker, Nicola Fattoush, is a relatively minor politician; that he warranted a visit by the ambassador illustrated the perception that the next prime minister would not be chosen by Parliament, but by a half-dozen or so foreign embassies in Beirut.        

Before the government fell, ending a period of relative calm, Saudi Arabia and Syria were trying to reach a deal over the tribunal and its possible indictments. Those talks fell through last week, for reasons that remain unclear. Hezbollah has accused the United States of scuttling the negotiations; others said that Syria was not able to deliver on what it had promised in the talks.        

In Damascus, Syria, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria and the emir of Qatar, Sheik Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani, met on Monday with the Turkish prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, in an attempt to defuse the Lebanese crisis.        

Syria issued a statement after the meeting saying that the three leaders had stressed their commitment &ldquo;to find a solution to the crisis based on the Syrian-Saudi efforts.&rdquo;        
 Nada Bakri reported from Beirut, and Marlise Simons from Paris. Anthony Shadid contributed reporting from Beirut.
