
ROME &mdash; Italy&rsquo;s ruling center-right coalition was resoundingly beaten in runoff administrative elections on Monday, a defeat that further weakened Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, who has been besieged by growing dissent within his razor-thin majority and faces criminal charges in court.        

In the most closely watched race, the Berlusconi-backed incumbent mayor of Milan, Letizia Moratti, was beaten by a center-left candidate, Giuliano Pisapia, 55.1 percent to 44.9. The prime minister had transformed the campaign, one of the most aggressive in recent memory, into a referendum on his popularity and his continuing clash with prosecutors who have placed him on trial.        

Returns in trash-choked Naples also pointed to an anti-Berlusconi vote. A former prosecutor, Luigi de Magistris, won 65.4 percent of the mayoral vote on the Italy of Values ticket. The leader of that party, Antonio Di Pietro, is one of Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s most vocal opponents.        

The center-left ousted center-right governments in Trieste and Novara, as well as in Gallarate, one of several cities where support for the Northern League, Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s main ally, showed signs of waning. The center-left even won in Arcore, the tiny Lombard town that is home to Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s lavish estate (where Milanese prosecutors say he had sexual liaisons with minors).        

The defeat is likely to open new political scenarios, though Mr. Berlusconi repeatedly said before the vote that he would not step down should his coalition do badly.        

But commentators said that his personalization of the election could not be ignored.        

&ldquo;Berlusconi only speaks of himself,&rdquo; said Vittorio Feltri, the editor of the conservative Milan daily newspaper Libero, calling it a campaign miscalculation that helped explain the vote. &ldquo;Then there&rsquo;s the paralysis of the government, which hasn&rsquo;t been able to do much. The desire for change is out there. If the government doesn&rsquo;t understand this, then the next election is going to offer up more surprises.&rdquo;        

Stefano Folli, a commentator for the daily economic newspaper Il Sole 24 Ore said that the electoral results &ldquo;opened up the question of the leadership of the center-right.&rdquo;        

On Monday, Pier Luigi Bersani, the leader of the Democratic Party, the strongest opposition party, called on the government to step down to open a &ldquo;new political phase&rdquo; through early elections, before the government&rsquo;s mandate expires in 2013.        

But local victories, some commentators cautioned, would not automatically translate into votes for the opposition at a national level. Neither Mr. Pisapia, the Milan victor, nor Mr. de Magistris, the winner in Naples, come from the ranks of the Democratic Party.        
