
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The Taliban launched an unusual attack on targets in the western Afghan city of Herat on Monday, including a NATO base, and the police said at least 4 people had been killed and 38 wounded.        

Operating far from the insurgents&rsquo; usual areas and in a city considered among the safest in Afghanistan, the attackers detonated a suicide car bomb in front of the Provincial Reconstruction Team headquarters, which is under Italian command, and set off a second bomb in a Herat shopping area, where most of the casualties were reported, said Col. Noor Khan Nekzad, a spokesman for the Herat police chief.        

In southern Afghanistan&rsquo;s Oruzgan Province on Monday, an Afghan soldier got into an argument with a soldier from Australia, killed him and fled, according to the local Afghan commander, Gen. Hamid, who like many Afghans uses one name. A Taliban spokesman said the attacker was an insurgent in disguise.        

In the Herat attacks, three explosions were heard around the city, one of them from a suicide bomber who tried to drive a vehicle through the gate of the Provincial Reconstruction Team compound, said a spokesman for the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force, Maj. Tim James. Gunmen with automatic weapons then opened fire on the compound from buildings nearby, he said.        

A spokesman for the Taliban, Qari Yousef Ahmadi, reached by telephone, claimed responsibility for the attack, saying: &ldquo;If we don&rsquo;t attack the Italian P.R.T., who else will? Of course we did it.&rdquo;        

Attacks by Taliban insurgents are rare in Herat, although the insurgents have been stepping up their efforts in parts of the country where they had previously been quiet.        

On Saturday, the Taliban claimed responsibility after a bomb in a government building in northern Takhar Province killed the popular Gen. Daoud Daoud, the regional police commander in the north, a police chief and two NATO soldiers, as well as wounding the German commander of NATO&rsquo;s northern command and the Takhar provincial governor.        

On Monday, a spokesman for the Afghanistan National Directorate for Security, its intelligence agency, said that the Takhar bombing had not been from a suicide mission, as originally thought, but from a bomb hidden in the building and detonated during a security meeting.        
Sangar Rahimi and Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting.
