
SANA, Yemen &mdash; The government pounded a major coastal city on Monday with airstrikes to dislodge Islamic militants and, to the west, smashed the country&rsquo;s largest antigovernment demonstration in overnight clashes that killed at least 20 protesters, according to witnesses reached by phone.        

In Zinjibar, along the country&rsquo;s southern coast, residents said warplanes attacked militant positions with repeated bombing runs beginning early Monday afternoon, a day after Islamists of uncertain affiliation took control, seizing banks and a central government compound. The compound was hit in the airstrikes and also shelled by the army, witnesses said.        

It is unclear how many people have died in the Zinjibar fighting, which began Friday. The city has few medical services left, and no electricity or water, people there say. Hundreds have fled; others have taken refuge in local mosques, residents said.        

In the city of Taiz, west of Zinjibar, security forces and plainclothes gunmen swept through a main square, driving out the thousands of protesters seeking the ouster of President Ali Abdullah Saleh. Witnesses said that security forces descended from three directions in a thick cloud of tear gas late Sunday afternoon, and that the clashes continued until after midnight with security forces firing water cannons and setting the protesters&rsquo; tents ablaze with Molotov cocktails. Video posted on social networking sites by opposition groups showed protesters scattering as plainclothes gunmen fired from doorways and from rooftops. Bulldozers and tractors demolished remnants of the sit-in. Sporadic gunfire echoed through the city on Monday, witnesses said.        

A doctor, Taiz Hamoud Aqlan, said Monday night that he could confirm 20 deaths, but that he expected the number to rise. &ldquo;I know that there are injured people who we can&rsquo;t even get to because of the constant gunfire,&rdquo; he said. Some reports put the death toll as high as 70, but they could not be confirmed.        

The United States Embassy in Sana, the capital, condemned the &ldquo;unprovoked and unjustified attack on youth protesters&rdquo; in a statement, adding that the protesters had &ldquo;shown both resolve and restraint and have made their viewpoint known through nonviolent means.&rdquo;        

A hospital within the protest area was looted early Monday, forcing the wounded to seek assistance farther away, said Abdulkafi Shamsan, a doctor there. He said about 15 soldiers held nurses at gunpoint as they smashed computers, stole medical supplies and detained several injured patients. &ldquo;They even shot their guns inside the hospital,&rdquo; he said.        

Mohammed Dabwan, a nearby resident, said no protesters had returned to the square on Monday.        

Yemen&rsquo;s state-run media, quoting an unnamed government security official in Taiz, said the violence there was not an organized crackdown. The official said &ldquo;armed groups&rdquo; from the opposition coalition attacked a security station, setting fire to cars. The protesters then &ldquo;kidnapped soldiers and took them to their sit-in square,&rdquo; he said, where they were abused by the protesters. The official said the security forces then &ldquo;decided on their own to go to the square and liberate their colleagues and clear the square from those making the riots, sabotage and murders.&rdquo;        

Witness in Taiz also said the fighting was touched off by a clash at a security station near the protest, but disputed that any soldiers had been kidnapped.        

Reporting on events in Yemen was limited Monday by what appeared to be a block on international calls to phones belonging to Sabafone, a cellular network owned by Hamid al-Ahmar, Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s biggest tribal rival.        

Violence broke out in Sana a week ago between government forces and fighters loyal to Mr. Ahmar and his brothers after Mr. Saleh refused to follow through on his promise to sign an agreement leading to his resignation. It was the third time since the uprising began in January that Mr. Saleh had agreed to transfer power, and the third time he reneged on the promise.        
Nasser Arrabyee reported from Sana, and J. David Goodman from New York. Laura Kasinof contributed reporting from Hagerstown, Md.
