
SANA, Yemen &mdash; A cease-fire between government forces and opposition tribesmen in Sana, the capital, broke down on Tuesday, renewing fears that the country&rsquo;s continuing political stalemate could drag it into civil war.        

The fighting came a day after government forces pounded a major coastal city with airstrikes to dislodge Islamic militants and, to the west, disrupted a large antigovernment demonstration in the city of Taiz in clashes that killed at least 20 protesters.        

Artillery explosions and machine-gun fire echoed across the center of Sana from late Monday into Tuesday morning as fierce fighting shattered a tenuous truce that had lasted fewer than two days.        

Black smoke rose over the Hasaba neighborhood as security forces attacked a compound belonging to the family of Hamid al-Ahmar, the strongest tribal rival of President Ali Abdullah Saleh, and tribesmen loyal to the Ahmars retook a government building near the compound that they had vacated as part of the truce on Sunday.        

Violence broke out in Sana a week ago after Mr. Saleh refused once again to follow through on a promise to sign an agreement that would lead to his resignation, after months of street protests demanding his ouster. It was the third time since the uprising began in January that Mr. Saleh had agreed to transfer power and then reneged.        

Each side blamed the other for breaking the cease-fire as fighting flared in the Hasaba district, where many government ministries are located. Witnesses said a local police station was burned to the ground before dawn on Tuesday. The two sides traded artillery fire near the state-run television headquarters.        

&ldquo;Last night&rsquo;s clashes were the fiercest so far,&rdquo; Mohammed al-Quraiti, a neighborhood resident, told Reuters. &ldquo;My children and I couldn&rsquo;t sleep all night because of the heavy shooting.&rdquo;        

Street battles in the capital reopened a central front for Yemen&rsquo;s security forces, which have moved forcefully to contain a diverse and distinctive group of opponents, including tribal fighters, militant Islamists and nonviolent antigovernment protesters.        

The protesters found themselves the target of a harsh crackdown in Taiz late Sunday and early Monday as security forces and plainclothes gunmen swept through a main square, dispersing thousands of protesters seeking Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s removal. The office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights said it had received reports that as many as 50 people were killed in the clashes, The Associated Press reported. The United States Embassy in Sana condemned what it called an &ldquo;unprovoked and unjustified attack.&rdquo;        

On Tuesday, protest leaders responded to the crackdown with calls for more large demonstrations. &ldquo;We are determined to carry our protests to five squares, instead of the one that was cleared,&rdquo; said Riyadh Adeeb, an activist in Taiz. &ldquo;We will know how to defend ourselves this time.&rdquo;        

A large number of Republican Guard troops were deployed around the city and were firing at protesters who tried to assemble, witnesses in Taiz said. By the late afternoon, more than 100 women had gathered in a central square, challenging security forces nearby to use force, which would represent a breach of social norms. &ldquo;This place, Wadi Al-Qadhi, may become the new sit-in square if women stand firm in their place,&rdquo; Mr. Adeeb said.        

But the women were soon dispersed by female police officers and women who support Mr. Saleh, a witness said; there were no reports of injuries.        

In the southern coastal city of Zinjibar, five Yemeni soldiers died in fighting on Tuesday, the state-run television reported. Hundreds of people have fled the city, where Islamic militants took control over the weekend.        
Nasser Arrabyee reported from Sana, and J. David Goodman from New York.
