
MOSCOW &mdash; Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, the former Russian oil tycoon who has been jailed since 2003, failed to prove that his prosecution was politically motivated, the European Court of Human Rights ruled Tuesday, while agreeing that the government had violated his rights.        

The ruling was a setback for Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s argument that charges of financial wrongdoing were brought against him because of his outspoken opposition to Vladimir V. Putin, the former president and current prime minister. But Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s lawyers noted that such cases demanded a very high burden of proof, and they focused instead on the unanimous ruling by the seven judges at the European Court &mdash; one a Russian &mdash; on eight complaints that Russia had violated their client&rsquo;s rights.        

&ldquo;The position of Mr. Khodorkovsky is that he is delighted at the vindication of his position in the European Court,&rdquo; Lord David Pannick, one of his lawyers, said at a news conference.        

Since armed commandos stormed his private plane in 2003, Mr. Khodorkovsky has assumed the role of a political prisoner. Once the owner of Russia&rsquo;s largest energy company, Yukos Oil, he was tried and sentenced to a lengthy term in a Siberian prison.        

The authorities have tried to paint him as a criminal and his imprisonment as a victory for Russian justice, but the case has tarnished Russia&rsquo;s image internationally.        

Mr. Khodorkovsky has given interviews and written op-ed articles lambasting Mr. Putin and his government and garnering sympathy in the West. Leaders in the United States and the European Union have for years called for his release, and Amnesty International recently declared that he was a &ldquo;prisoner of conscience.&rdquo;        

After the initial case against him on charges of tax fraud, Mr. Khodorkovsky was tried and convicted again last year on charges of embezzlement. He is now scheduled to be released in 2016.        

In reaching its decision on Tuesday, the court in Strasbourg, France, ruled that whatever Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s political activities at the time of his arrest, they did not absolve him of responsibility before the law.        

&ldquo;The fact that Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s political opponents or business competitors might have benefited from his detention should not have been an obstacle for the authorities to prosecute him if there were serious charges against him,&rdquo; the court said. &ldquo;Political status did not guarantee immunity.&rdquo;        

It said Mr. Khodorkovsky had not presented &ldquo;incontestable proof&rdquo; of political motivations.        

Karinna Moskalenko, one of his lawyers, played down the significance of the decision, saying her team had accumulated further evidence that Mr. Khodorkovsky was a victim of political oppression and would soon present it to the court.        

Some of Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s supporters in Moscow were less forgiving.        

&ldquo;We see political motivations, and they don&rsquo;t,&rdquo; Lyudmila Alekseyeva, a leading rights campaigner, told the Interfax news agency. &ldquo;I am disappointed in the European Court.&rdquo;        

Tuesday&rsquo;s decision applied only to the first case against Mr. Khodorkovsky. The court did not rule on its merits, but focused on complaints that Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s rights had been violated upon his arrest and in detention before and during his trial.        

Among several violations outlined, the court ruled that Mr. Khodorkovsky was held in &ldquo;inhuman and degrading conditions&rdquo; at times during his detention.        

At one point, the court statement said, &ldquo;he had had less than four square meters of personal space in his cell, and the sanitary conditions had been appalling.&rdquo;        

The court also noted several procedural violations, and took issue with the conduct of his arrest. Though summoned only as a witness initially, Mr. Khodorkovsky was detained at gunpoint while boarding his plane in Siberia and forcefully returned to Moscow &ldquo;in a manner more appropriate for dealing with dangerous criminals,&rdquo; the court said.        

Because of these infractions and others, the court ordered the Russian government to pay Mr. Khodorkovsky compensation of about $35,000.        

Russian authorities said on Tuesday that they would review the ruling thoroughly before responding.        

It was not immediately clear how or if the decision would change Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s current circumstances. He is being held in a Moscow prison while awaiting a decision on a recent request for parole.        

Russia now has to suggest measures for carrying out the court&rsquo;s decision, which will then be evaluated by the Council of Europe&rsquo;s Committee of Ministers.        

The court has only rarely ordered a country to release an inmate.        
