
HAMBURG &mdash; Except for the hum of the elevator, there was hardly a sound in the intensive care unit of the University Medical Center of Hamburg-Eppendorf.        

Two hospital attendants were wheeling a stretcher, as quickly and as carefully as possible, along the wide corridor. The woman on the stretcher lay motionless, her eyes closed. There was a grimace on her face and her skin was a pale yellow-gray.        

Inside one room, a young man, dressed in a green hospital gown, sat completely still beside a bed, his hand resting on the side. He looked at the woman lying in the bed. She had same color as the woman on the stretcher, the same listlessness.        

This solemn scene on Tuesday afternoon at the hospital, north of the city center, is just one part of a food contamination crisis unfolding in northern Germany and beyond, as health officials continue to scramble to find the source of a deadly E.coli outbreak and doctors struggle to keep alive the most vulnerable of the victims.        

&ldquo;These people are very, very sick,&rdquo; said Dr. J&ouml;rg F. Debatin, the medical director and chief executive of the huge clinic, where doctors are fighting to save the lives of the 20 people in the intensive care unit.        

Hamburg is the center of a crisis that broke out nearly three weeks ago. As of Tuesday, 15 people had died, according to the German state authorities, and more than 1,100 are suffering from the effects of the bacteria. Scores are in intensive care units like the one here.        

As medical officials deal with the illnesses, a mystery remains about the precise source. Despite earlier statements by the regional authorities that the E. coli could be traced to cucumbers from facilities in Spain &mdash; a stance that continued to prompt angry denials from Spanish officials &mdash; officials in Berlin admitted on Tuesday that there was no certainty this was the case.        

There was still a &ldquo;very difficult situation in Germany,&rdquo; Agriculture Minister Robert Kloos said in Hungary. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re not yet able to establish exactly where and how the infection has arisen.&rdquo;        

The Robert Koch Institute, Germany&rsquo;s disease control authority, is monitoring the spread of the infections, which can cause a disease called hemolytic uremic syndrome, or H.U.S., which can in turn lead to kidney failure and death.        

Meanwhile, one woman in Sweden died in the first fatality outside Germany linked to the outbreak, The Associated Press reported, but officials noted that she had recently visited Germany.        

The suggestions that the outbreak is linked to Spanish produce has ignited tensions between Spain and Germany, as farmers were forced to dump produce. Tensions are also rising with Russia, which blocked some imports and threatened to extend that ban.        

Germany, Denmark, the Czech Republic, Luxembourg, Hungary, Sweden, Belgium and Russia were blocking entry of Spanish cucumbers, according to news reports from Spain. In addition, some Dutch exports of cucumbers had also been halted.        

Over the weekend, Spanish officials underlined that there had been no outbreak of the illness in Spain, and they said that this suggested that the vegetables were contaminated elsewhere. While one case was recorded in Spain on Tuesday, officials noted that the patient, a man hospitalized in the Basque country, had recently visited Germany.        

&ldquo;We are by now talking about hundreds of millions of euros of loss,&rdquo; Armando Garc&iacute;a L&oacute;pez, the chief of staff of the regional agriculture department of Andalusia, said by telephone. &ldquo;Germany has tabled an accusation without any proof, which is something totally illegal and in gross violation of the E.U.&rsquo;s common agricultural policy.&rdquo;        

Carlos Rojas, the mayor of Motril, one of the Andalusian towns that is a major producer of cucumbers, said over the phone that the situation for local farmers was &ldquo;a complete disaster.&rdquo;        

Mr. Rojas said farmers had been forced to abandon their production and leave it to rot on the ground because of canceled orders from Germany, Austria and other countries.        

&ldquo;There is a reluctance on the part of consumers to purchase vegetables,&rdquo; said Mr. Kloos, the German minister. &ldquo;All vegetables in the European Union are affected,&rdquo; he said, specifically mentioning Spain, The Netherlands, Germany and Belgium.        

Mr. Kloos was speaking after a meeting of agriculture ministers as efforts also got underway on Tuesday to compensate producers who were losing business.        
(Page 2 of 2)
The European Union&rsquo;s agriculture commissioner, Dacian Ciolos, also speaking in Hungary, said he was coordinating efforts to compensate farmers for losses incurred on produce they had been obliged to take off the market.        

Mr. Ciolos said that safety came first, but he also warned of an overreaction that could affect the range of products available and their prices. &ldquo;Ultimately, this could turn against consumers if large parts of fruit and vegetables disappear,&rdquo; he said.        

Gregory Hartl, a spokesman for the World Health Organization, said the most serious prior E. coli outbreak was in Japan in 1996. Mr. Hartl said that in case, contaminated radish sprouts in school lunches caused 9,451 illnesses. He could not say how many of those led to deaths.        

The European Union operates as a single market but nations zealously guard powers over certain areas of national policy, including health policy and disease control. Even so, European efforts to track the source of the bacteria were far more effective than in other parts of the world, including the United States, one E.U. official said Tuesday.        

The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he did not want to be seen criticizing other health and food authorities around the world, said high standards of traceability meant that E.U. experts would soon pinpoint the origins of the outbreak.        

On Tuesday, the office of the agricultural minister of Andalusia said the Germans had raised questions about two companies, Costa de Almeria and Frunet, that own 13 different production centers in the region.        

Although Spanish authorities said over the weekend that no productions sites had been closed, the ministry in Andalusia said Tuesday that all 13 had been temporarily shut down to carry out tests on water, soil and produce. Samples from all the sites were being sent to a national lab in Galicia, in northern Spain, with preliminary results expected Thursday.        

But back in Hamburg, the emphasis remained on treatment.        

The impact of the infections at the University Medical Center has been so intense that the hospital staff, though accustomed to dealing with a clinic that has a special cancer unit, say they have been unusually upset by the magnitude of the crisis. Relatives are receiving psychological help.        

Dr. Debatin, 49, said in an interview Tuesday afternoon in the hospital that while he hoped patients would recover, 20 and 30 percent of affected people get complications.        

The illness, which is common among children and treatable, has in this case affected adults, as well. It cuts across gender and age. But, said Dr. Debatin, &ldquo;two-thirds of the patients are women. They tend to be young.&rdquo;        

During the afternoon, a young man, probably in his mid-20s, was leaving the intensive care unit. Hospital staff asked how he was doing. He said little. His fianc&eacute;e was inside.        

James Kanter reported from Brussels. Raphael Minder contributed reporting from Granada, Spain.         
