
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; After a 72-hour bombing lull to allow President Jacob Zuma of South Africa to fly into Tripoli on an unsuccessful peace mission for the African Union, NATO resumed its airstrikes on the Libyan capital after dusk on Tuesday. There was no immediate word from NATO or the Libyan government on the targets of the strikes.        

The new attacks underscored NATO&rsquo;s declared intention to step up the pressures on Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi to abandon power and flee into exile. But all signs in the wake of the Zuma visit on Monday pointed to a hardening resolve on the part of the 68-year-old Libyan leader, who was quoted in a statement issued by Mr. Zuma&rsquo;s office in South Africa as having told the South African leader that &ldquo;he was not prepared to leave his country, despite the difficulties.&rdquo;        

The chief spokesman for the Qaddafi government, Moussa Ibrahim, offering the first official Libyan account of the Zuma talks 24 hours after they ended, also emphasized Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s determination to fight on. Addressing NATO and others who have called for Colonel Qaddafi to quit, Mr. Ibrahim offered a blunt riposte. &ldquo;We say: &lsquo;Who are you to say the Libyan cannot choose Muammar Qaddafi?&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; He added: &ldquo;We will never give in.&rdquo;        

Saying the Libyan people&rsquo;s &ldquo;love for the leader&rdquo; had imbued &ldquo;thousands and thousands&rdquo; of Libyans with a will to resist NATO and the rebels who had taken control of much of eastern Libya, he added, &ldquo;When it comes down to it we will all take our guns and fight.&rdquo;        

The increasingly shrill words appeared to reflect a darkening sense of isolation, brought on by 10 weeks of NATO bombing, rebel advances in the east, Western leaders&rsquo; recent reaffirmation of demands for Colonel Qaddafi to quit, and the fact that Russia, an old ally of Libya, joined those demands last week. Also, prosecutors at the International Criminal Court announced two weeks ago that they would seek war crimes indictments against Colonel Qaddafi and a son, Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi, narrowing the destinations the Libyan leader might choose if forced into exile.        

The pressures found a renewed focal point on Monday when clashes broke out between government forces and a dense crowd of protesters in the Souq al-Juma neighborhood of Tripoli. A video posted on the Internet by activists showed scenes from what were said to have been hours of angry street demonstrations, when pro-Qaddafi forces opened fire on crowds who had turned out for the funeral of two protesters. The video, posted on YouTube, showed the protesters shouting &ldquo;Muammar is the enemy of God!&rdquo;        

The heavily populated district is one of several in Tripoli where protests against Colonel Qaddafi were suppressed after the revolt first erupted in February.        

Reporters who reached the neighborhood on Tuesday found it peaceful, but local people pointed to what they said were fresh bullet holes in walls and cars from Monday&rsquo;s shooting, and spoke of nighttime raids by security forces to round up suspected rebel sympathizers, according to a Reuters report.        

Mr. Ibrahim, the government spokesman, told reporters he had no information on the reported unrest.        
