
MOSCOW &mdash; The Russian authorities on Tuesday arrested the man they suspect of shooting the journalist Anna Politkovskaya, whose apparent contract killing in 2006 sent a chilling message about the hazards of challenging the powerful in contemporary Russia.        

After evading arrest for nearly four years, the suspect, Rustam Makhmudov, was taken into custody in the southern region of Chechnya. Russia&rsquo;s powerful Investigative Committee said its investigators had discovered that Mr. Makhmudov had been hiding in Belgium, and had opened a joint investigation with the Belgian authorities that forced him to leave that country and return to Chechnya.        

Aleksandr I. Bastrykin, who heads the Investigative Committee, traveled to Belgium several times to consult with his counterparts there, officials said.        

Mr. Makhmudov was the missing link in a 2009 murder trial that ended in acquittal for three other suspects. Two of his brothers had been accused of acting as his lookout and driver, and a former police investigator had been accused of hiring the Makhmudov brothers and overseeing logistics. But the prosecution offered thin evidence, relying heavily on cellphone billing records that suggested that the suspects had called one another from the crime scene. The jury returned a verdict of acquittal after deliberating for two hours.        

The Supreme Court overturned the verdict, which is allowed by Russian law, and ordered a new trial, but the second trial was adjourned so that investigators could search for Mr. Makhmudov.        

The deputy editor of Novaya Gazeta, where Ms. Politkovskaya had worked, said he hoped that the arrest would lead to a new murder trial soon.        

&ldquo;They have a better chance of proving the involvement of all the individuals they want because the triggerman is the key to proving a crime,&rdquo; said the deputy editor, Sergei M. Sokolov, whose journalists had undertaken an independent investigation of Ms. Politkovskaya&rsquo;s death. &ldquo;That is, if Rustam Makhmudov really is the killer. And on this issue I am in solidarity with the investigators.&rdquo;        

Murad Musayev, a lawyer who defended one of Mr. Makhmudov&rsquo;s brothers two years ago, said Mr. Makhmudov denied playing any part in the killing.        

Mr. Musayev said that for years, Mr. Makhmudov had been offering to surrender and cooperate with the investigation, but that the authorities &ldquo;were fully satisfied with the fact that he was hiding, so they didn&rsquo;t have to prove his involvement.&rdquo; Mr. Musayev said he believed Mr. Makhmudov had been living in plain sight in Chechnya, and had taken steps to turn himself in, which prompted the arrest.        

&ldquo;He is sick and tired of running,&rdquo; Mr. Musayev said. &ldquo;You cannot be a fugitive for the rest of your life.&rdquo;        

Ms. Politkovskaya was a fierce critic of the Kremlin&rsquo;s policy in Chechnya, and in particular of its leader, Ramzan A. Kadyrov, a loyal lieutenant to Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin during his presidency. Mr. Putin&rsquo;s chilly response to her death &mdash; he was silent for days, then remarked that &ldquo;her influence on political life was extremely insignificant in scale&rdquo; &mdash; colored his image in the West. He went on to suggest that she had been murdered by enemies of the state &ldquo;to create a wave of anti-Russian feeling.&rdquo;        

During the 2009 trial, prosecutors showed jurors security-camera footage of a man in a dark baseball cap who entered Ms. Politkovskaya&rsquo;s Moscow apartment building 10 minutes before she walked in, carrying bags of groceries. The man left 24 seconds afterward. Ms. Politkovskaya died in the elevator, a Makarov 9-millimeter pistol discarded beside her body.        

As the news of Mr. Makhmudov&rsquo;s capture sank in, Dmitri A. Muratov, the editor of Novaya Gazeta, wondered aloud at the fact that a man long rumored to be hiding in Western Europe was found at his family&rsquo;s home.        

&ldquo;Does that mean that Ramzan Kadyrov, the head of the Chechen Republic, the commander of its police, does not have complete control over who is located on the territory of his republic?&rdquo; Mr. Muratov said, in an interview on Kommersant FM radio.        

&ldquo;Or maybe he knew,&rdquo; Mr. Muratov said. &ldquo;I, of course, am inclined to believe he simply didn&rsquo;t know, and something just malfunctioned. But you will agree that it is revealing that in his home village, in his parents&rsquo; home, there was living a person who was the object of two manhunts &mdash; one Russian, and one international.&rdquo;        
