
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Up to 200 militants from Afghanistan crossed into northwestern Pakistan on Wednesday and engaged in a gun battle with security forces, local officials said Wednesday.        

At least one police official was killed in the attack. There was no immediate information on militant casualties.        

The militants attacked a police post in Barawal, a village surrounded by rugged mountains and forests in Shaltalo area of Upper Dir, a district in northwestern Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province early on Wednesday. Shaltalo is near the border with Kunar Province of Afghanistan.        

&ldquo;Fighting is still ongoing,&rdquo; said Said Muhammad, a local police official in Upper Dir.        

&ldquo;The militants have made bunkers on the mountains and are attacking the security forces,&rdquo; Mr. Muhammad said by telephone.        

The dead police official was a driver and the police van was destroyed in the attack.        

Mr. Muhammad said the militants carried out their attack around 3:30 a.m. on Wednesday. Their exact number was not immediately known, but estimates put the militant force at 150 to 200.        

Mr. Muhammad said local police officers and border scouts were taking part in retaliatory action. Dozens of Pakistani Army soldiers also joined in, local police officials said.        

&ldquo;The attack is to take revenge for Osama bin Laden,&rdquo; said Jawahir Ali, a junior police official in Barawal, referring to the American raid last month in which the leader of Al Qaeda was killed. &ldquo;The militants held a meeting across the border in Afghanistan and vowed to take revenge from Pakistani government officials,&rdquo; Mr. Ali said.        

Local police officials said it was not clear if Pakistani militants had joined the attackers.        

Mr. Ali said that the militants were wearing military fatigues, similar to those worn by the Pakistani security forces, and that this was causing confusion.        

&ldquo;The local villagers have also take up arms to help us is in resisting the attack,&rdquo; Mr. Ali said.        
