
CAIRO &mdash; Syrian military forces killed 42 people Wednesday, including a 10-year-old boy and 4-year-old girl, in raids on a string of towns around the central city of Homs as the government continued trying to crush a three-month-old popular uprising against President Bashar al-Assad, human rights activists said.        

Troops and tanks moved against the towns of Talbiseh, Teir Maaleh and Al-Rastan on Saturday after large antigovernment demonstrations on Friday, said Razan Zeitouneh, a rights activist whose organization, the Syrian Human Rights Information Link, collected the names of 42 people killed in Al-Rastan. Though figures for other towns were not available, Syrians reached by telephone described widespread arrests of men and neighborhoods besieged by tanks and snipers.        

&ldquo;There are many, many tanks and soldiers in the whole area of Homs,&rdquo; said a human rights activist in Homs, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. &ldquo;There has been a lot of fighting.&rdquo;        

Hajar al-Khateeb, 10, was killed when security forces opened fire on a school bus driving between Al-Rastan and Homs, and Marwa Shakhdo, 4, was shot dead when soldiers entered her family&rsquo;s home in Al-Rastan, Ms. Zeitouneh said.        

Syrian state television said three soldiers had so far died in the operation, which it said was aimed at &ldquo;armed terrorist groups,&rdquo; part of the official government narrative that has blamed foreigners and terrorists for the uprising. Even some of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s supporters have said that explanation was not credible with protests drawing large crowds across the country.        

The scene of the crackdown on Wednesday, Al-Rastan, is the hometown of Syria&rsquo;s former defense minister, Mustafa Tlas, who served for more than three decades, and many army officers are drawn from there, said Radwan Ziadeh, an exiled human rights activist and visiting scholar at George Washington University. He said hundreds of people had been detained in the operation. Syrian forces also shelled the southern town of Hirak, killing at least eight, including Malak Munir al-Qaddah, 11, The Associated Press reported. Mohamed, a Dara&rsquo;a resident reached by telephone who did not want to give his last name for fear of reprisal, said that about 40 tanks idled at the village entrance and that security forces had arrested dozens of men over the age of 18.        

&ldquo;Residents have fled through the fields around the village,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Snipers are everywhere.&rdquo;        

Telephone, electricity and water were cut in many towns on Wednesday, Mr. Ziadeh said.        

Information about the military operation was impossible to verify because Syria has denied foreign journalists permission to report in the country.        

At least 40 children have died in the uprising against Mr. Assad, whose family has ruled for four decades. The most infamous of those cases involved Hamza Ali al-Khateeb, 13, whose mutilated remains were recorded on a video posted online, transforming the young man into a symbol of the revolt and the government&rsquo;s unsparing, lethal crackdown. Activists said Hamza was arrested on April 29 at a protest in the southern town of Jiza.        

In response to international outrage, the government offered an official version of Hamza&rsquo;s death on state television on Wednesday, saying he was lured into attacking a military housing compound by armed men &ldquo;inciting calls for jihad&rdquo; and died in the cross-fire. It quoted a judge who said he had died &ldquo;without any traces of torture,&rdquo; a statement at odds with the video.        

The state broadcaster, SANA, reported on its Web site that Hamza&rsquo;s father had discussed his son&rsquo;s death in a meeting with Mr. Assad, who SANA said the father described as &ldquo;gentle and kind.&rdquo; Activists said that the father was detained by security forces last week after a video of his son&rsquo;s corpse appeared on YouTube.        

The military operations in Syria coincided with a meeting of more than 300 opposition activists who gathered in the Turkish resort town of Antalya. Most of the people there were Syrians living abroad with ties to traditional opposition movements.        

&ldquo;This is the first time in 50 years such a large group gets together for action,&rdquo; said Orouba Barakat, who arrived from Abu Dhabi. She said she had donated money and satellite phones to protesters. &ldquo;I am so happy, but also confused in the face of growing violence,&rdquo; she said.        

Turkey views Syria as an important economic partner, but officials have also grown alarmed at the violence and pressed the Assad government to make changes.        

On Wednesday, the Turkish government kept a cautious distance from the conference. &ldquo;This is a meeting initiated by Syrian groups,&rdquo; said a Foreign Ministry official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity in keeping with diplomatic protocol. &ldquo;If our advice for reforms had been followed, today&rsquo;s situation would have been quite different. Our message to the Syrian administration has been and is very clear. No explanation can justify the death of a 13-year-old child.&rdquo;        
Sebnem Arsu contributed reporting from Antalya, Turkey, and Hwaida Saad from Beirut, Lebanon.
