
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; An explosion destroyed two cars on Wednesday night in a parking lot outside a Benghazi hotel that is a central meeting place for Libyan rebel leaders, diplomats and journalists. A rebel spokesman blamed a hand grenade lobbed by an unidentified loyalist saboteur for the blast.        

The spokesman, Mahmoud Shammam, said that there were no deaths or injuries, and that a hunt for the assailant was under way. &ldquo;This attack is aiming to create a sense of chaos and fear.&rdquo;        

Asserting that there were &ldquo;small sleeper cells&rdquo; loyal to the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, lurking inside the city, Mr. Shammam added, &ldquo;They want to send a message that they can strike inside Benghazi.&rdquo;        

Since the Libyan conflict began, hotels housing foreigners have been targets of sporadic attacks, carried out with small explosives or guns. But this blast, which shattered windows hundreds of feet away, seemed to be on a larger scale.        

Dozens of security officers cleaned the wreckage in the parking lot, which stretches in front of the Tibesti Hotel. Diplomats, including the United States envoy, along with representatives of the Qatari and Italian governments, have stayed at the hotel while in Benghazi, the eastern Libyan city that has been the base of the anti-Qaddafi uprising.        

The rebel National Transitional Council, the United Nations and the European Union all keep offices at the Tibesti, where the coffee shop is a favorite spot for deal-making and negotiations. The entrances to the hotel are only lightly guarded by armed uniformed sentries and soldiers.        

At a news conference directly after the explosion, Mr. Shammam, the rebel spokesman, said that security forces had received &ldquo;a tip&rdquo; a half-hour before the explosion, but he did not say what information was conveyed. He held up a grenade pin that he said was found in the parking lot and said that there was surveillance video of the explosion, though it was not clear what it showed.        

&ldquo;There is nothing called perfect security measures,&rdquo; he said.        

The bombing coincided with confirmation of another high-profile defection from the increasingly isolated Qaddafi government in Tripoli. The former oil minister of Libya appeared at a news conference at a hotel in Rome to renounce Colonel Qaddafi and pledge &ldquo;to fight for a democratic country.&rdquo;        

The minister, Shukri Ghanem, was chairman of Libya&rsquo;s National Oil Corporation and a former prime minister. He is one of the most prominent figures to publicly break from Colonel Qaddafi, who is under pressure from NATO military bombings and diplomats to leave the country.        

Mr. Ghanem&rsquo;s announcement put an end to two weeks of speculation about his abrupt disappearance. In mid-May, it was reported that he had fled to Tunisia but the Libyan government would not confirm the defection.        

On Wednesday, he said he had left because the bloodshed had become unbearable.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not possible to work any longer in this situation, so I left my country and my job to join the choice of young Libyans to fight for a democratic country,&rdquo; he said, according to a report by Ansa, an Italian news agency.        

Mr. Ghanem said he had not joined the National Transitional Council. He also did not say where he would go from Rome, where he arrived on Tuesday.        

He said that Libya was currently under pressure, &ldquo;from within and from outside,&rdquo; and that many solutions were still possible, even peaceful ones. &ldquo;We must wait and see,&rdquo; he said.        

Eight Libyan military officers announced their defection at a news briefing Monday in Rome.        

The oil minister, who represented Libya at meetings of the Organization of Oil Exporting Countries, said the international embargo had brought oil production in Libya nearly to a halt. The departure of many foreigners, which Libya had relied on to help run the oil industry, has also hurt, Mr. Ghanem said, because &ldquo;then you cannot export, and if you can&rsquo;t export you can&rsquo;t produce.&rdquo;        

In a statement, the vice chairman of the National Transitional Council, Abdul Hafidh Ghoga, said, &ldquo;Mr. Ghanem has shown that it is possible to stand up against Qaddafi and that it is our duty as Libyans to unite and end Qaddafi&rsquo;s brutal reign.&rdquo;        
Kareem Fahim reported from Benghazi, and Elisabetta Povoledo from Rome.
