
JUBA, Sudan &mdash; Officials from the disputed Abyei area of Sudan said Wednesday that 116 civilians, including many children, had been killed last month when the northern Sudanese army seized Abyei.        

The figures were the first attempt at calculating the death toll from the incursion, Abyei officials said, and did not include soldiers and policemen also killed in the fighting, which set off fears across Sudan that a larger conflict may be looming.        

Acuil Akol, the Abyei administration&rsquo;s finance minister, said that the death toll was tabulated by surveying leaders of the area&rsquo;s traditional Dinka chiefdoms, and that the number was most likely a low estimate.        

He said that the fighting also drove tens of thousands of people into the bush, with many now sleeping in the open, exposed to torrential downpours.        

&ldquo;They are traumatized and terrified,&rdquo; Mr. Akol said.        

United Nations officials said that several waves of looters had pillaged Abyei and that there was even a market in town now for looted goods.        

The northern Sudanese military sent thousands of troops and militiamen into Abyei on May 21 after repeated clashes between northern and southern Sudan forces. Both sides claim the area, and with southern Sudan gearing up to declare independence on July 9, military action around the contested border has intensified as the date draws near.        

The African Union said Tuesday that the north and south had struck a deal to defuse tensions along the border. But on Wednesday, northern Sudanese officials were backing away from the idea.        

&ldquo;There is no comprehensive agreement about such case of the border,&rdquo; said Rabie A. Atti, a Sudanese government spokesman. &ldquo;Up to now, there is nothing agreed upon.&rdquo;        

The Obama administration on Wednesday dispatched its top counterterrorism official, John O. Brennan, to the Sudanese capital, Khartoum, where he &ldquo;underscored President Obama&rsquo;s deep concern over the continued presence of Sudanese armed forces in Abyei and urged a rapid and peaceful resolution to the crisis,&rdquo; the White House said in a statement.        

Also on Wednesday, United Nations officials said they were preparing withdrawal plans for hundreds of United Nations employees and millions of dollars of equipment from northern Sudan, because the government in Khartoum has demanded that the United Nations mission entrusted with monitoring Sudan&rsquo;s border leave by July 9.        

According to one United Nations official, there is a plan to hire 250 barges to cart away United Nations equipment, which would be floated down the Nile River from Khartoum to Juba, the capital of southern Sudan, where the new United Nations mission is expected to be based.        

But there are complications to operating in southern Sudan. United Nations officials have complained that soldiers from southern Sudan&rsquo;s armed forces routinely attack aid convoys traveling through rural areas. Col. Philip Aguer, a spokesman for the southern forces, did not directly dispute this, saying, &ldquo;if it has happened that is completely a wrong action,&rdquo; and that it is &ldquo;uncommon.&rdquo;        

The southern military is under pressure on a number of fronts. The northern Sudan government had given southern-allied forces until Wednesday to pull out of all contested areas north of the internal border. On Wednesday, officials in Blue Nile state, home to several thousand heavily armed southern-allied soldiers, said there had been no clashes.        

&ldquo;So far it is okay,&rdquo; said Malik Agar, Blue Nile&rsquo;s governor. But, he added, &ldquo;there is a deaf dialogue&rdquo; and &ldquo;we are ready to defend ourselves.&rdquo;        
Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Washington
