
BERLIN &mdash; Shortly after the earthquake and tsunami struck the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant in Japan in March, stores in faraway Germany began selling out of radiation-tracking Geiger counters. Sales of iodine pills to limit the absorption of radiation surged briskly, too, propelled by anxiety that people might find themselves engulfed in clouds of long-range radioactive fallout.        

No matter that the incipient nuclear catastrophe was about 5,500 miles away, or that Germany, unlike Japan, did not lie on known tectonic fault lines. On the streets of major cities, hundreds of thousands of protesters, casting events in Japan as a portent of what might happen here, turned out ahead of state elections to demand a halt to Germany&rsquo;s own nuclear power program, the source of nearly a quarter of the nation&rsquo;s electricity.        

Those two intertwined phenomena &mdash; angst and electoral maneuvering &mdash; led to what seemed one of the most abrupt reversals of Angela Merkel&rsquo;s years as German chancellor: On Monday, she abandoned plans laid only nine months earlier to extend the life of the country&rsquo;s nuclear power stations and ordered instead that they be phased out by 2022.        

The decision meant that, at Europe&rsquo;s heart, the Continent&rsquo;s economic powerhouse had committed itself far more radically than its neighbors to the east or west to replace nuclear power with renewable sources of energy like wind turbines &mdash; or at least, critics said, with nuclear-generated power imported from neighbors like France.        

But the German move also raised a question whose answer seemed elusive: What is there in this land of 82 million people that has, over decades, bred an aversion to nuclear energy that seems unrivaled among its economic peers, defying its reputation for reasoned debate?        

&ldquo;Just as creationists attempt to ban the theory of evolution from the school books,&rdquo; said a physicist, Peter Heller, in a Web posting that challenged the national nuclear orthodoxy, &ldquo;it almost seems as if every factual and neutral explanation in Germany is now in the process of being deleted&rdquo; from the nuclear debate.        

Indeed, said Reinhard Wolf, a professor in Frankfurt, the debate is so passionate that &ldquo;you are either with us or against us.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;There is no middle ground,&rdquo; Professor Wolf said.        

The power of antinuclear sentiment has already redrawn the politics of survival for Mrs. Merkel. Recent regional elections in the southern state of Baden-W&uuml;rttemberg and in the northern city-state of Bremen have undermined her conservative Christian Democratic Union to the benefit of the antinuclear Green Party. The Greens&rsquo; showing was so strong it seemed that if national elections were held now, they would emerge again as kingmakers, as they were before Mrs. Merkel came to power in 2005.        

Within days of that fundamental shift, her energy policy, once firmly based on extending the life of Germany&rsquo;s nuclear plants, swung around in favor of closing the plants much sooner. As she said after the Fukushima crisis began, events in Japan changed &ldquo;everything in Germany.&rdquo;        

When Mrs. Merkel on Monday announced her plans to phase out all of Germany&rsquo;s 17 nuclear reactors, said Gerd Gigerenzer, director of the Max Planck Institute for Human Development here, she courted the danger &ldquo;that when a government reacts too quickly to an incident like Fukishima, it creates the impression that there is no real reason except winning votes.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The government has decided to listen to the anxiety of the people and go to the position where the opposition wants them to go,&rdquo; Mr. Gigerenzer said in a telephone interview.        

Some call the process Merkelism, defined by the columnist Roland Nelles in the weekly Der Spiegel as politics &ldquo;based on two principles.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The first is that, if the people want it, it must be right,&rdquo; Mr. Nelles wrote. &ldquo;The second is that whatever is useful to the people must also be useful to the chancellor.&rdquo;        

That calculation seemed borne out by opinion surveys suggesting that around 70 percent of Germans believed that their chancellor was maneuvering for electoral advantage. The same proportion, significantly, said they were prepared to pay higher electricity bills in return for ending nuclear energy.        

That again seemed to underscore the way the nuclear debate here draws such apocalyptic comparisons.        

&ldquo;What Sept. 11, 2001, meant for the vulnerability of the West,&rdquo; the center-left S&uuml;ddeutsche Zeitung said, for instance, the catastrophe in Japan on March 11, 2011, &ldquo;will mean for the idea that nuclear power is controllable. That idea can no longer be supported.&rdquo;        

Of course, few modern German reflexes are completely free of what Professor Wolf in Frankfurt called &ldquo;the German experience&rdquo; of its Nazi past, which has made many suspicious of the industrialization of destructive forces, whether chemical or nuclear.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Some date the roots of Germany&rsquo;s Greens movement &mdash; a leading opponent of nuclear power &mdash; even further back, to the romanticism of the 19th century, and the hankering for forests and a wholesome, perfect world.        

That may seem fanciful to some. But there is little doubt that Germany&rsquo;s modern history has combined to produce a deep strain of risk aversion, of caution, and a dislike for surprises, all of which magnify the potential hazards of nuclear energy, producing a perception that is different from that of other major European economies like France or Britain, commentators said.        

&ldquo;The dramatic events in Japan demonstrate that nuclear power can&rsquo;t be controlled completely,&rdquo; said Claudia Roth, a Greens leader. &ldquo;Nuclear power is not 100 percent safe, which makes it highly dangerous.&rdquo;        

Professor Wolf said that German leaders once insisted that &ldquo;we could trust our engineers, we could trust our technicians, and nuclear power was completely safe.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This argument has been shattered by Fukushima,&rdquo; he said.        

Germany&rsquo;s suspicion of nuclear technology is not new, developing partly from the profound sense of pacifism that grew from World War II, and from decades of what Professor Wolf called &ldquo;a potential nuclear battlefield&rdquo; between East and West on the very front line of the cold war.        

Four decades ago, civil society groups chose as their slogan &ldquo;Nuclear power? No thanks!&rdquo; Then, a groundswell of opposition to America&rsquo;s stationing of nuclear-armed missiles on German soil seemed to some to conflate two separate issues, nuclear energy and nuclear weapons, making for a combustible mix.        

Some, though, see the galvanizing moment as the Chernobyl nuclear meltdown in 1986.        

&ldquo;That was a shock, and the shock was never overcome,&rdquo; said Claudia Kemfert, an energy professor at the Hertie School of Governance in Berlin. &ldquo;Chernobyl showed that it&rsquo;s not a safe technology,&rdquo; Professor Kemfert said in a telephone interview, and that spurred the Social Democrats and the Greens to start campaigns against nuclear technology that not only endured, but broadened.        

In Germany, Professor Kemfert said, political groups, civil society organizations and faith groups all oppose nuclear power. &ldquo;These groups all oppose nuclear power,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;This is different in other countries.&rdquo;        
