
CARPENDALE, Australia &mdash; The  smashed remains of Kapernick&rsquo;s Bridge &mdash; with its bent guardrails and a  hanging concrete slab where road once was &mdash; are as sure a sign as any  that the Lockyer Valley&rsquo;s decade-long drought is finished.        

Next door, at the vegetable farm of Steve Kluck, the inland tsunami  that smashed apart towns and killed more than a dozen people last week  in the northeast Australian state of Queensland left a deep gouge in the  earth covering nearly two acres. Water is now plentiful; soil,  unfortunately, is not anymore.        

The cost of rebuilding and future losses are hard to calculate, Mr.  Kluck said, but he estimated it would probably be hundreds of thousands  of dollars &mdash; still a pittance compared with the losses of some nearby  farmers. And there is always the risk of more flooding as Australia&rsquo;s tropical wet season drags on.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re picking up all these sticks&rdquo; and other debris, Mr. Kluck  said, adding that any progress he made could be wiped out by more  flooding at any time. He said he anticipated dealing with the fallout  for the next 10 years.        

Farmers like Mr. Kluck are among the worst hit in the  multibillion-dollar economic toll of Australia&rsquo;s continuing flood  crisis, which has affected five states. In the worst-hit state,  Queensland, flooding in regions with a land area more than double that  of California  has killed at least 28 people. Even as victims in southern Queensland  cleaned up behind receding waters over the weekend, fresh floods struck  in other areas; in the state of Victoria, homes were inundated and more  than 3,500 people were forced to evacuate, The Associated Press  reported.        

Buffeted by a cycle of dispiriting dry followed by overwhelming wet,  the farmers are experiencing a fate highlighting the vagaries of  Australia&rsquo;s extreme weather. At the same time, their situation adds fuel  to a continuing debate over the future of intensive agriculture on a  continent drier than all the others but Antarctica.        

&ldquo;Oh, mate, it&rsquo;s going to hurt us financially,&rdquo; said Derek Schulz,  who owns land near the town of Grantham, which was largely destroyed in  the flood. Where more than a week ago fields were ready for a fresh  vegetable crop, there is now a plain of cracked mud and the scattered  debris of crushed cars, tractors and torn homes.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re carrying a huge amount of debt, we&rsquo;re talking my wife and I  carrying millions of dollars in debt,&rdquo; Mr. Schulz said. &ldquo;And to have a  complete wipeout, that&rsquo;s gonna hurt us.&rdquo;        

Australian farming is a business of high expenditures and narrow  margins, and Mr. Schulz said he expected many in Grantham would give up.  Insurance will not cover many losses, and government assistance, including disaster grants of up to $25,000 and low-interest loans  of up to $250,000, is a fraction of what is required to cover losses  and start anew. But Mr. Schulz said he would probably take on fresh debt  and return to the land.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve got this little saying: &lsquo;I&rsquo;ve got dirt under the fingernails,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And it&rsquo;s gonna be hard to get rid of that.&rdquo;        

While some farmers may leave the land because of the floods, the  bigger threat in the longer term is still likely to be a lack of water,  said Chris Cocklin, an environmental scientist who is the deputy vice  chancellor of James Cook University in Queensland. Before the start of  heavy rains late last year, a drought had persisted for more than a  decade across the Murray-Darling Basin, a vast irrigated river system in  eastern Australia that is the country&rsquo;s most important agricultural  area. In many areas, it would take years of significant rain to bring  underground aquifers up to healthy levels, Dr. Cocklin said.        

Dr. Cocklin warned that it was impossible to easily blame the latest floods on climate change. Rather, the immediate culprit is La Ni&ntilde;a, a Pacific weather pattern that has caused havoc from Brazil to Sri Lanka.  But he said it was indisputable that, as a result of climate change,  &ldquo;these extremes are becoming more intensified&rdquo; &mdash; meaning more severe,  and longer, droughts.        

As a result, Australia must consider a less water-intensive  agricultural future, Dr. Cocklin said. &ldquo;People have to accept that the  game&rsquo;s changed,&rdquo; he said, particularly in the case of water-hogging  crops like rice and cotton.        

&ldquo;They&rsquo;re literally flooding the continent &mdash; you know, they&rsquo;re trying to copy monsoon Asia,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;You&rsquo;d have to wonder if that&rsquo;s really a smart thing to be doing.&rdquo;        

In response to the long drought, the government authority responsible  for the Murray-Darling Basin released a proposal in October to  drastically reduce water consumption by irrigators. Some outraged  farmers burned copies of the plan in protest.        

Amid heavy floods at the start of this year, the National Farmers  Federation called on the center-left minority Labor government of Prime  Minister Julia Gillard to delay its water reform process. The government has rejected the calls.        
