
BEIJING &mdash; As an act of subversion, the empty wall unveiled Wednesday afternoon inside the CCD 300 gallery was rather tame. The defiance apparently came in appending the name Ai Weiwei below the blank space.        

Lin Bing, one of the show&rsquo;s organizers, described the void as a melancholy reference to the plight of Mr. Ai, who has now spent two months in police custody and is accused of economic crimes. &ldquo;We feel regret because his voice can&rsquo;t be heard,&rdquo; Mr. Lin told Reuters on Wednesday.        

The void&rsquo;s symbolism, it seems, was apparently too much for the authorities.        

On Thursday morning, the curators of the show, the Incidental Art Festival, were forced to close their doors and dismantle the exhibit, which included photographs, video and conceptual pieces by 19 participants, many of them performance artists. &ldquo;The whole thing has been canceled and everything has already been taken down,&rdquo; Yang Xiaoyan, a gallery employee, said Thursday afternoon.        

What is more, three organizers of the festival, including Mr. Lin, seem to have disappeared, she and others said.        

Wen Jie, one of the festival participants, said he believed that the three organizers were being questioned by the police; Mr. Lin, in fact, had told friends that he had received an invitation from the Public Security Bureau on Wednesday afternoon to &ldquo;discuss&rdquo; the exhibition.        

&ldquo;Judging from my own experience, they will be let out after 24 hours with a warning,&rdquo; Mr. Wen said. His own experience includes a brief detention in late April after he staged a piece of performance art &mdash; &ldquo;a sunbathing event&rdquo; &mdash; that involved standing silently in front of the capital&rsquo;s 798 Arts District to protest Mr. Ai&rsquo;s detention. &ldquo;This is rogue behavior,&rdquo; he said of the authorities. &ldquo;They are just being totally unreasonable.&rdquo;        

A man who answered the phone at the Caochangdi police station on Thursday afternoon asked a reporter to fax over questions but later declined to discuss the case of the three men or their festival.        

In the meantime, Mr. Ai&rsquo;s own predicament remains something of a mystery. His whereabouts have been unknown since April 3, when he was led away from Beijing International Airport as he prepared to board a flight for Hong Kong. According to the state media, Mr. Ai, through his company, Beijing Fake Cultural Development Ltd., is accused of evading a &ldquo;huge amount&rdquo; of taxes and intentionally destroying financial documents. Beyond that, there have been no details and no formal charges.        

His family, friends and allies in the art world contend that Mr. Ai&rsquo;s prosecution is a naked attempt to silence one of the country&rsquo;s most notoriously fearless, in-your-face critics. His prolonged detention has prompted an international outcry that has yet to subside. On Wednesday, the Royal Academy of Art in London made Mr. Ai an honorary member, citing his role as &ldquo;one of the most significant cultural figures of his generation.&rdquo;        

That news, however, did not make it into the Chinese media.        

The timing of the Incidental Art Festival, just days before the 22nd anniversary of the crackdown on the protests at Tiananmen Square, was not terribly auspicious. Ms. Yang, the gallery employee, said the exhibit lasted only a few hours before &ldquo;pressure&rdquo; was applied, although she declined to elaborate. &ldquo;Only about 30 people came,&rdquo; she said with regret in her voice.        
Li Bibo contributed research.
