
TOKYO &mdash; Prime Minister Naoto Kan survived a bruising no-confidence vote in Parliament on Thursday, but only after promising to resign once his government made progress in overcoming the nuclear crisis and the devastating earthquake and tsunami that caused it.        

The offer to resign appeared to be aimed at avoiding a destructive split in his governing Democratic Party, where there has been rising discontent with what many call Mr. Kan&rsquo;s plodding and indecisive response to the triple disaster. But the move also turns Mr. Kan into essentially a lame duck even as he must still guide his nation out of its most deadly catastrophe since World War II.        

It also appears almost certain to prolong the political paralysis that has gripped Japan for years. If he leaves office before the end of summer, Mr. Kan will be the sixth prime minister to resign in five years.        

Mr. Kan won the vote on Thursday in the 480-seat lower house by a comfortable margin of 293 to 152, after offering to resign to keep his party intact and prevent power from reverting to the opposition Liberal Democratic Party.        

&ldquo;I want the younger generation to take over my responsibilities once I fulfill my duty,&rdquo; Mr. Kan told Parliament, signaling his intention to quit in the often oblique language of Japanese politics. &ldquo;I will not destroy this Democratic Party.&rdquo;        

In the buildup to the vote, sponsored by the Liberal Democrats, the prime minister faced the threat of mass defections by lawmakers loyal to his own party&rsquo;s disgruntled former kingmaker, Ichiro Ozawa. While it was unclear if the defections would have been enough to turn the no-confidence vote, Mr. Ozawa was also making noises about possibly splitting off to form a new party.        

Mr. Kan left unclear when he would actually step down. At a news conference, he seemed to hint that he wanted to stay in office until the crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant was brought under control, which might take until early next year. However, some members of his party called for him to do so after the expected passage in the summer of a supplementary budget with additional funds for reconstruction.        

While that budget is likely to total in the tens of billions of dollars, economists say it could cost at least a quarter of a trillion dollars to fully rebuild from the March 11 disaster, which left the country with the nuclear crisis, more than 24,000 people dead or missing and hundreds of miles of the coastline rendered uninhabitable by vast masses of tangled debris.        

There had been hopes in Japan that the shock of the multiple disasters could motivate the nation to finally find a way out of a two-decade period of economic and social stagnation. However, voters appear to be increasingly disappointed with their national leadership.        

In particular, Mr. Kan has come under intense public criticism for his government&rsquo;s apparently clumsy handling of the nuclear crisis and delays in building temporary housing for the tens of thousands still homeless. His government has also suffered from the perception that it has not been forthcoming about the risks from the radioactive material that continues to spew from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant.        

However, the public was also put off by the political maneuvering that brought about the no-confidence vote. On the streets of Tokyo, voters expressed disappointment and disgust with lawmakers on both sides for engaging in what they called petty political struggles when the country&rsquo;s needs were so urgent.        

&ldquo;Sure, Prime Minister Kan is a weak leader, but this is not the time for such political games,&rdquo; said Harumi Ishihara, 55, a commuter in Tokyo&rsquo;s crowded Shibuya train station. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s irresponsible to do this when so many people are suffering in the northeast.&rdquo;        

Ms. Ishihara echoed the view of many voters here that the opposition Liberal Democrats bore equal blame for the political paralysis, for trying to weaken Mr. Kan when the focus should be on rebuilding. Local media coverage has also been harsh in its coverage of the role of Mr. Ozawa, a scandal-tainted political operator whom many here see as trying to extract political revenge for Mr. Kan&rsquo;s exclusion of Mr. Ozawa and many of his supporters from the current cabinet.        

Newspaper editorials blamed both Mr. Kan and the Liberal Democratic leader, Sadakazu Tanigaki, for the political impasse. &ldquo;These parliamentary maneuvers are a joke and sickening,&rdquo; the daily newspaper Asahi Shimbun said in a recent editorial.        

Many of the Democrats who turned against Mr. Kan said they did so for fear that the unpopular prime minister could become a liability in future elections.        

&ldquo;This is not a time for stagnation,&rdquo; Yukio Hatoyama, a former prime minister and ally of Mr. Ozawa, said in Parliament. &ldquo;The atmosphere inside the party is very grim.&rdquo;        

Apparently appeased by Mr. Kan&rsquo;s offer to resign, Mr. Hatoyama and other Democratic critics of Mr. Kan ended up voting against the no-confidence measure. Mr. Ozawa abstained from the vote.        
