
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; At least 28 Pakistani soldiers have been killed after two days of intense fighting with militants who crossed the border from Afghanistan into northwestern Pakistan, local police officials said Thursday.        

As many as 45 militants were killed, the officials said. The figures could not be independently verified.        

Three civilians, including two women, were also killed in the clashes, and three Pakistani soldiers were missing. It was unclear whether they had been killed or had been abducted by the attackers.        

At least 200 militants crossed the border on Wednesday morning and attacked a police post in Barawal, a village surrounded by rugged mountains and forests in the Shaltalo area of Upper Dir, a district in northwestern Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province. Shaltalo is near the border with Kunar Province of Afghanistan.        

The fighters took up positions in the surrounding mountains and also attacked troops from hide-outs in the thick forest outside the village. They destroyed at least two schools and set several houses on fire. By Thursday afternoon, the intensity of the fighting was diminishing, and by the evening the troops had regained the advantage, the police said.        

&ldquo;The situation is under control,&rdquo; said Jawahir Ali, a junior police official in Barawal.        

Pakistani officials lodged a protest with the Afghan government late Thursday. Foreign Secretary Salman Bashir conveyed &ldquo;strong concern&rdquo; about the matter, according to a statement from the Pakistani Ministry of Foreign Affairs.        

The statement said that as many as 400 Afghan militants had been involved in the attack. Mr. Bashir demanded a strong response from the Afghan Army and United States and NATO forces against militants in Afghanistan, the statement said.        

The border with Afghanistan in Dir district is porous and unguarded at most of the crossings, making infiltration easier. An army border checkpoint is located at Shahi, about 19 miles from Barawal.        

Several of the militants fled back into Afghanistan during the night, said Murad Ali Shah, a police official in Barawal. Mr. Shah said that there had been no arrests and that the fighters were thought to have taken the militants killed during the fighting back to Afghanistan. &ldquo;The terrorists don&rsquo;t leave their dead behind,&rdquo; he said.        

The militants used heavy weapons in their attack and wore military fatigues similar to those of Pakistani security forces.        

NATO officials in Afghanistan say there are as many as 100 fighters with Al Qaeda who are active in eastern Afghanistan, most of them in Kunar Province, which is adjacent to Dir.        
