
JIDDA, Saudi Arabia &mdash; The organizers behind the Bahrain Grand Prix decided on Friday to schedule the auto race, delayed because of an antigovernment uprising, despite pleas from local and international human rights organizations to stay away.        

Even as the announcement was made, the security police fired tear gas, rubber bullets and birdshot at antigovernment protesters trying to reach the former epicenter of the protests in the capital, Manama, and in villages scattered throughout the Persian Gulf island nation, rights activists said. No immediate figures were available for the number of wounded, they said.        

The government-owned Bahrain International Circuit, where the race is held, welcomed the decision to hold the Formula One race at the end of October, saying it would help boost the economy after a &ldquo;difficult time.&rdquo;        

On Wednesday, Bahrain lifted a state of emergency in place since March, when the race was originally scheduled, and protests resumed instantly. Since February, there have been reports of torture and other abuse among hundreds of detained demonstrators whose demands ranged from jobs to political reform. The government said it acted t with Saudi Arabia and other gulf neighbors to prevent an Iranian-supported revolution.        

In the statement, Zayed R. Alzayani, the director of the raceway, said that the Formula One event &ldquo;transcends politics,&rdquo; even as he confirmed reports that the raceway fired Shiite Muslim employees during the unrest. &ldquo;We did have some staff issues,&rdquo; Mr. Alzayani told the Al Jazeera English network, saying they were fired because they missed too many workdays in a row.        

Tom Porteous, a spokesman for Human Rights Watch, said the organization condemned the use of labor laws to fire as many as 1,600 Shiite Muslims around Bahrain, saying they were being punished for heeding a strike called to protest the government crackdown on the pro-democracy movement.        

&ldquo;The state of fear continues,&rdquo; Mr. Porteous said, describing the decision to schedule the race &ldquo;unfortunate.&rdquo;        

On Bahrain itself, opinions were mixed, with some saying it would provide cover for the government and others calling it a welcome return to normalcy.        

The main opposition group, Wafaq, a target of the government crackdown, was among those welcoming the race. The raceway is a pet project of the crown prince, Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa.        

&ldquo;It is not the Formula One itself but because it will fill the hotels, the taxis, the restaurants,&rdquo; said Sawsan al-Shaer, a Bahraini columnist who endorsed the move in a telephone interview. &ldquo;It is for the income of the country &mdash; as a sport, few people care about it.&rdquo;        

Mohammed Al-Maskati, the head of the Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights, said, &ldquo;It is clear that Formula One does not respect human rights in Bahrain,&rdquo; adding that he hoped journalists who covered the race would report on conditions on the island.        

The World Motor Sport Council of the F&eacute;d&eacute;ration Internationale de l&rsquo;Automobile, the sport&rsquo;s governing body, said the decision was a result of a fact-finding mission to Bahrain. It issued a statement saying the decision &ldquo;reflects the spirit of reconciliation in Bahrain.&rdquo;        

The announcement was met with derision on social media networks like Twitter. &ldquo;The F.I.A. has been assured by Bahrain there will be no crime race weekend, or people in the streets, and really just way less people over all,&rdquo; read one Twitter message by @breaking auto.        

Opponents said they would continue to pressure sponsors, teams and drivers in an attempt to have the race canceled. There were already some misgivings in the auto world, with one prominent former driver, Damon Hill, telling the BBC that Formula One racing would &ldquo;forever have the blight of association with the repressive methods to achieve order&rdquo; if it held the race.        

The online social activist organization Avaaz.org has collected about 350,000 signatures worldwide on an online petition against the race. Ricken Patel, its executive director, noted press reports that organizers would collect a $40 million fee from Bahrain for the race, saying they had put a price on human rights.        

&ldquo;I think you would have to be crazy to want your brand associated with this event,&rdquo; Mr. Patel said. &ldquo;This is really an unconscionable decision.&rdquo;        
