
MOSCOW &mdash; Three days after Abkhazia announced that a fifth government &mdash; the tiny, impoverished Pacific island nation of Vanuatu &mdash; had agreed to formally recognize its sovereignty, an official from Vanuatu said the report was false, as a behind-the-scenes diplomatic competition went into overdrive.        

Ambassador Donald Kalpokas, Vanuatu&rsquo;s permanent representative to the United Nations, said officials in Port-Vila, the capital, have not recognized Abkhazia, a Black Sea territory that has long sought to break away from Georgia.        

Previously, only four countries &mdash; Russia, Nicaragua, Venezuela and Nauru, another island nation &mdash; defied a strong message from the West that Abkhazia and another breakaway region, South Ossetia, were part of Georgia.        

&ldquo;I have asked my capital whether this is true and they denied it emphatically,&rdquo; Mr. Kalpokas said in a telephone interview from New York. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know who is responsible for declaring that this is true. As far as we are concerned, we are dealing with Georgia, not Abkhazia.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;It is defamation for our country. This is disrespect.&rdquo;        

Though Russia, Nicaragua and Venezuela had political reasons to recognize the territories, the South Pacific islands are more known for a history of trading recognition in return for assistance, a skill honed during years of jockeying between China and Taiwan.        

Nauru, facing the depletion of its most valuable resource, phosphates formed from bird droppings, severed diplomatic relations with Taiwan in 2002, then restored them three years later, prompting a Chinese official to grumble that the islanders were &ldquo;only interested in material gains.&rdquo;        

Vanuatu recognized Taiwan in 2004 and switched back to China a month later, when the prime minister who made the deal was forced from office.        

Abkhaz officials said Friday that they were confident Vanuatu&rsquo;s recognition was valid, and that Mr. Kalpokas may simply not have gotten word.        

Abkhazia&rsquo;s foreign minister, Maxim Gundjia, said the recognition document had been shuttled between Abkhazia and Vanuatu via air freight and was signed by the prime ministers of Vanuatu and Abkhazia on May 23. He said negotiations with Vanuatu&rsquo;s premier, Sato Kilman, had taken three months.        

&ldquo;He has the right to make this decision,&rdquo; Mr. Gundjia said. &ldquo;I would never publish such news if I didn&rsquo;t have confirmation.&rdquo; He added that &ldquo;no one paid anyone anything.&rdquo;        

Georgian officials asserted, with equal certainty, that Vanuatu had not recognized Abkhazia.        

&ldquo;I haven&rsquo;t seen any document signed by any prime minister,&rdquo; said Deputy Foreign Minister Sergi Kapanadze. &ldquo;The only way we can check to see if it is correct is to ask the representatives of Vanuatu if it is correct or not. For us, that contact is the ambassador of Vanuatu to the United Nations.&rdquo;        

Vanuatu&rsquo;s government faces a dizzying task, trying to govern a wildly diverse population scattered in 82 volcanic islands over a territory of almost 5,000 square miles. Daniel Scott, a travel writer who recently returned from there, described one ethnic group, the Yaohnanen, who worship Britain&rsquo;s Prince Philip, believing that he is the incarnation of one of their ancestral spirits, and believe he will one day return to their island and rule the world.        

Recent reports suggest that the island, which was a British and French colony until 1980, has undergone considerable political upset. Mr. Kilman became prime minister last month after an appeals court ruled that his predecessor had been elected improperly. Opposition forces are suing to remove Mr. Kilman. The island&rsquo;s economy relies heavily on offshore banking, and its official Web site promotes an active volcano that is small enough for tourists to approach safely, usually.        

Russia, after a burst of effort after the 2008 war with Georgia, stopped openly lobbying its allies to recognize the enclaves, but seeking more alliances remains a crucial goal for Abkhazia. Mr. Gundjia said his efforts have been consistently frustrated, at times when recognition was tantalizingly within reach.        

&ldquo;I go to a lot of countries, and I am not against the idea that Georgians come there, too,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The problem is not that I am facing Georgian diplomats. I am facing American diplomats.&rdquo;        
