
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; United Nations officials expect Afghanistan to make a serious effort to ask the Security Council to lift sanctions soon against more than 40 Taliban figures &mdash; more than a fourth of all those who are now on the organization&rsquo;s blacklist of Al Qaeda and Taliban members.        

Richard Barrett, coordinator of the Al Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Committee&rsquo;s monitoring team, said during a visit here Saturday that he expected more than 40 Taliban names would be presented to the Security Council on June 16 for a decision on whether they should be removed from the blacklist. It includes 138 Taliban names.        

Proponents of lifting the sanctions &mdash; a major demand of the Taliban for peace talks &mdash; say it would boost prospects for reconciliation. Those who are on the list are barred from traveling outside the country, and their bank accounts are supposed to be frozen.        

Removal from the list would require unanimous support from the Security Council. Western diplomats say the biggest obstacle to delisting would be that Russia, which in the past has threatened to exercise its veto to stop de-listing the Taliban, would do so this time. The Russians cite Taliban training for Chechen rebels and their role in heroin trafficking to Russia.        

Mr. Barrett, who acts as an adviser to the Security Council on the Taliban and Al Qaeda, said many of the Taliban figures on the list clearly no longer belong there. Some have died; others are already working with the current Afghan government.        

Four of the sanctioned persons are members of the Afghan government&rsquo;s High Peace Council, set up to pursue reconciliation with the Taliban, and a fifth works for the council&rsquo;s secretariat, Mr. Barrett said. &ldquo;Is it logical to have members of the High Peace Council on the list?&rdquo; he asked. &ldquo;It seems a bit odd at least.&rdquo;        

If even a fourth of the 40 names are delisted, it will be more than have been removed in the past two years of efforts by Afghan officials. Last year, seven Taliban were removed from the list, which at its peak had 142 Taliban members on it, but another three were added. There are more than 500 names in all, but the rest are Qaeda figures.        

Part of the problem in the past has been providing sufficient documentation to satisfy the United Nations bureaucracy that the candidates for delisting were no longer terrorists. In most cases, proposed candidates did not even reach the Security Council. This year, the documentation is expected to be much better prepared, Mr. Barrett said.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think anybody&rsquo;s talking about a blanket delisting,&rdquo; Mr. Barrett said. &ldquo;This is all selective, it&rsquo;s all being done to clean up the list, to make the list a more useful representation of the threat.&rdquo; Removal from the sanctions list is one of the three conditions cited by Taliban leaders for peace talks, along with the release of their prisoners and withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan.        

&ldquo;This is one of the basic demands of the Taliban,&rdquo; said Muallavi Arsala Rahmani, a former Taliban minister of higher education who is one of those on the sanctions list. &ldquo;I am also on the list, and I am a senator and a member of the High Peace Council,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;As long as you have these sanctions against people, you&rsquo;ll never reach peace.&rdquo;        

One of the others being proposed for delisting is Mullavi Qalamuddin, another High Peace Council member, who during the Taliban regime was in charge of the much-feared religious police. It enforced strict codes against women leaving the home or men shaving their beards.        

Mr. Qalamuddin has been able to travel regularly, despite the travel ban, he said, and he has no foreign bank accounts to be frozen, so being on the list has no practical effect on him. &ldquo;Still, it does matter to me,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I am part of this community of human beings, and I want my name to be removed as soon as possible.&rdquo;        

In other news, four NATO soldiers were killed in eastern Afghanistan Saturday by an improvised explosive device, the military said in a statement. The victims&rsquo; nationalities were not released, as is standard practice.        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul, and Khalid Alokozay from Jalalabad.
