
JERUSALEM &mdash; Israel on Saturday was bracing for possible clashes along its borders after Palestinian activists in the region called for protest marches on Sunday, three weeks after a similar wave of coordinated protests led to deadly clashes with Israeli troops.        

Protests on Sunday to mark the anniversary of the Palestinian &ldquo;naksa,&rdquo; or setback, in the June 1967 Middle East war were being planned in the West Bank and Gaza, territories that were conquered by Israel then. There have also been calls on social networking Internet sites for Palestinians in Lebanon and Syria to march at the Israeli border.        

That echoed the conditions that led to the violence on May 15, the day Palestinians mark as the &ldquo;nakba,&rdquo; or catastrophe, of Israel&rsquo;s establishment in 1948. Taking a cue from the so-called Arab Spring movement, organizers in multiple countries and territories called for a coordinated action against Israel, and huge crowds of Palestinians responded.        

They clashed with Israeli troops on four fronts, and breached the border between Syria and the Golan Heights for the first time in more than 30 years. At least 14 protesters from Lebanon and Syria were killed, stoking outrage in Palestinian camps across the region and intensifying pressure on Israel to create the conditions for a return to peace talks.        

The Israeli military was not giving out details of its preparations, but television reports showed soldiers repairing fences and bulldozers digging trenches along the borders in the north. On Thursday, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said he had instructed Israeli forces to act with restraint, but also with determination, to protect Israel&rsquo;s sovereignty and borders. According to reports from Lebanon, activists there canceled plans to march to the Israeli border after the Lebanese authorities declared the border area a closed military zone.        

On Saturday, Palestinian officials signaled another possible source of pressure on Israel, saying they would accept a French proposal to attend a peace conference in Paris next month with the aim of restarting negotiations based on the broad principles laid out by President Obama last month. Mr. Obama said that talks should be for a future Palestinian state based on the 1967 lines with mutually agreed land swaps. He also suggested that talks should focus first on the issues of borders and security, and deal later with the contentious issues of the status of Jerusalem and the fate of Palestinian refugees of the 1948 war and their descendants.        

The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, said that in principle, the French proposal was acceptable. He told the Reuters news agency on Saturday that under the plan, neither Israel nor the Palestinians would carry out &ldquo;unilateral actions.&rdquo; The Palestinians have demanded a freeze in Israeli settlement building, while the Israelis oppose Palestinian plans to bypass negotiations and seek recognition for statehood at the United Nations this fall.        

There has been no public response to the French plan from the Israeli side, but Israel has previously rejected talks based on the 1967 lines. Moshe Yaalon, the minister for strategic affairs in the Israeli government, told Israeli television on Saturday that Israeli leaders would discuss the French proposal this week.        

In a sign of growing frustration in Gaza, travelers tried to force their way through a crossing on the border with Egypt that was temporarily closed on Saturday, a week after Egypt declared it open permanently in a move hailed by Palestinians as an end of the Israeli-led blockade of the coastal enclave.        

Officials of Hamas, the Islamic militant group that rules Gaza, said they had not been told in advance about the closing. Egypt said it was a result of delays in renovation work that should have been completed on Friday.        

Dozens of Palestinian travelers gathered in front of the closed gate leading to the Egyptian side of the crossing in the morning. Peering through barbed wire next to the gate, they realized that it would be impossible for buses to pass through because of the works on the other side. After waiting for three hours, the travelers forced open the gate and entered the Egyptian section. The Egyptian police persuaded them to return peacefully.        

By the afternoon, there was some one-way traffic of people crossing from Egypt into Gaza by foot. But Palestinian officials would not let people pass through to the Egyptian hall on foot, saying it would be an offense to travelers. It was unclear whether the crossing would formally reopen open Sunday.        

After Hamas took full control of Gaza in 2007, Israel responded by cutting off the territory, and Egypt kept the crossing mostly closed. In June 2010, former President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt ordered the crossing to reopen on a regular basis, but conditions for travel remained tightly restricted. The border was sealed again from January, when Egypt was rocked by protests that eventually ousted Mr. Mubarak.        

Last Saturday&rsquo;s opening, ordered by Egypt&rsquo;s interim leadership, was seen as a sign of a new approach, giving Gazans a gateway to the world that bypassed Israel. But complications have already emerged. By Tuesday, Hamas officials were complaining that the movement of travelers was being limited and that dozens had been returned from the Egyptian side.        
Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from Jerusalem.
