
NEW DELHI &mdash; Led by a prominent yoga guru, thousands of protesters on Saturday staged a huge anticorruption protest in the heart of India&rsquo;s capital, gathering beneath a vast outdoor tent for a yoga session, followed by a hunger strike orchestrated as a pressure tactic against the government.        

The guru, Swami Ramdev, had been demanding that the government take various steps to recover so-called black money, the misappropriated cash stashed in foreign banks by some corrupt Indian politicians and business people. After a long, confusing day of speeches, yoga sessions and back-and-forth negotiations with government ministers, Swami Ramdev announced on Saturday evening that the government had acceded to his demands.        

But his seeming triumph quickly became muddled. A top government minister was simultaneously telling reporters that, in fact, a deal had been struck a day earlier, before the protest actually began. The minister said that Swami Ramdev&rsquo;s representatives had promised that they would call off the strike on Monday. When the minister&rsquo;s comment was relayed back to the yoga tent, Swami Ramdev angrily said the fast would go on.        

Hours later, hundreds of police officers swooped down on the protest, forcibly removed Swami Ramdev and used tear gas and canes to disperse his supporters, injuring some people.        

A police spokesman, Rajan Bhagat, said officers had detained Swami Ramdev early Sunday, but later released him. The guru had permission to hold a yoga function with 5,000 people, he said. &ldquo;More than 40,000 people had turned up at the venue, and it was not possible to provide security to them,&rdquo; Mr. Bhagat told The Associated Press.        

The chaotic day is the gaudiest piece of political theater in what otherwise has become a growing anticorruption campaign by different segments of India&rsquo;s civil society against the Congress Party-led national government.        

In April, a veteran campaigner, Anna Hazare, staged a hunger strike in New Delhi that provoked a spontaneous outpouring of public support. Government leaders ultimately capitulated to his demand for a special committee to draft legislation for a new anticorruption agency.        

Swami Ramdev, a yoga practitioner with a vast following across India, began dabbling in political issues more than a year ago and has made fighting corruption a centerpiece of his message. He has sought to separate himself from other civil society factions by focusing on black money. He is demanding the recovery of black money, the creation of special corruption courts, the confiscation of assets from people convicted on corruption charges and stiff sentences, even the death penalty, for violators.        

Government officials had responded by releasing a four-page memorandum detailing various actions currently being taken on the issue. Meanwhile, a powerful Congress Party leader, Digvijay Singh, criticized Swami Ramdev and accused opposition parties, including right-wing Hindu groups, of furtively promoting the rally.        

The spectacle of powerful government ministers scrambling to curry favor with a yoga guru has already drawn biting criticism from some political commentators, while others have also criticized the tactics of the reform camp as being dangerously antidemocratic in nature.        

&ldquo;Civil society activists act as if they should have the last word on everything,&rdquo; wrote Pratap Bhanu Mehta, president of the Center for Policy Research in New Delhi. &ldquo;The outrage that drives them has some justifiable basis. But civil society is, unconsciously, abetting its own brand of authoritarianism.&rdquo;        

At the Saturday rally in New Delhi, supporters of Swami Ramdev sang devotional and patriotic songs after holding their yoga sessions. Crowds chanted slogans like &ldquo;Reform Rotten Laws,&rdquo; &ldquo;Bring Back Black Money&rdquo; and &ldquo;Hang Killers of Mother India,&rdquo; lending a more combustible atmosphere for the usually placid practice of yoga.        

&ldquo;I support Swami Ramdev&rsquo;s agitation because he is fighting against corruption,&rdquo; said Amit Paswan, 20, a student. &ldquo;I will sit here as long as Swami Ramdev is sitting here.&rdquo;        
