
JUBA, Sudan &mdash; Fighting broke out in a heavily militarized part of Sudan on Sunday, United Nations and Sudanese officials said, escalating tensions between the northern and southern areas of the country a month before it is to be officially divided.        

The fighting began at dawn, when gunmen looted weapons from a police station in Kadugli, the capital of Southern Kordofan, a northern Sudanese state that is on the border with southern Sudan.        

Hours later, a firefight broke out in a small village about 30 miles away. United Nations officials said it was not clear if the two clashes had been connected or if anyone had been killed.        

&ldquo;We sent up a land patrol and an air patrol,&rdquo; said Kouider Zerrouk, a United Nations spokesman. &ldquo;We will see what we get.&rdquo;        

An American official briefed on the events said the fighting was relatively small and involved northern Sudanese soldiers who were staging a mutiny because they did not want to be deployed to the Darfur region of western Sudan or to Abyei, a contested area on the north-south border that was seized by the northern Sudanese forces on May 21.        

There were also reports that forces allied with the south might have been involved in the fighting in Kadugli.        

The incursion into Abyei has put Sudan on war footing, and the northern Sudanese government threatened to follow it up by seizing two other areas &mdash; Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile State &mdash; that are home to thousands of southern-allied soldiers.        

Analysts have said a major conflict could erupt if the northern forces move into areas controlled by southern-allied troops.        

Southern Sudan is scheduled to declare independence on July 9 after a struggle that has lasted for decades. The south is home to most of the country&rsquo;s oil, and diplomats fear that actions by the north in trying to hold onto as much of it as possible could scuttle the 2005 peace agreement that ended the Sudanese civil war.        

Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan were on the front lines during the civil war and were granted special status under the peace agreement. The two states were supposed to hold vaguely defined &ldquo;popular consultations&rdquo; to determine the degree of self-rule, though the process has not been completed.        

Analysts say that Sudan&rsquo;s government is concerned that rebel movements in other parts of the country, like Darfur, could be encouraged to fight harder for autonomy if the popular consultations in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan are allowed to proceed.        
Josh Kron reported from Juba, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Nairobi, Kenya.
