
LISBON &mdash; Portugal&rsquo;s Social Democrats unseated the governing Socialists with a resounding parliamentary election victory on Sunday, giving the next government a strong mandate to enact a tough austerity program in return for 78 billion euros, or about $114 billion, international bailout.        

Pedro Passos Coelho, the leader of the Social Democrats, is expected to become the next prime minister, at the helm of a center-right coalition government with the conservative Popular Party.        

In recent opinion polls, Mr. Passos Coelho had been leading Jos&eacute; S&oacute;crates, the Socialist caretaker prime minister, but by a narrower margin than in Sunday&rsquo;s vote.        

With about 80 percent of the votes counted, the Social Democrats had won 39 percent of the votes compared with 28 percent for the Socialists. The Popular Party, meanwhile, had 12 percent of the vote.        

The result is expected to be welcomed by international creditors who had feared that a less clear-cut outcome could have extended the political squabbling over fiscal strategy that set off the collapse of the government of Mr. S&oacute;crates in the first place.        

Conceding defeat with only half of the votes counted, Mr. S&oacute;crates admitted to having made &ldquo;some mistakes&rdquo; and also announced that he would tender his resignation as party leader. &ldquo;This is my electoral defeat, and I assume complete responsibility for it,&rdquo; he said on television.        

Mr. S&oacute;crates actually resigned in late March, when lawmakers led by the Social Democrats rejected his latest austerity package. However, he then remained at the controls of a caretaker government that was forced to request and then negotiate a bailout package with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund because of the country&rsquo;s inability to meet its refinancing obligations.        

Portugal&rsquo;s bailout followed that of Greece and Ireland last year.        

Lu&iacute;s Cabral, a Portuguese economics professor at the IESE Business School, said that Mr. Passos Coelho&rsquo;s victory was &ldquo;good news for Portugal&rsquo;s creditors,&rdquo; because the three-year financial assistance program negotiated last month by the European Union and the I.M.F. is &ldquo;much closer to the Social Democrats&rsquo; political program than the losing Socialists&rsquo;, especially in what concerns structural reforms.&rdquo;        

However, Mr. Cabral warned, it was too early to say whether electoral pledges made by Mr. Passos Coelho would translate into an actual overhaul of Portugal&rsquo;s economy.        

&ldquo;One can only hope that the pressure created by the current economic and financial crisis will suffice to garner the political support required for a series of painful and unpopular but necessary reforms,&rdquo; he said.        

Jos&eacute; Costas, a 36-year social worker, said that he continued to feel &ldquo;ideologically on the left,&rdquo; but had voted for the first time for the Social Democrats on Sunday.        

&ldquo;When you have hit the wall like our economy has, you have to accept that it&rsquo;s time to gamble on a change of direction and give somebody new a chance,&rdquo; he said.        

As in regional elections in neighboring Spain last month, voters punished the governing Socialists for overseeing an economic slump that has also sent Portugal&rsquo;s unemployment soaring to 12 percent.        

In Portugal&rsquo;s case, however, the prospects for a recovery are much bleaker, with the finance minister instead forecasting last month that the economy would contract by 2 percent both this year and next.        

Furthermore, the economic crisis and ensuing bailout had made the vote &ldquo;decisive,&rdquo; Jos&eacute; Manuel Barroso, the president of the European Commission and a former Portuguese prime minister, argued earlier in the day.        

Given the financial and economic woes of his country, Mr. Barroso said, Sunday&rsquo;s vote ranked as the most important for the country since Portugal&rsquo;s return to democracy in the 1970s.        
