
WASHINGTON &mdash; With a major internal debate gathering inside the White House over how quickly to reduce the size of the American fighting force in Afghanistan, the military pushed back on Monday against the prospect of a substantial withdrawal, arguing that to leave too early would imperil hard-fought gains.        

Finishing his final trip to Afghanistan as defense secretary on Monday, Robert M. Gates told troops there, &ldquo;I think we shouldn&rsquo;t let up on the gas too much, at least for the next few months.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gates met over the weekend with the American commander in Afghanistan, Gen. David H. Petraeus, who is hammering out a suggested schedule for the troop reduction. The Pentagon knows the White House will be deeply skeptical that keeping troops around for another fighting season next spring would make strategic or political sense.        

In Washington, senior military officials say the withdrawal of United States forces depends in large part on the ability of the Afghans to defend themselves, an effort they concede is still a work in progress and makes them reluctant to remove troops too quickly.        

Lt. Gen. William B. Caldwell IV, the American in charge of the NATO effort to train Afghan forces, said Monday that although NATO was on track to reach its goal of training 305,000 army and police forces by October, attrition remained a significant problem. Those forces currently total 296,000.        

General Caldwell said that about 30 percent of Afghan soldiers leave the Army every year before their terms of service are up, particularly in areas of heavy combat where they are needed most. In addition, he said that only one in 10 recruits can read and write, meaning NATO must first provide literacy training so that soldiers are able to write their names and read serial numbers on their weapons. So far, he said, NATO has trained 90,000 men in basic literacy.        

As military officials made their case for caution in reducing American troop strength, President Obama met with his senior national security advisers in the White House Situation Room to review progress in Afghanistan. That meeting was not intended to debate the withdrawal, which will happen in a separate process over the next few weeks.        

Aides said Mr. Obama had not received any recommendations on troop reductions. Still, the meeting on Monday was likely to inform that debate, because it was one of the last moments for the military to make its case about the progress it was making, including in training Afghan troops.        

Mr. Obama will hold a video teleconference with President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan on Wednesday to discuss the war, the White House spokesman, Jay Carney, said Monday.        

At issue is where Mr. Obama sets the &ldquo;bookends,&rdquo; in Mr. Gates&rsquo;s phrase, of how quickly American troops begin to depart, and when all 30,000 reinforcements sent to Afghanistan in the surge last year will be out of the country. Most officials expect the latter date to be next summer.        

Mr. Gates&rsquo;s comments, made to troops at Combat Outpost Andar in eastern Afghanistan&rsquo;s Ghazni Province, demonstrated that while the secretary is to retire from his Pentagon post at the end of the month, he intends to remain a prominent advocate for the counterinsurgency strategy even as voices in the White House express doubts on sustaining the large commitment of troops and money.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve made a lot of headway, but we have a ways to go,&rdquo; he said.        

He made the case that success in Afghanistan required a combination of counterinsurgency efforts and counterterrorism strikes, and stressed that counterinsurgency &mdash; COIN in military jargon &mdash; produces benefits required for the more precise counterterrorism strikes to be carried out.        

&ldquo;It is a mix of COIN and counterterrorism,&rdquo; Mr. Gates said, arguing that valuable information on insurgents and terrorists will be offered only by a population that feels secure and has bonds to the local government.        
David E. Sanger reported from Washington, and Thom Shanker from Combat Outpost Andar, Afghanistan. Elisabeth Bumiller and Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington.
