
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; American drone aircraft attacked at least three sites in the tribal region of South Waziristan on Monday, killing at least 18 people, according to Pakistani officials.&nbsp;        

At least three missiles were fired at a house in the Shalam Raghzai region of South Waziristan, a semiautonomous mountainous tribal region straddling the border with Afghanistan. The second attack struck a suspected militant compound in Wacha Dana, about seven miles northwest of Wana, the main town of South Waziristan.&nbsp;        

At least 14 people were killed in the first two attacks, officials said. &nbsp;        

A few hours later, at least four people were killed when a drone fired at a vehicle at Darnashtra in the Shawal area of the region. &nbsp;        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t have troops on the ground, so information is hard to verify,&rdquo; said a local Pakistani Army commander in Wana. &ldquo;Local residents do not necessarily provide accurate information on the number of casualties.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Most of those killed in the drone strikes are said to be foreigners,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;Their nationalities are described to be Arabs, Uzbeks and at least one Turk.&rdquo;        

Details on the attacks could not be independently verified.        

The drone strikes &mdash; in which American forces use unmanned, remotely guided aircraft to fire missiles at suspected members of the Taliban and Al Qaeda in the restive tribal areas &mdash; are very unpopular in Pakistan.&nbsp;        

But despite protests from opposition political parties,&nbsp; the drones continue to be the American weapon of choice. In recent days, there has been a surge in the number of drone attacks against suspected militants in South Waziristan.&nbsp;On Friday night, local residents and officials said that Ilyas Kashmiri, one of the most feared Pakistani militants and a senior Al Qaeda operational commander, was killed in a drone attack in the Laman area of South Waziristan.&nbsp;        

This was the second time Mr. Kashmiri was reported to have been killed. Pakistani officials had claimed in September 2009 that he had died in a drone strike.        
