
RIYADH, Saudi Arabia &mdash; Diplomatic maneuvering intensified on Monday to push President Ali Abdullah Saleh of Yemen to accept a peaceful transition from power while he recuperates in a Saudi military hospital from burns and other injuries sustained during an attack on his palace mosque.        

Top aides maintained that Mr. Saleh would return home within a matter of days. But the United States, Saudi Arabia, the European Union and the other Gulf Arab states engaged in a choreographed effort to stress that the fractious country, rocked by street protests demanding Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s ouster for four months, needed change.        

In Washington alone, the White House, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and her spokesman all said that the time had come to implement peaceful, democratic transition through a delayed Arab plan that would usher in a temporary government and organize new parliamentary elections over a 90-day period.        

&ldquo;We think an immediate transition is in the best interests of the Yemeni people,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said when asked at a news conference if Mr. Saleh should stay outside Yemen. &ldquo;The instability and lack of security currently afflicting Yemen cannot be addressed until there is some process that everyone knows is going to lead to the sort of economic and political reforms that they are seeking.&rdquo;        

Obama administration officials have been pressuring Mr. Saleh for weeks to accept the plan, negotiated by the Gulf Cooperation Council. But with President Saleh&rsquo;s sons and nephews still in charge of much of the country&rsquo;s security forces, it remains critical to get him to agree to step down formally and begin a political transition, they said.        

In Saudi Arabia, which wields substantial if imperfect influence over Yemeni tribes through cash subsidies, the cabinet issued a statement urging that the transition plan move forward, as did the G.C.C. Mr. Saleh, 69 and the president of Yemen for the past 33 years, had been on the brink of signing and then balked three times in recent months.        

In the Yemeni capital of Sana, opposition groups tried to encourage the transition by referring to Abed Rabbo Mansour al-Hadi, Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s vice president who he left in charge, as the &ldquo;acting president.&rdquo; But real estate told the actual story. Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s sons and nephews were operating from the presidential palace, while Mr. Hadi remained in his usual offices.        

&ldquo;The G.C.C. initiative is the only way for Yemen to get out of this crisis,&rdquo; said Abdul Karim al-Eryani, former prime minister and presidential adviser. &ldquo;It has to be restarted in whatever way the vice president can arrange.&rdquo;        

Efforts continued to bolster a fragile cease-fire in Sana and elsewhere in the country, including the embattled southern city of Taiz. In Sana, sporadic skirmishes left at least three men dead, said the media office of Sheikh Sadeq al-Ahmar, the head of the main tribe competing with Mr. Saleh.        

In the southern city of Zinjibar, armed men killed seven soldiers and wounded 12 others, Reuters reported, the latest in a series of clashes since the town was seized by armed militants believed to be members of Al Qaeda.        

Both Washington and Riyadh had grown weary of dealing with Mr. Saleh even before the street protests began, finding him as much adversary as ally. But the idea of the country sinking into anarchy gives them pause.        

Washington was dispatching a team to Yemen to both cement the cease-fire and move the political process forward, Yemeni officials said, although one aide close to Mr. Saleh in Riyadh said the Americans should concentrate on the cease-fire and nothing else.        

The key hurdle remains the same one that has dogged Yemen for months &mdash; Mr. Saleh refusing to sign the agreement, which would grant him immunity from prosecution in exchange for stepping down. Western officials said they were giving Mr. Saleh time to recuperate before engaging in that conversation again.        

Although aides around Mr. Saleh stress that he is alert and in command, Arab and Western diplomats said that talk of a two-week recovery period for him was likely to prove optimistic. The idea of an extended absence leaving Yemen vulnerable to instability is another reason neighboring states and Western powers are pushing for an immediate transition.        

The jockeying commenced in earnest in Sana.        

The first step in the agreement negotiated by the G.C.C. was for Mr. Saleh to cede power to his vice president. Since Mr. Hadi is running Yemen in his absence, opposition groups said, the first step in the plan was a good as completedand it was time to move to step two, the formation of a transitional government.        

The leaders of the Youth Movement for Change, who have been organizing the street protests, issued a statement urging all political groups to begin forming a national transitional government made up of technocrats. If there was no sign of this within 72 hours, they threatened to take over government buildings and become the transitional government themselves, said Abdul Ghani al-Aryani, a political analyst and founder of the Democracy Awakening Movement.        

The youth movement also urged people to continue celebrating Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s ouster, even if it remained unclear that he was gone for good. Protesters have been holding up signs for months saying &ldquo;Leave,&rdquo; and one newspaper captured the mood of uncertainty with a giant red headline reading, &ldquo;Left?&rdquo;        

Mr. Saleh was flown to Riyadh on Saturday with about a dozen of his top political allies who were with him when the mosque in the presidential palace was hit with explosives. They are all being treated at the Armed Forces Hospital.        

Nouman Duweid, the governor of Sana, flown out a day later, remains in a coma, said Tareq Shami, the spokesman for the General People&rsquo;s Congress. Other officials evacuated were the prime minister, the speaker of parliament, the head of the Shura council and two deputy prime ministers, including one, Sadiq Ameen Abu Ras, who lost a leg, Yemeni officials said.        
Reporting contributed byYasser Alarami and Kawkab al-Thaibani in Sana, Yemen, and Laura Kasinof and Scott Shane in Washington.
