
JERUSALEM &mdash; Arsonists damaged a mosque in a West Bank village early Tuesday and sprayed Hebrew messages on the walls, leading to suspicions that Jewish settler extremists were responsible.        

Israel&rsquo;s prime minister and defense minister strongly condemned the act and accused the arsonists of trying to provoke a broader conflagration in the area. The Palestinian Authority government issued a statement accusing the Israeli authorities of turning a &ldquo;blind eye&rdquo; to such acts, giving settlers &ldquo;impunity to continue their attacks.&rdquo;        

The desecration of the mosque, in the Palestinian village of Al Mughayyir, near Ramallah, comes at a delicate time of international efforts to bring the Israeli and Palestinian sides back to peace talks, in order to fend off a controversial Palestinian bid for recognition of statehood at the United Nations in the fall.        

In this charged political climate and given the broader turmoil in the region, there are increasing fears of a slide into violence.        

Ehud Barak, the Israeli defense minister, described the mosque burning as a &ldquo;criminal act&rdquo; that was &ldquo;meant to inflame passions and wreck the chance of living peacefully side by side.&rdquo;        

An Israeli police spokesman, Micky Rosenfeld, said a carpet in the mosque caught fire after a burning tire was thrown through a window. He added that a police forensics team had been at the scene and that the police were looking for a number of suspects.        

Video taken at the mosque on Tuesday showed burned carpets, blackened walls and Hebrew graffiti on an outside wall that read &ldquo;price tag&rdquo; and &ldquo;Alei Ayin.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Price tag&rdquo; refers to a policy adopted by some radical settlers in which they respond to attempts by the Israeli military to curb their building or other actions with attacks on Palestinians. Alei Ayin is the name of an unauthorized Jewish settlement in the area, where Israeli security forces demolished several illegal structures and clashed with settlers last week. Soon after the demolitions, a regional Israeli police commander&rsquo;s car was set on fire.        

The head of the Mughayyir council, Faraj Nasan, told the official Palestinian news agency Wafa that villagers discovered the fire when they went to pray at dawn.        

There have been a number of similar attacks on mosques in West Bank villages in the past two years.        

The Palestinian Authority government called on foreign nations to condemn the latest attack and &ldquo;insist that Israel is held accountable.&rdquo;        

Robert H. Serry, the United Nations special coordinator for the Middle East peace process, noted the Israeli government&rsquo;s condemnation and emphasized the need for &ldquo;forceful action.&rdquo;        
