
BEIJING &mdash; A 21-year-old music student who accidentally struck a young woman with his car, then silenced her by stabbing her to death on the roadway, was executed Tuesday in Xi&rsquo;an, in northwestern China, the state-run Xinhua news agency reported.        

The student, Yao Jiaxin, had lost an appeal of a death sentence handed down by a Xi&rsquo;an court on April 22. The crime had fanned deep public resentment against the &ldquo;fu er dai,&rdquo; the &ldquo;rich second generation&rdquo; of privileged families who are widely believed to commit misdeeds with impunity because of their wealth or connections.        

Mr. Yao was the son of employees of a state-owned corporation in China&rsquo;s defense sector, one of them an executive and a military officer. The victim, Zhang Miao, 26, was a peasant.        

Mr. Yao, a student at a local music conservatory, was driving a Chevy Cruze in Xi&rsquo;an last Oct. 20 when he struck Ms. Zhang, who was riding a bicycle. She was not seriously injured, according to news reports. But when Mr. Yao realized that she was memorizing his license plate number, he stabbed her eight times with a knife. He said later that he feared the woman, a poor peasant, would &ldquo;be hard to deal with&rdquo; should she seek compensation for her injuries.        

Mr. Yao was detained after a second auto accident that night and initially denied killing Ms. Zhang, but turned himself in four days later.        

Ms. Zhang&rsquo;s murder came just four days after another privileged son, Li Qiming, struck and killed a young university student with his automobile in Hebei Province, then fled the scene after telling guards who sought to stop him, &ldquo;My father is Li Gang,&rdquo; a local police official. Both crimes stirred national outrage on China&rsquo;s social-networking Web sites; in January, Li Qiming was sentenced to six years in prison.        

Ms. Zhang&rsquo;s husband, Wang Hui, had rejected court-ordered compensation of about $6,900 for her death, calling it &ldquo;money stained with blood.&rdquo; He pledged to delay Ms. Zhang&rsquo;s burial until her killer was executed.        

A Shanghai lawyer later donated 540,000 renminbi, about $83,300, to her survivors after pledging to pay one renminbi for each message sent to the husband over Sina Weibo, a Chinese version of Twitter.        

On Tuesday, public reaction on Weibo to the execution varied, with some calling it a victory for the rule of law and others calling Mr. Yao a victim of Internet-style mob rule.        

One prominent Beijing lawyer, Liu Xiaoyuan, noted that it was highly unusual for courts to hand down a death sentence to someone who had turned himself in. A well-known blogger known as Beihei said that Mr. Yao &ldquo;was shouted to death by the people,&rdquo; adding, &ldquo;The Cultural Revolution was started because of this kind of leftist behavior.&rdquo;        

A third well-known commentator in the Chinese media, Li Qianfan, wrote: &ldquo;In a country guided by the rule of law, people would not clap their hands in joy over soon being executed. What I really hope to see is not the death of Yao Jiaxin, but the legal system being able to provide protection to the people.&rdquo;        
