
PARIS &mdash; The German government came under increased criticism on Tuesday at home and abroad, accused of mismanaging the crisis surrounding an E. coli outbreak that has killed more than 20 people.        

German officials, however, reported a slight fall in the rate of newly reported infections. &ldquo;There is much to suggest that we have put the worst behind us,&rdquo; said Daniel Bahr, the federal health minister. Still, officials said they did not know the source of the outbreak.        

According to the Robert Koch Institute, Germany&rsquo;s disease control agency, as of Tuesday 2,325 confirmed and suspected cases of E. coli infection have been reported across Germany since early May, about 640 of them involving a potentially lethal complication that affects the kidneys and the nerve system.        

The World Health Organization has reported 23 deaths, 22 in Germany and 1 in Sweden. The Koch Institute, which put the death toll at 22, said 16 of those deaths came from the complication.        

The levels of new cases &ldquo;suggest a slight reduction,&rdquo; the institute said on its Web site, but &ldquo;it cannot currently be determined whether this reduction will continue.&rdquo;        

The extent of the outbreak, spreading through Germany, seemed unclear. Figures compiled by the German news agency, dpa, based on statistics from states, put the total of confirmed and suspected cases at around 3,000 &mdash; far more than the Robert Koch Institute&rsquo;s assessment.        

In Luxembourg, European agriculture ministers met on Tuesday to negotiate compensation for farmers whose sales have plummeted since German warnings &mdash; later dismissed as unfounded &mdash; that the outbreak had originated in cucumbers, tomatoes and lettuce grown in Spain. No agreement was reached.        

Suspicion shifted Sunday to bean sprouts from a north German farm, only for scientists to report on Monday that tests on 23 of 40 samples from the facility tested so far had proved negative. A package of bean sprouts found past its sell-by date in the back of an E. coli patient&rsquo;s refrigerator also showed no traces of contamination, the Hamburg health authorities said Tuesday.        

&ldquo;The consumers have been left in the lurch,&rdquo; said Claudia Roth, a leader of the opposition Green Party, sensing further political advantage as the government struggles. The party&rsquo;s successes in regional elections had led to an about-face by Chancellor Angela Merkel on a nuclear energy policy she had long advocated.        

The E. coli outbreak has added to Europe&rsquo;s woes as it confronts a stubborn debt crisis, forcing many governments to seek spending cuts at public institutions, including hospitals. In light of the strain on intensive care units that are coping with hundreds of patients, Georg Baum, the head of the German Hospital Federation, said, &ldquo;I appeal to politicians to rescind the planned financial cuts to hospitals.&rdquo;        

The crisis has also affected European farmers, and those who distribute their crops.        

&ldquo;We have been selling 35 percent less fresh produce since the food warnings,&rdquo; said Roman Spirin, a storekeeper at a Russian-specialty supermarket in the Charlottenburg district of Berlin. &ldquo;So of course we buy less in. We can regulate that pretty well &mdash; the less the customers buy from us, the less we buy in. The real problems are with the wholesalers who simply have to destroy their produce.&rdquo;        

On a broader scale, Russia &mdash; a huge market for European Union produce &mdash; banned all imports last week.        
Victor Homola and Stefan Pauly contributed reporting from Berlin.
