
HETAOCUN, China &mdash; Compared with some of the more spectacular recent traffic jams in China, among them a 60-mile snarl last summer that paralyzed a major artery outside Beijing for two weeks, the thousands of travelers who spent the night trapped on a snow-coated highway in southwest Guizhou Province on Monday did not even warrant a mention in the local news media.        

The immediate effect of the information vacuum was to suck more unwitting victims &mdash; including this reporter &mdash; into the morass, which stretched for miles along the four-lane affair linking Guizhou north to Chongqing .        

Stranded drivers chain-smoked, stomped their feet against the chill and cursed the government for failing to come to their rescue. As the night wore on, fuel lines froze and cellphone batteries died.        

The residents of Hetaocun, however, saw the unmoving necklace of taillights from their mountain village and got entrepreneurial. They roused children from their beds, loaded boxes of instant noodles into baskets and began hawking their staples to a captive clientele. The 500 percent markup did not appear to dent sales.        

&ldquo;It rarely snows here, so this is a good thing,&rdquo; said Yi Zhonggui, 42, as he wove past stalled vehicles with his wife and 4-year-old daughter lugging thermoses of hot water.        

As the supply of noodles ran low, residents began gathering up the walnuts that give the village its name. In between cries of &ldquo;walnuts, walnuts,&rdquo; salesmen like Chen Xianneng obliged the desperate with snippets of news from the front, even if the information was based on hearsay.        

&ldquo;The roadway is frozen, and the trucks can&rsquo;t get down the hill,&rdquo; he would say, cracking shells open with his bare hands as a sort of sales pitch. (Later, it became apparent that an overturned truck carrying toilets was largely responsible for the mess.)        

By noon on Tuesday, more than 12 hours after the blockage began, the frustration and anxiety were mounting. Truckloads of oranges were going bad, and Xi Xinli was nervously eyeing his cargo of 30 hogs, a noisome pile of pink complaining flesh that was bound for the slaughterhouse. &ldquo;You would be annoyed, too, if you were stuck together like that without food or water,&rdquo; Mr. Xi said.        

People were faring no better, especially the busloads of migrant workers who had endured clotted roadways for as long as three days. One especially unlucky bunch left Guangdong Province on Saturday only to find themselves stuck on their bus for eight hours when an earlier bout of freezing rain crippled a portion of southern China.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m hungry, but the food they&rsquo;re selling is too expensive, and I&rsquo;m tired but too cold to sleep,&rdquo; said Zhao Ling, 25, a carpenter trying to return home to Chengdu, the provincial capital of Sichuan.        

Mr. Zhao and his fellow passengers thought they were smart by traveling before the Chinese New Year&rsquo;s crush, which starts in earnest next week. In 2008, the last time unusually snowy weather buried China&rsquo;s southern flank, more than six million people were stranded as they tried to make their way home for the New Year&rsquo;s holiday. That crisis prompted a national debate about the government&rsquo;s ability to deal with weather-related calamities and led to a rare, well-publicized apology from Prime Minister Wen Jiabao.        

If the past few weeks are any indication, the coming holiday may be no better. Much of the region has been battered by unusually cold weather, and earlier this month, a storm shut down most of Guizhou&rsquo;s highways, including the road to Guangzhou, where thousands were stuck for four days.        

According to local news reports, the government eventually mobilized with emergency food and water, and gave each trapped passenger 100 renminbi, or about $15.        

Mr. Zhao and the others would not be so lucky. As the hours passed, he fidgeted in his seat and wondered whether the traffic police would ever show up. &ldquo;Maybe they all went home early for the holiday,&rdquo; he said with a smirk.        

Moments later came a cascade of shouts, followed by the honking of horns and then the coughing of starting engines that became contagious. As people scurried back into their vehicles, the bedraggled, frozen column began to creep forward, slowly at first, but then with more resolve.        

The hawkers from Hetaocun stepped back onto the highway shoulder, their expressions forlorn. But then the snow began to fall again and Mr. Yi, the farmer-turned-noodle vendor, began to smile. He repeated the weather forecast he had heard that morning &mdash; several more days of freezing precipitation &mdash; and told his wife to stay put. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t worry,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They&rsquo;ll get stuck again.&rdquo;        
Xiyun Yang contributed reporting.
