
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; A top United Nations official said Tuesday that the Taliban in Afghanistan should be treated separately from Al Qaeda extremists as nations weigh sanctions against the two groups, a step that could help clear a path for negotiations with the Taliban.        

Removal from the United Nations sanctions list, commonly called the blacklist, has been one of the preconditions of the Taliban for entering peace talks with the Afghan government.        

Treating the Taliban separately from Al Qaeda extremists, who have a global agenda while the Taliban have an Afghan-only one, might be seen as a step toward such removal and a signal that the Taliban were seen as a group that could be negotiated with.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s now time to separate these two groups because they have different fields of action and their nature is different,&rdquo; said Peter Wittig, the German ambassador to the United Nations who is also the chairman of the Security Council&rsquo;s Sanctions Committee, during a visit to Kabul on Tuesday.        

Among the preconditions for peace talks on the side of the Afghan government and its allies is that the Taliban sever all ties with Al Qaeda, however.        

&ldquo;Of course, the political message would be clear,&rdquo; Mr. Wittig said.        

No sooner had Mr. Wittig made those remarks, however, than evidence of fresh Taliban atrocities emerged: the chairman of the Bamian Provincial Council was abducted and killed, as was another man.        

A Western diplomat familiar with the subject said the Security Council would soon consider a proposal to break its sanctions committee into two, one to enforce travel and financial bans on Taliban figures, and the other to enforce similar bans on Qaeda-linked people and organizations.        

The sanctions committee proposal comes as the Security Council will also be studying the possible removal of more than 40 Taliban names from the blacklist, according to Richard Barrett, the coordinator of the Security Council&rsquo;s Al Qaeda and Taliban monitoring team.        

Mr. Barrett said that the 40-plus names would be given to the Security Council by June 16. The Council would at the same time be considering the proposal to treat Taliban and Qaeda sanctions separately.        

Among those 40-plus Taliban names are 5 current members of the Afghan government&rsquo;s High Peace Council, which is charged with pursuing peace talks with the Taliban.        

The sanctions committee now has 138 Taliban members on its blacklist, and more than 350 Qaeda individuals and organizations.        

There is likely to be some opposition to treating the Taliban separately, particularly from the Russians, who have a veto on the Security Council, and have in the past opposed removing the Taliban from the blacklist.        

During their years in power in Afghanistan, from 1995 to 2001, the Taliban provided training camps for Al Qaeda and a refuge for Osama bin Laden, and since then have often acted in concert with the extremists in Afghanistan &mdash; although Al Qaeda has not been a major factor in the Afghan fighting.        

More recently, Taliban leaders were initially quiet after the death of Bin Laden, leading some observers to speculate that they would take that opportunity to break with Al Qaeda. After a few days, however, a spokesman called the death of Bin Laden a &ldquo;great tragedy,&rdquo; and some Taliban figures said they would seek to avenge his death.        

The bodies of Jawad Zuhak, the Bamian provincial council chairman, and an unidentified second man were discovered Tuesday in a rugged area not far from a road where Taliban insurgents had apparently abducted both men four days earlier, according to Afghan officials.        

Although the episode happened in neighboring Parwan Province, the road is a vital link from Kabul to Bamian Province, which is among the first seven provinces and cities to be handed over to Afghan government control as part of the transition process by July and is normally considered one of the more peaceful parts of the country.        

Last Friday the insurgents set up a roadblock on the road at Pul-i-Ranga, Siah Gird District, in the Ghorband Valley of Parwan Province, and carried out searches on all travelers, looking for identity cards that showed whether they were working for the coalition or the Afghan government, according to a traveler who witnessed the roadblock, and asked not to be named out of fear for his personal safety. The witness said 10 Taliban insurgents operated the roadblock, while hundreds more were in the mountains nearby.        

It is unknown how many abductions were carried out on the road, which normally is under government control.        

Parwan&rsquo;s governor, Abdul Basir Salangi, said Mr. Zuhak&rsquo;s head had been crushed, apparently by stones. Abdul Rahman Shaheedani, a member of the Afghan Parliament from Bamian Province, said that the Taliban had tried to trade Mr. Zuhak for an imprisoned Taliban commander from Bamian, Mullah Burhan.        

&ldquo;It was beyond our power and the power of Bamian elders to set that criminal Taliban free. Sadly, Mr. Zuhak lost his life in the hands of murderers,&rdquo; Mr. Shaheedani said.        

Abdul Rahman Ahmadi, a spokesman for the governor of Bamian, said there were reports that a second body, which had been beheaded, had been found near Mr. Zuhak&rsquo;s. Mr. Shaheedani said the beheading victim was believed to be a judge.        
Sangar Rahimi contributed reporting.
