
PARIS &mdash; A woman identifying herself as the Syrian ambassador to France announced her resignation by telephone on French television Tuesday evening, in what would be the first such defection from the government of President Bashar al-Assad in months of unrest.        

But Syrian state television and Al Arabiya television both followed by broadcasting telephone denials in Arabic from someone they identified as the ambassador, Lamia Shakkour, who said the France24 news channel had been taken in by an impostor.        

It was not possible Tuesday night to confirm whether Ms. Shakkour had resigned, been impersonated, or resigned and then changed her mind. She took the ambassador&rsquo;s post in August 2008 after it had stood vacant for nearly two years amid French-Syrian tensions over the assassination of Rafik Hariri, the former prime minister of Lebanon. Her father had also served as Syria&rsquo;s ambassador to France, and she is a member of a Christian minority loyal to the Assad government.        

The resignation had appeared credible in large part because of its rationale and timing. The woman said she could no longer support the government&rsquo;s violent suppression of protesters; her statement came after violent clashes in the town of Jisr al-Shoughour that the government portrayed as a massacre by &ldquo;armed groups&rdquo; but that residents said was the government&rsquo;s own answer to a wave of defections from military forces sent to besiege the town.        

Syria bars foreign journalists from entering the country and neither the government&rsquo;s nor the residents&rsquo; accounts of the events could be independently verified. Nevertheless, either version would represent a serious escalation in both the chaos and violence of the Syrian uprising and harsh government efforts to crush it.        

Telephone calls and e-mails to the Syrian Embassy in Paris were not answered. The embassy Web site was not functioning in the evening; attempts to access it prompted a message saying the account had been suspended. The French Foreign Ministry said it could not confirm the resignation.        

France24, which had arranged for Ms. Shakkour to appear by telephone on a live debate about Syria and used a telephone number for her Tuesday that it had used before, said it was convinced that she was the woman who made the resignation statements, in both English and French. Reuters said it had confirmed the resignation by e-mail via the Syrian Embassy Web site before it was taken down.        

In the telephone statement on France24, the woman identified as Ms. Shakkour said that she recognized &ldquo;the legitimacy of the people&rsquo;s demand for more democracy and freedom&rdquo; and that she could not &ldquo;ignore that demonstrators have died, that families live in pain.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I can no longer continue to support the cycle of extreme violence against unarmed civilians,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I can no longer ignore all the strong men, women and children who have died.&rdquo;        

Her resignation was effective immediately, she said, and she had informed &ldquo;the private secretary of President Bashar al-Assad.&rdquo;        

The Arabic Web site of the Syrian state broadcaster, SANA, said that reports of the resignation were &ldquo;untrue and false&rdquo; and part of a &ldquo;distorting and biased media campaign against Syria.&rdquo;        

The Web site also quoted her as saying: &ldquo;I greet President Bashar al-Assad and salute Syria, the homeland every Arab citizen carries in his heart. I am deeply disturbed by the false reports on some Arab and foreign satellite channels, part of a distorting and tendentious campaign aiming to achieve one thing: destroy the credibility of this great nation through its children and its young.&rdquo;        

Al Arabiya television broadcast a telephone interview in which someone identified as Ms. Shakkour insisted that she was &ldquo;still the Syrian ambassador, the ambassador of the Syrian Arab Republic," and said that she had not talked &ldquo;to any channel in the world.&rdquo;        
Steven Erlanger reported from Paris, and Liam Stack from Cairo.
