
S&Atilde;O PAULO, Brazil &mdash; A top cabinet official in the government of President Dilma Rousseff resigned Tuesday amid reports that he had enriched himself while a federal lawmaker, deepening the first political crisis for Ms. Rousseff since she took office in January.        

Opposition leaders in the Senate had been calling for the resignation of the official, Antonio Palocci, who was Ms. Rousseff&rsquo;s chief of staff, even after Brazil&rsquo;s federal prosecutor-general on Monday shelved an investigation into accusations that Mr. Palocci had increased his personal wealth twentyfold as a corporate consultant while he was a congressman and the coordinator of Ms. Rousseff&rsquo;s 2010 presidential campaign.        

Mr. Palocci said in a statement Tuesday night that while he believed that the decision of the prosecutor, Roberto Gurgel, had &ldquo;confirmed the legality and rectitude&rdquo; of his activities, he had decided to resign to quell the political confrontation.        

Opposition senators were enraged by Mr. Gurgel&rsquo;s finding that there was no evidence of wrongdoing by Mr. Palocci. The opposition said before the resignation on Tuesday that it was within four votes of the 27 needed to initiate a Senate investigation, which would have the power to look at bank and telephone records relating to Mr. Palocci&rsquo;s consulting arrangements.        

Mr. Palocci, 50, was the third chief of staff of the last four to hold the office to resign amid accusations of wrongdoing dating back to 2005, when Luiz In&aacute;cio Lula da Silva was president. Ms. Rousseff was the only chief of staff under Mr. da Silva who was not forced from office.        

The chief of staff&rsquo;s office under the Workers Party governments of Mr. da Silva and Ms. Rousseff had &ldquo;turned into a type of haunted house,&rdquo; said Alvaro Dias, the leader of the Social Democratic Party in the Senate.        

Political analysts and opposition leaders said the contention over Mr. Palocci had weakened Ms. Rousseff&rsquo;s sway with Congress and her image as a leader. Mr. Dias lamented the &ldquo;excessive interference&rdquo; by Mr. da Silva, who had urged legislators and Ms. Rousseff to keep Mr. Palocci in the post.        

Mr. Palocci, in interviews on Friday, acknowledged that he had made substantial money as a consultant from 2006 to 2010 while a federal legislator, saying companies had found his experience as a finance minister under Mr. da Silva &ldquo;useful.&rdquo; But he said he had not broken the law.        

Even with Mr. Palocci&rsquo;s resignation, Mr. Dias vowed to continue to investigate whether there was a connection between Mr. Palocci&rsquo;s business dealings and Ms. Rousseff&rsquo;s campaign.        
