
NANJING, China &mdash; Heavy rains since last Friday have brought some relief from the worst drought in the Yangtze River region in 50 years, but also caused flooding in at least two southern provinces, state news organizations reported Tuesday.        

The six-month drought had resulted in water shortages for 3.5 million people. With the rains, that number has dropped to 2.15 million, according to Xinhua, the state news agency. The amount of farmland affected by the drought has dropped by 3.68 million acres, to 5.68 million.        

Flooding has occurred in parts of the provinces of Guizhou and Hunan. In Guizhou, at least nine people were killed and 13 others were missing, and 60,000 people had to be evacuated from their homes. Economic losses, mostly because of flooded farmland, were estimated at $26 million, China Daily reported.        

Despite the rains, the central government is urging local officials to continue with relief efforts because the levels of many major lakes, rivers and reservoirs in central China remain low.        

Here in Jiangsu Province, one of China&rsquo;s economic powerhouses, rain is still scarce. From Friday to Monday, only a tenth of an inch of rain fell, much less than the 3 inches that fell in Jiangxi Province during the same period. Water levels remain low along the section of the Yangtze running past the former national capital of Nanjing, where a famous 525-foot-long bridge completed by Chinese engineers in 1968 spans the river.        

The drought&rsquo;s severe impact on rich agricultural land and on the Yangtze, the country&rsquo;s most important river for shipping, has raised politically delicate questions about China&rsquo;s most ambitious water and energy projects. In recent weeks, some Chinese news organizations have run stories asking whether the Three Gorges Dam, the world&rsquo;s largest hydroelectric project, could be worsening the effects of the drought downstream from its location in the middle of the Yangtze.        

Last week, Shanghai Daily ran an article quoting a water official saying that the dam&rsquo;s planners had failed to properly gauge the dam&rsquo;s environmental impact. Two of China&rsquo;s largest freshwater lakes, Dongting in Hunan and Poyang in Jiangxi Province, both connected to the Yangtze, have suffered from lower water levels in part because of the storage of water in the reservoir behind the Three Gorges Dam, the report said. In May, senior officials in Beijing released a vaguely worded statement saying there were &ldquo;urgent problems&rdquo; associated with the impact of the dam.        

Some Chinese are even pointing to the dam as a direct cause of the drought. Jay S. Famiglietti, director of the University of California&rsquo;s Center for Hydrologic Modeling, based in Irvine, said in an e-mail that Chinese water officials and scientists he had met with on a recent trip to China seemed very concerned that this belief had become widespread, despite there being &ldquo;absolutely no causal link&rdquo;.        

&ldquo;At virtually every stop we heard that the general population is blaming the dam for the drought, or more generally, for any anomalous weather events,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The management at Three Gorges was particularly sensitive to these claims.&rdquo;        

The drought has also raised questions about the wisdom of a plan by Chinese leaders to transfer at least six trillion gallons of water each year via canals from the Yangtze River and its tributaries to cities in the parched north. Critics of the $62 billion project, called the South-North Water Diversion, point out that the Yangtze region is increasingly afflicted by droughts, and so precious water should not be sent north. On Saturday, the water level at Danjiangkou Reservoir in Hubei Province, the starting point of the middle channel of the project, was more than 26 feet lower than average, Xinhua reported.        

Last week, Prime Minister Wen Jiabao visited the reservoir in Hubei and the two large freshwater lakes in Hunan and Jiangxi, Xinhua reported. Afterward, he told officials at a seminar in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei, to push forward with drought relief because it was &ldquo;key to maintaining stable and rapid economic growth in the country.&rdquo; Farmers in drought-stricken areas would get subsidies from the central government, he said.        

The slowdown in shipping along the Yangtze has caused economic distress for some businesses and hampered critical industries. For example, ships carrying coal down the Yangtze have sometimes been forced to carry less coal because of the low water levels, according to a report last Friday by China Business News. Electricity plants that use coal are scattered all along the Yangtze, and the drought has worsened electricity shortages that had already been afflicting some provinces.        
Xiyun Yang contributed research.
