
RIYADH, Saudi Arabia &mdash; The uncertainty surrounding the political future of Yemen&rsquo;s president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, deepened Tuesday as he was treated for far more severe burns than had first been disclosed, while maneuvering intensified in the capitals of Yemen, the United States and Saudi Arabia to head off an emerging and dangerous power vacuum.        

Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s sudden departure from Yemen initially prompted warring factions to call a cease-fire, but that failed to stabilize the badly fractured nation as fighting on Tuesday intensified in the south between militants and the government, leaving dozens dead.        

While mediators move toward establishing a transitional government, Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s condition &mdash; and his prospects for recovery &mdash; emerged as the crucial factor in determining who will rule the nation, which is an important ally of the United States in fighting terrorism. While Washington and Riyadh have wanted Mr. Saleh to step down in the face of months of protests and increasing violence, there was no agreement Tuesday on how to proceed while he is in the hospital here.        

Interpretations of Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s medical state have varied according to the competing demands of the camps that would like different outcomes in Yemen.        

Those wanting him to remain in power suggest that he is fully conscious and in control and expected to return to Yemen any day. Those who would like to see him step down portray his condition as more dire. He has not been seen publicly since the attack.        

There has been some bickering within the Saudi royal family about the wisdom of pushing out a neighboring head of state, and King Abdullah would never issue an ultimatum to a fellow Arab leader to step down, especially in the face of the youth-driven uprisings shaking the region, diplomats said on the condition of anonymity in keeping with protocol.        

The working plan for a transition of power &mdash; one Mr. Saleh has rejected three times &mdash; was outlined by the Gulf Cooperation Council and called for elections 90 days after he officially resigned. But with Washington and Riyadh eager for a transitional government to take power, the council&rsquo;s plan is expected to be the focus of intense discussions in Abu Dhabi, in the United Arab Emirates, on Thursday on the sidelines of a meeting about Libya.        

Mr. Saleh, who was flown to Saudi Arabia on Saturday along with the prime minister and other top aides for treatment at the Armed Forces Hospital in Riyadh, was first said to have light injuries, including burns on his face, neck and arms caused by an explosion at the palace mosque during Friday Prayer. On Tuesday, it was revealed that he has suffered burns on 40 percent of his body and that a large wooden shard sliced into him and might have punctured a lung, said Abdul Rahman al-Rashed, the head of the Arabiya television network.        

But the explosion left Mr. Saleh with burns on his back as well, said a person familiar with his injuries, speaking on the condition of anonymity, and although not life-threatening they were severe enough to require strong sedation for the pain and several months of convalescence.        

&ldquo;His face was quite charred,&rdquo; said a Western official, speaking anonymously in accordance with government restrictions. &ldquo;The burns are serious; he is not as well as his aides are portraying it.&rdquo;        

An Arab diplomat said, &ldquo;It is not life threatening but will require a lot of care.&rdquo;        

An aide reached at the hospital refused to confirm or deny the extent of the president&rsquo;s injuries.        

The source of the explosion, which killed several guards and the imam of the mosque and wounded a dozen government officials and Saleh allies, has also been mysterious. It was initially believed to have come from a mortar or rocket attack from outside the compound.        

But as the investigation continued, there have been reports by officials in Yemen and in the press there suggesting more of an inside job, a diplomatic source noted, including in the minbar, or pulpit. The splintering wood hit many, including the president, like spears.        

Neil MacFarquhar reported from Riyadh, and Robert F. Worth from Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Muhammad al-Ahmadi and Kawkab al-Thaibani contributed reporting from Sana, Yemen.
