
Ayman al-Zawahri, long the second in command of Al Qaeda, delivered his first public comments on the killing of his boss Osama bin Laden in an American raid last month, saying in a video eulogy posted by Al Qaeda&rsquo;s media arm on Wednesday that Bin Laden had &ldquo;terrified America in his life&rdquo; and &ldquo;will continue to terrify it after his death.&rdquo;        

The 28-minute video, titled &ldquo;The Noble Knight Dismounted,&rdquo; begins with old footage of Mr. Zawahri and Bin Laden seated together in a mountainous setting before cutting to Mr. Zawahri alone, dressed in white and seated with a rifle in front of a black background. He alternates between poetry and verse eulogizing Bin Laden, according to the SITE Intelligence Group, which tracks jihadist communications and translated the video.        

Mr. Zawahri heaped praise on the slain terrorist leader, calling him &ldquo;the noble emir&rdquo; and a &ldquo;heroic fighter&rdquo; before vowing to continue Bin Laden&rsquo;s efforts to &ldquo;expel the invaders from the land of Islam.&rdquo;        

Speaking of Yemen, Mr. Zawahri said he hoped that the months of unrest there would bring about &ldquo;a good regime that rules in accordance with Shariah&rdquo; that &ldquo;expels the Americans and their henchmen.&rdquo; Even before that country&rsquo;s current political crisis, militants connected to Al Qaeda had gained a foothold in Yemen, an American ally in fighting terrorism. The United States and Saudi Arabia have worked to head off a power vacuum that could provide militants a further opportunity.        

In the video, Mr. Zawahri also called on Pakistanis to revolt against their leaders, &ldquo;just as your brothers in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya and Syria have done.&rdquo;        

Al Qaeda has been without a declared leader since May 2, when members of the Navy Seals raided a compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, where Bin Laden had been hiding for years, and killed him.        

While Mr. Zawahri would appear the likeliest successor to lead Al Qaeda, he is seen to lack Bin Laden&rsquo;s charisma and ideological leadership ability, appearing to be more of a professorial scold than a leader likely to inspire new recruits.        

In an English-language video message released last week, a Qaeda spokesman, Adam Gadahn, urged individual jihadists not to wait for instructions but to attack whenever and wherever they can. There has been no formal announcement about who would replace Bin Laden.        

Mr. Zawahri, an Egyptian and former surgeon, is believed to be hiding in remote mountainous reaches of Pakistan &mdash; though that theory, which also had Bin Laden in such a location, was called into question after Bin Laden was found in Abbottabad, a middle-class town and home to a large Pakistani military base.        

The Wednesday video posting followed an audio recording by Mr. Zawahri that appeared online in late May, but was said to have been recorded before Bin Laden&rsquo;s death, according to SITE International. In the audio message, Mr. Zawahri addressed the revolutions and unrest spreading across the Middle East, throwing his support behind protesters in Syria and Libya while denouncing NATO and United States, saying the Western powers had backed repressive governments.        
