
GUVECCI, Turkey &mdash; Since violent clashes broke out in a northern Syrian town close to this border last weekend at least 140 Syrians have fled into Turkey, some bearing tales of black-clad gunmen opening fire on protesters without warning. Many other Syrians, camped out in scrubby fields within sight of the Turkish border, are ready to follow them at the first sign that security forces are pursuing them, those who have crossed say.        



The influx of refugees has prompted Turkey&rsquo;s leaders to toughen their criticism of the situation in Syria. Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan expressed increasing concern about the refugees and repeated his call for immediate reforms in Syria, including that authorities allow peaceful civilian protests.        

&ldquo;We hope that Syria will immediately become more tolerant in its attitude towards civilians and fully realize the steps it has started towards reforms in a way to persuade civilians,&rdquo; the semi-official Anatolian News Agency quoted Mr. Erdogan as saying.        

In all, hundreds of Syrians have crossed into Turkey since the protests against the rule of President Bashar al-Assad began in April. Many have taken advantage of a porous border and the relaxed border controls put in place last year. Some have gradually returned to Syria on their own; Turkish officials have also provided assistance to nearly 260 people sheltered in a tent city less than 40 miles from Hatay, in Turkey&rsquo;s southeast.        

In Guvecci, about 10 miles from the Syrian border, people overlooked a field in Syria where groups of Syrians, mostly from Jisr al-Shoughour, have camped while trying to decide whether to flee to Turkey.        

An 18-year-old Syrian who gave his name only as Hamid said that he and his family of seven had fled into Turkey together, and that no one they knew remained in Jisr al-Shoughour, which was the scene of the clashes that began over the weekend. &ldquo;My family and others will all enter in if the Syrian military follow us as far as the border,&rdquo; he said.        

He said he had joined a group of about 300 pro-democracy protesters in the village on the weekend. &ldquo;All we said at this protest was to have a democracy like in Turkey, and men in black uniforms fired at us,&rdquo; without warning, Hamid said. &ldquo;We will go back to protest,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;We want Assad regime down.&rdquo;        

The circumstances surrounding the violence in Jisr al-Shoughour and some other towns remains murky.        

The government has claimed that armed groups it called terrorists had attacked its security forces, possibly after donning military uniforms and infiltrating military ranks. Opposition people, meanwhile, say that military forces opened fire on soldiers who refused orders to fire on civilians or who had defected.        

The official Syrian government news agency, SANA, reported Wednesday that members of &ldquo;terrorist groups&rdquo; had dressed in military uniforms and filmed themselves committing crimes in order to &ldquo;manipulate the photos and videos and distort the reputation of the army.&rdquo; SANA also reported that terrorists had faked a mass grave near a building used by Syria&rsquo;s security services.        

Radwan Ziadeh, a Syrian human rights advocate who is a visiting scholar at George Washington University in Washington, disputed the report. &ldquo;Of course it is not true,&rdquo; he said in a telephone interview.        

&ldquo;These armed gangs are the Syrian army, killing its own members because they are refusing to open fire,&rdquo; Mr. Ziadeh said. &ldquo;But state TV cannot say that there are soldiers defecting because it needs to keep discipline in the army against the Syrian people. Always when you hear Syrian TV, you have to believe the opposite.&rdquo;        

A Damascus-based activist named Sami said that three of his relatives from Jisr al-Shoughour had reported that troops from the Syrian army&rsquo;s elite Fourth Division, which is led by Maher al-Assad, the brother of the Syrian president, were being brought into the restive region &ldquo;to finish the soldiers&rsquo; uprising quickly.&rdquo;        

The Associated Press also reported that the Fourth Division, far better trained and better equipped than other Syrian army units, had been sent to the region. If the reports are true, they could suggest another, more forceful crackdown in the coming days.        
Sebnem Arsu reported from Guvecci, and Katherine Zoepf from New York. Reporting was contributed by Liam Stack from Cairo, Hwaida Saad from Beirut, Lebanon, and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria.
