
BEIJING &mdash; The wife of the internationally known human rights activist Hu Jia said Wednesday that she and her daughter could be forced out of their apartment in Shenzhen only weeks before he is scheduled to complete a 42-month prison sentence for state subversion.        

Mr. Hu&rsquo;s wife, Zeng Jinyan, said that she was resisting the demand to move and that she was &ldquo;still wrestling over this with the police.&rdquo; But she added that her landlord, a public employee, was under intense pressure to force the family to leave, perhaps within a week.        

Ms. Zeng, 27, previously lived in Beijing but moved in April, taking her 3 &frac12;-year-old daughter to Shenzhen, an industrial city near Hong Kong. &ldquo;The Beijing police drove me out,&rdquo; she said in a written exchange over the Internet on Wednesday. &ldquo;Now Shenzhen authorities are driving me out, too.&rdquo;        

Although Ms. Zeng and her husband were frequently harassed in the past, she said, the reason behind the latest pressure was unclear. &ldquo;Maybe once again there are some officials who don&rsquo;t want me under their jurisdiction, or maybe there are bigger political reasons,&rdquo; she wrote, adding: &ldquo;If I try to find a job, they threaten my boss. If I try to cooperate with someone, they threaten my partner. If I try to find some part-time work, they tell the human resources of the company to censor me.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hu, 37, was perhaps China&rsquo;s best-known proponent of civil rights when security officers detained him in December 2007 during a roundup of activists in the months before Beijing&rsquo;s 2008 Olympics. In tandem with Ms. Zeng, he campaigned in the past decade on many issues that the government deems sensitive, including human rights, medical care and the environment. The couple were early users of e-mail and the Internet to publicize their causes.        

Mr. Hu spent much of the past five and a half years either in prison or under house arrest, but managed until his imprisonment to continue speaking on civil liberties issues through the Internet. His December 2007 detention came one month after he testified on China&rsquo;s human rights problems via a video link before a European Parliament committee. He was formally convicted of subversion in April 2008 after a trial in which prosecutors cited his Internet statements, articles and interviews with foreign journalists as proof of wrongdoing.        

Two months after the Olympic Games in August 2008, the European Parliament awarded Mr. Hu the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought, a prestigious human rights award. He is believed to have been under serious consideration for the 2008 Nobel Peace Prize.        

Ms. Zeng, herself a blogger and rights activist, has long waged a public campaign for her husband&rsquo;s release on medical grounds, arguing that he was seriously ill and had been denied proper medical care. Mr. Hu suffers from cirrhosis, a result of an earlier hepatitis B infection, and prison authorities told Ms. Zeng last year that doctors had discovered a mass on his liver.        

The authorities rejected her request for his release, and in an April 2010 interview with The Associated Press, Mr. Hu&rsquo;s lawyer said a prison official had told him there was &ldquo;no way&rdquo; that Mr. Hu would be freed early.        

She disclosed the family&rsquo;s possible eviction in a post late Tuesday on Twitter, which is banned in mainland China.        

On Wednesday, she wrote on Twitter that despite visits from police officers and other authorities, Shenzhen was &ldquo;still much better than the environment in Beijing, where I was under severe surveillance and occasional house arrest.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;My baby is getting used to the new environment,&rdquo; she continued. &ldquo;I am trying everything, to see if I can survive here.&rdquo;        
Jonathan Ansfield contributed reporting, and Xiyun Yang contributed research.
