
ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates &mdash; The nations intervening in Libya pledged as much as $1 billion in support for the opposition there on Thursday as senior officials continued to predict that the collapse of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s government could be imminent.        

As the NATO military alliance intensified attacks in the Libyan capital of Tripoli, including a new round of daytime raids, senior officials meeting here acknowledged reports that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s son Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi could be seeking a negotiated exit and said that repeated entreaties reflected the government&rsquo;s isolation and weakness, despite public defiance.        

&ldquo;There have been obviously multiple feelers from the Qaddafi regime to various members of the international community coming every other day,&rdquo; Australia&rsquo;s foreign minister, Kevin Rudd, said after a meeting of more than 30 nations and international organizations.        

Mr. Rudd said the consensus here was that &ldquo;Qaddafi&rsquo;s days are well and truly numbered,&rdquo; giving urgency to the efforts to prepare the opposition for taking power and overseeing a transition. &ldquo;This is no longer an academic proposition,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It is a real proposition and one we may be facing sooner than many of you in this room may think.&rdquo;        

Such predictions, echoed again by Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, have proved premature more than once before since the United States and other NATO nations began a military campaign in March.        

In Geneva, a senior Libyan diplomat vehemently denied that Libyan forces had committed atrocities, including a systematic campaign of rapes by soldiers, possibly including the distribution of Viagra, as prosecutors for the International Criminal Court suggested on Wednesday.        

Investigations into rape and sexual abuse in war zones are notoriously difficult, and even some human rights groups have cast doubt on the accusations. Amnesty International said in a statement on Thursday that the group&rsquo;s researchers, working in eastern Libya, Misurata and in refugee camps along the Tunisian border, &ldquo;have not to date turned up significant hard evidence to support this allegation&rdquo; of systematic rape.        

Libyan officials have also steadfastly denied talk of any deal involving Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s leaving the country, but even so officials meeting here as part of what is called the &ldquo;contact group&rdquo; increasingly took steps to prepare for what Mrs. Clinton in her remarks called &ldquo;the inevitable: a post-Qaddafi Libya.&rdquo;        

The officials established a financial mechanism &mdash; first agreed on when they met last in Rome a month ago &mdash; that would allow direct assistance to the Libyan opposition despite United Nations sanctions that remain in place on the country. That cleared the way for nearly $300 million in assistance already pledged by Kuwait and Qatar, two Arab nations that have strongly supported international action against the Qaddafi government. Italy, France, Turkey, Australia and other countries also pledged additional money on Thursday totaling more than $1 billion, much of it backed by frozen Libyan government assets. But the money still faces legal hurdles before it can reach the rebels.        

The United States and Australia joined Britain and other countries in recognizing Libya&rsquo;s opposition as the legitimate representative of the country, a step closer to diplomatic recognition.        

The opposition in the eastern half of the country, known as the Transitional National Council, has pleaded for as much as $3 billion worth of immediate assistance to pay for emergency needs and basic services in the parts of Libya it controls. And its leaders expressed frustration over what they viewed as the plodding pace of international diplomacy.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s beyond frustration,&rdquo; the opposition&rsquo;s finance minister, Ali Tarhouni, said on the sideline of Thursday&rsquo;s meeting, held at the Emirates Palace, an opulent hotel on the shores of the Persian Gulf.        

The foreign minister of the United Arab Emirates, Sheik Abdullah bin Zayed al-Nahyan, acknowledged the sluggish pace of international efforts to dislodge Colonel Qaddafi from power, following his crackdown on a popular uprising that began in February. &ldquo;I understand the dissatisfaction that is felt, and this dissatisfaction is legitimate,&rdquo; he said.        

&ldquo;Our brothers and sisters in Libya are losing blood and money and time as well,&rdquo; he added, but then laid the blame on the refusal of Colonel Qaddafi and his aides to respond to international demands to end the violence. &ldquo;How did they allow this situation to reach this point in the first place?&rdquo;        

The tone of the meeting here contrasted with that of defense ministers of the NATO alliance the day before in Brussels. There, the strains of a military operation now nearing the end of its third month became public, as Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates pressed some allies &mdash; Germany, Poland, the Netherlands, Spain and Turkey &mdash; to contribute more to the military effort, only to be rebuffed.        

Turkey&rsquo;s foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, appeared with Sheik Abdullah and declared that &ldquo;we have a duty and a burden on our shoulders&rdquo; to support Libya&rsquo;s opposition, through humanitarian means, if not military ones. Mr. Davutoglu also called for a political resolution, though that seems as remote as ever.        

In Washington, President Obama&rsquo;s nominee to replace Mr. Gates as defense secretary, Leon E. Panetta, testified before the Senate that there were signs that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government might &ldquo;be starting to crack.&rdquo; But, he added, &ldquo;The odds of a stalemate remain far too high.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Clinton announced here that the United States would contribute an additional $26 million in humanitarian aid to international organizations, not directly to the rebels. That would bring American humanitarian aid to $81 million over all, as Congress worked on legislation that would allow the administration to free up some of the more than $38 billion in Libyan assets now frozen under the United Nations Security Council resolution, a process that could take weeks or months longer.        

While Mrs. Clinton said she was aware of quiet diplomacy that included &ldquo;the potential for a transition,&rdquo; she appeared to dismiss the possibility of a negotiated exit by Colonel Qaddafi, saying, &ldquo;There is not any clear way forward yet.&rdquo;        

She sounded optimistic, though, even as some in Congress have begun to express concern about the depth and duration of another American conflict in the Middle East. &ldquo;We have very good reason to believe that time is on our side,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;so long as we sustain the pressure.&rdquo;        
