
KARBEYAZ, Turkey &mdash; Security forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad of Syria converged in the country&rsquo;s restive northwest on Thursday as hundreds of residents fled across the border into Turkey, heightening fears of a budding refugee crisis and a widening crackdown on dissent.        

The security forces massed around the town of Jisr al-Shoughour after clashes last weekend made the area the new focus of the pro-democracy demonstrations that have swept across Syria since March. The protests present the gravest threat yet to four decades of rule by the Assad family.        

The unrest in Jisr al-Shoughour has taken on critical importance for both the Syrian government and its opponents: reports say that soldiers there have defected to the opposition, refused to fire on civilian demonstrators and turned their guns on loyalist army units. While many of the soldiers who defected have apparently fled the town, some civilians remain. And although the Syrian government blamed armed gangs and terrorists for the violence, it appears determined to punish the residents still in Jisr al-Shoughour.        

Tanks and armored personnel carriers moved to the edge of the town on Thursday night, and soldiers appeared to be pitching tents, said one resident reached by telephone. Many women and children had fled but those residents who remained, another said, were being stopped at checkpoints ringing the town. A few thousand men were holed up, awaiting what appeared to be an imminent assault.        

&ldquo;They are going to raid the city but we don&rsquo;t know when,&rdquo; said Ahmad, a 28-year-old resident reached by phone who estimated that 100 tanks were among the forces camped at the city&rsquo;s doorstep. &ldquo;Most of us are not armed. We will be completely exterminated.&rdquo;        

The violence in Jisr al-Shoughour has driven more than a thousand people across the border, raising the pressure on Syria&rsquo;s embattled government as Turkey, an important economic partner, is forced to confront a flow of refugees that could grow in the coming days.        

The Turkish government authorized the construction of two refugee camps on Thursday, according to Turkey&rsquo;s semiofficial Anatolian News Agency. The new camps can accommodate more than 5,000 refugees.        

The violence has provoked fresh international condemnation. On Thursday, the United Nations Security Council continued debate on a resolution, circulated by France and Britain, condemning the Syrian government for using force against civilians, though the measure faced stiff resistance from China and Russia.        

In Geneva, Navi Pillay, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, called on Syria to stop the &ldquo;assault on its own people.&rdquo;        

Reports suggested that more than 1,100 people had been killed, and &ldquo;10,000 or more&rdquo; detained in the weeks since the unrest began, Ms. Pillay said. The massing of Syrian security forces in the northwest added to concerns that the toll would rise.        

A spokesman for the Local Coordinating Committee in Syria, an umbrella group organizing protests and documenting the crackdown, said there was also a heavy security presence in the provincial capital, Idlib City, which was also surrounded by checkpoints.        

Saeb Jamil, 34, a Jisr al-Shoughour resident reached by phone, said people were being stopped at the checkpoints in Idlib and other cities and detained for questioning. &ldquo;All residents of Jisr al-Shoughour are now wanted,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We are not allowed to pass or leave to any province.&rdquo;        

Many people from the town have also fled to other cities in Syria. Mohamed, 19, fled with his family to Hama, itself the site of a crackdown on protesters that killed dozens last Friday. His family left without money, food or a change of clothes, he said, and had to rely on donations from poor farmers in the countryside as they ran.        

The unrest in Jisr al-Shoughour began with a military operation launched last Saturday after large antigovernment protests on Friday, but both state television and residents reached by phone said that the security forces soon lost control of the situation on the ground.        

Sebnem Arsu reported from Karbeyaz, and Liam Stack from Cairo. Dan Bilefsky contributed reporting from the United Nations, and Hwaida Saad from Beirut, Lebanon.
