
MOSCOW &mdash; Georgia said Thursday that it might withdraw from regular talks with Russia after uncovering what it said were Russian plots to plant bombs in Georgian territory. The talks, which are held in Geneva, have been the two countries&rsquo; main line of communication since their war in 2008.        

Twice in the last week, the Georgian authorities arrested people who said they had been hired by Russian military officers to plant bombs inside Georgia. Giga Bokeria, the leader of the Georgian delegation in Geneva, said Tbilisi would end the negotiations if there were any more episodes.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s as serious as it can be,&rdquo; Mr. Bokeria said after he returned Thursday from the 16th round of talks. &ldquo;We consider it to be an important venue despite the lack of substantial progress. Despite that, we always thought we would still be going to Geneva, because it&rsquo;s better to have a place where you talk rather than not to have it.&rdquo;        

Russia has cast doubt on the allegations, but promised to review evidence about the planned bombings that was provided by Mr. Bokeria.        

Georgia is also engaged in negotiations with Russia over a proposal that Moscow join the World Trade Organization, which Georgia, as a member, has the power to block.        

Mr. Bokeria said Georgia was willing to support Russia&rsquo;s membership in the W.T.O. if Moscow &ldquo;finds a compromise on border transparency,&rdquo; like placing independent observers at the border between Russia and the Georgian breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. But, he said, any further incidents could jeopardize that, too.        

&ldquo;If the campaign worsens, it affects everything,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;If Russia continues to be a state sponsoring terror attacks, that changes everything.&rdquo;        

The reports of the planned bombings hinge on confessions by people detained by the Georgian police before they detonated any explosives.        

The Georgians said a man and a woman confessed last Thursday that Russian officers in Abkhazia had hired them to bomb a marketplace. A man detained on Monday said a Russian officer in South Ossetia had offered him $2,000 to set off explosives outside the NATO liaison office in Tbilisi, the Georgian capital. In December, Georgia announced that it had traced five small bombings to a Russian Army officer based in Abkhazia, though it stopped short of accusing Russia of ordering them.        

But Aleksandr K. Lukashevich, a spokesman for Russia&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry, dismissed the accusations on Thursday, saying that Georgia&rsquo;s delegation was trying &ldquo;to write off all the failures of Tbilisi&rsquo;s leadership in domestic and international affairs to Russia&rsquo;s intrigues.&rdquo;        

He said Georgia&rsquo;s &ldquo;increased aggressiveness&rdquo; in Geneva had been accompanied by a series of raids by Georgian special forces in Abkhazia.        

&ldquo;These actions are organically connected with an anti-Russian campaign of spy mania in Georgia, attempts to find some kind of Russian hand in the action of internal Georgian opposition,&rdquo; Mr. Lukashevich said. He called for &ldquo;more meticulous control from international observers from the European Union over the actions of Georgian forces.&rdquo;        

Violence has broken out several times this spring near the boundaries of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which have been mostly calm since the war ended.        

In April, a Russian border guard and two Georgians were killed during a shootout in Abkhazia. Last month, two Georgians were seriously wounded after South Ossetia border guards opened fire on them.        

Pierre Morel, the European Union&rsquo;s mediator in Geneva, described the situation as &ldquo;stable but unpredictable, with a potential for dangerous escalation due to highly worrying developments and incidents.&rdquo;        
