
UNITED NATIONS &mdash; The United Nations nuclear watchdog voted Thursday to report Syria to the Security Council, citing Syria&rsquo;s construction of a covert nuclear reactor and its failure to cooperate with investigators, diplomats said.        

The vote, supported by the United States and its European allies, coincided with growing pressure for the international community to condemn the violent crackdown by the Syrian government against pro-democracy protesters. United Nations human rights officials say reports suggest that more than 1,100 have been killed since March.        

With 17 votes in favor and six against, the 35-nation board of the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency adopted a resolution rebuking Syria for failing to cooperate over the past three years with an investigation into Dair Alzour, a remote site in the Syrian desert which was bombed by Israel in 2007. American intelligence reports contend it was a covert reactor designed by North Korea and intended to produce plutonium for atomic bombs.        

Citing a lack of confidence that Syria&rsquo;s nuclear program is for peaceful purposes and pointing to a history of concealment by Damascus, the I.A.E.A. resolution says that the destroyed Dair Alzour site was &ldquo;very likely a nuclear reactor and should have been declared by Syria.&rdquo;        

The 15-member Security Council has the power to rebuke Syria by urging it to cooperate with the I.A.E.A. and imposing sanctions against the country, as it has done in the case of Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program. But Russia and China, two veto-wielding members of the Security Council, voted against the resolution, underlining international divisions over how to approach Damascus and signaling that punitive measures against the Syrian government were unlikely.        

Syria has said the Dair Alzour site was a non-nuclear facility and has denied having a secret nuclear program. It has urged the I.A.E.A. to focus on Israel and allegations about its own covert nuclear activities.        

On Thursday, diplomats continued to debate a separate resolution against Syria, circulated at the Security Council by France and Britain on Wednesday, which condemns the regime of President Bashar al-Assad for using force against Syrian civilians.        

Both efforts faced stiff resistance from China and Russia, which maintain that the council should not interfere in the domestic affairs of sovereign states.        

Russia, an ally of Syria, has been especially adamant that the country should not be singled out for criticism. Ahead of the vote in Vienna, Russian officials said the referral of Syria to the Security Council was based on hypothetical evidence and was not objective, The Associated Press reported.        

On Thursday, a spokesman for the Russian Foreign Ministry, Alexander Lukashevich, said the country opposed any Security Council resolution on Syria.        

&ldquo;The situation in this country, in our view, does not present a threat to international peace and security,&rdquo; he told reporters in Moscow.        

Diplomats said Russia was using the situation in Libya as a pretext to oppose United Nations action in Syria, arguing that NATO&rsquo;s intervention in Libya, under a United Nations mandate to protect civilians, had spiraled out of control.        

Brazil, South Africa, and India have also expressed reservations about a resolution against Syria.        

The United States insisted Thursday that the condemnation of Syria&rsquo;s covert nuclear activities was separate from the effort to condemn Syria for its violent crackdown on demonstrators.        
