
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan arrived in Islamabad on Friday for a two-day visit, which was being viewed as an effort to ensure Pakistani help in the peace talks he has initiated with the Taliban.        

Mr. Karzai will meet with top Pakistani civil and military leaders.        

A statement by Pakistan&rsquo;s Ministry of Foreign Affairs said Mr. Karzai was visiting at the request of President Asif Ali Zardari.        

Mr. Karzai has had an uneven relationship with the Pakistani leadership, and the visit will be a litmus test of where relations between the neighbors, often mistrustful of each other, are headed.        

Pakistan has a crucial role in the Afghan peace process because it maintains influence over several Taliban groups that are fighting inside Afghanistan against United States and NATO forces, and it has shown no inclination of loosening its leverage. Many of the Taliban groups&rsquo; leaders and fighters operate from Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal regions.        

Leon E. Panetta, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency, who is President Obama&rsquo;s nominee to be secretary of defense, was also in Islamabad on Friday, administration officials said. He met with the Pakistani Army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, and the leader of Pakistan&rsquo;s intelligence service, Lt. Gen. Ahmed Shuja Pasha.        

The statement from Pakistan&rsquo;s Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s visit &ldquo;will contribute to further enhancing friendship and close cooperative ties&rdquo; between the two countries. He is scheduled to hold a news conference with Mr. Zardari on Saturday, officials here said.        

&ldquo;There are two objectives of the visit,&rdquo; said Hasan Askari Rizvi, a defense analyst based in Lahore. &ldquo;Firstly, President Karzai is seeking Pakistani cooperation for some kind of dialogue with the Taliban. Secondly, as the responsibility is shifted from the Americans to Afghan Army, they would like to see Pakistan&rsquo;s cooperation to stabilize the situation in Afghanistan.&rdquo;        

The quandary for Mr. Karzai is that while he wants good relations with Pakistan, the Tajik and Uzbek members in his government are very anti-Pakistan, Mr. Rizvi said, adding that he did not expect any big developments during the visit.        

&ldquo;Pakistan will have to play its cards very carefully,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It would not want to overshadow the Afghan government, but it wants to remain a major player, as stability in Afghanistan is crucial for Pakistan as well.&rdquo; Pakistan also wants to try to ensure that India does not gain more influence in Afghanistan.        

Pakistani military officials have long complained of being kept in the dark by United States officials as the endgame in Afghanistan draws near.        

In April, General Kayani and General Pasha accompanied Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani on a visit to the Afghan capital, Kabul. It was considered an attempt by the Pakistani leadership to woo Mr. Karzai.        

Apart from soliciting Pakistani support for the peace process, Mr. Karzai is likely to again take up the issue of Taliban sanctuaries. Pakistan has balked at calls from the United States to start a military operation in North Waziristan, a semiautonomous tribal region on the border with Afghanistan. North Waziristan is a stronghold of the Haqqani network, the Taliban offshoot run by Sirajuddin Haqqani.        
