
DAMAO BANNER, China &mdash; The Mongol nomads who have ranged across these blustery grasslands for millenniums have long had a tempestuous relationship with their Han Chinese neighbors to the south. Genghis Khan&rsquo;s horseback conquerors overran Beijing in 1215, and Qing dynasty armies returned the favor four centuries later.        

By the time Mao&rsquo;s Communist rebels declared victory in 1949, the Mongolians who occupied what became the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region of China had been by and large pacified through Han immigration, intermarriage and old-fashioned repression.        

But the ethnic Mongolian protests that have swept a number of cities in recent weeks are a sobering reminder that government largess, assimilation or an iron fist cannot entirely extinguish the yearnings of some of China&rsquo;s 55 ethnic minorities, who account for 8 percent of the country&rsquo;s population.        

Even as an exemption from the nation&rsquo;s one-child policy granted to minorities helped expand their numbers, Mongolians are still outnumbered by Han five to one in Inner Mongolia, a region twice the size of California that borders the independent nation of Mongolia.        

&ldquo;We feel like we are being drowned by the Han,&rdquo; said a 21-year-old computer science student, speaking through the fence of Hohhot Nationality University, where he and thousands of other Mongolian students were penned up for five days last week to prevent them from taking to the streets. &ldquo;The government always talks about ethnic harmony, but why do we feel so oppressed?&rdquo;        

Although the immediate trigger of the demonstrations was a homicide in which a Han coal truck driver struck and killed a Mongolian herder in early May, the underlying enmity can be tied to longstanding grievances that spilled out during interviews with more than a dozen Mongolians last week: the ecological destruction wrought by an unprecedented mining boom, a perception that economic growth disproportionately benefits the Han and the rapid disappearance of Inner Mongolia&rsquo;s pastoral tradition.        

In Xilinhot, a mining hub not far from where the herder was killed as he and others tried to block a convoy of coal trucks, as many as 2,000 people, many of them students, took to the streets on May 26. Five days later, about 150 protesters marched through the center of Hohhot, the regional capital, despite the presence of thousands of soldiers and paramilitary police officers who kept college students confined to their campuses.        

The government response has hewed closely to the recipe used to quell the far more violent ethnic turmoil that convulsed Tibet in 2008 and the predominantly Muslim region of Xinjiang a year later. Internet access has been severely restricted, with most Mongolian Web sites shut down, and scores of students, professors and herders have been taken into custody. Enhebatu Togochog, an exiled human rights advocate, has described the crackdown as a &ldquo;witch hunt.&rdquo;        

But officials have also sought to address some of the underlying drivers of the discontent. They have vowed to correct abuses of the coal industry, among them unregulated strip mining and trucks that career over the fragile steppe. The government has also committed to broader changes, promising hundreds of millions of dollars for education, environmental protection and the promotion of Mongolian culture.        

And in an unusually prompt trial &mdash; apparently a reflection of Chinese leaders&rsquo; fears of further unrest &mdash; a Xilinhot court on Wednesday handed down a death sentence to the Han driver convicted of running down Mergen, the Mongolian herdsman. The trial, which lasted six hours, according to the official Xinhua news agency, also yielded stiff sentences for three other men involved in the episode. The authorities said they planned to quickly try another Han driver accused of killing an activist with a forklift during a confrontation between the two groups at a coal mine several days later.        

But it is unclear if the swift action will still resentments that have simmered despite Inner Mongolia&rsquo;s fast-expanding economy &mdash; the growth rate has topped that of all other provinces since 2002 &mdash; and affirmative action policies that have provided tens of thousands of government jobs to ethnic Mongolians.        

Shi Da and Adam Century contributed research.
