
BAGHDAD &mdash; A Shiite militia with ties to Iran claimed responsibility on Friday for an attack five days ago that killed five American soldiers, in what was the deadliest day for the United States here since 2009.        

The militia, Kataib Hezbollah, said in a statement posted on its Web site that it would continue to attack American forces until they withdrew from Iraq.        

&ldquo;We want to stress that we have the power and the readiness to fight,&rdquo; the statement said.        

Shiite militia groups, some with ties to the anti-American cleric Moktada al-Sadr, pose one of the greatest threats to the United States military as it prepares to withdraw all of its remaining 46,000 troops from Iraq by the end of the year.        

In recent weeks, these groups have stepped up violence against Americans, particularly mortar and rocket attacks against bases. Last month, there were 37 mortar attacks against American and Iraqi targets in Baghdad, compared to 17 in April.        

The increased violence has come as Iraqi leaders weigh whether to ask the United States to keep some troops in the country beyond the Dec. 31 withdrawal deadline.        

United States officials have provided few details about the attack on Monday. But Iraqi officials said it occurred early in the morning and that three rockets were fired from a pickup truck near the American base in eastern Baghdad.        

The number of American casualties has dropped significantly since the height of the sectarian war here in 2006 and 2007. But 11 soldiers died in April, making it the most deadly month since November 2009.        

Elsewhere in Iraq on Friday, 2,500 pro-government demonstrators took to the streets of Baghdad to call for the executions of two dozen men who were arrested several days ago in connection with a massacre of a wedding party in 2006.        

The demonstrators attacked a group of 300 antigovernment protesters who had assembled in one of the city&rsquo;s major squares for a weekly demonstration calling for government reforms and improved public services. The pro-government demonstrators struck members of the antigovernment group with sticks and accused them of being supporters of Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s outlawed Baath Party, driving them out of the square.        

In southern Baghdad, a series of explosions on Friday killed four people, including a soldier, and wounded 20, including 14 soldiers.        
