
MARJA, Afghanistan &mdash; The poppy harvest is over and the fighting season has arrived in southern Afghanistan &mdash; except this year the Taliban have not returned in their usual numbers to intensify the war, Afghans across the region say.        

They credit the thousands of additional American troops and Afghan forces deployed to insurgency-ridden districts who have cleared out most of the Taliban and are keeping them at bay.        

The change is palpable. In Marja, the district in Helmand Province where American Marines began the offensive 15 months ago, government officials can now drive freely. Last year, they could arrive only by helicopter, such was the threat of roadside bombs and ambushes.        

In neighboring Kandahar Province, the heartland of the insurgency, Taliban commanders who have ventured back for the new fighting season were detained or chased out of the area within hours of arriving from Pakistan, villagers and officials say.        

In both places, the insurgency is now mostly limited to small groups of local fighters who lay mines or carry out assassinations or suicide bombings in the cities, attacks that are more important psychologically than strategically, residents and Afghan and NATO officials say. Casualties remain high &mdash; and in the case of civilian deaths reached a new record in May. Yet the Taliban are no longer the dominant presence they were.        

But while many Afghans say the Taliban have been weakened &mdash; some say irreparably &mdash; the familiar conundrum of Afghanistan applies: what happens when the foreign troops leave?        

Many doubt that their politicians can hold the country together. Although Afghan forces are far more developed than they were six years ago, few analysts believe they can prevent the Taliban from reinfiltrating, as they did when American troops and resources were diverted to Iraq in 2005.        

It is this mixed landscape of improvement and uncertainty that confronts President Obama and his advisers, just a month after the killing of Osama bin Laden, as they weigh how many troops to withdraw from Afghanistan this summer.        

In Marja, as elsewhere across much of the south, the reduced presence of the Taliban has allowed people to return to work and an Afghan government to emerge, however tentatively. Yet the greatest shortcoming &mdash; one the military buildup was not intended to address by itself &mdash; is a lack of strong Afghan institutions to fill the void left by the Taliban retreat.        

Even as the local government expands and begins to earn the support of the population, there remains an intense distrust of President Hamid Karzai&rsquo;s government. Afghans continue to have doubts about whether it can deliver on its own once Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s foreign backers begin to withdraw, and they express a deep unhappiness over the corruption, cronyism and ineffectiveness that undermines any progress made on the ground.        

&ldquo;There were internal things that made people support the Taliban: weak administration, injustice, bad district governors,&rdquo; said the governor of Helmand Province, Gulab Mangal, who is credited with improving the local government. Residents confronted Mr. Karzai about his appointees when he visited Marja last year, Mr. Mangal said. &ldquo;One man told the president, &lsquo;Besides the brutality of the previous administration, they robbed us of our dignity,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; he said.        

The military gains since last summer, and the absence of the Taliban in many areas, have created the opportunity for Afghan officials to get out and engage residents &mdash; some of whom are seeing their first government presence in years.        

It took the Marines far longer to clear and secure Marja than many other places, since the Taliban were so entrenched in the population and the population was so alienated from the government. For months the Taliban retained their grip over Marja, and they still hold sway in several pockets. Yet the overwhelming strength of the Marines, and large numbers of Afghan Army and police forces brought in to increase security, eventually tipped the balance, residents and officials in the region said.        

That is starting to change the atmosphere in Marja. Hundreds of Afghan police officers guard outposts along the main road, and crowds of villagers stand around watching crews clear the irrigation canals than run alongside the road.        

In Kandahar Province, too, while small groups of local fighters remain, their activity is much reduced, residents say.        

Ruhullah Khapalwak contributed reporting from Kandahar, Afghanistan.
