
BAGHDAD &mdash; Twin car bombs ripped through a crowded neighborhood of restaurants and peanut vendors in the northern Iraqi city of Mosul on Saturday, and unidentified gunmen killed a teacher and his family in the central part of the country. At least 11 people were killed in the attacks.        

The violence highlighted continuing concerns about Iraq&rsquo;s security as its leaders ponder whether to ask American forces to remain here after a Dec. 31 withdrawal deadline. A drumbeat of bombings, assassinations, random shootings, robberies and roadside attacks has added urgency to that already charged debate.        

The Interior Ministry, which oversees police forces, reported that 321 Iraqis had been killed last month, a 28 percent increase from the 251 killed in April. But civilian deaths made up a lower proportion of those casualties, falling in May to their lowest level for the year, according to the Health Ministry.        

In Mosul, one of the most violent corners of Iraq, a bomb inside a parked car was remotely detonated near a popular restaurant where police officers and soldiers often eat lunch, a police official said. A second bomb in a nearby parked car exploded a short time after, apparently aimed at those responding to help victims of the first attack.        

The restaurant, Abu Faras, was crowded with lunchtime customers when the car bombs shattered its windows and filled the place with &ldquo;smoke and screaming,&rdquo; said the head waiter, Ali Mustafa, 60.        

&ldquo;I noticed that the cashier has been killed and also three customers at the entrance,&rdquo; Mr. Mustafa said. &ldquo;I saw fire and black smoke coming from a car outside the restaurant. It&rsquo;s an ominous and sad day.&rdquo;        

A total of four civilians and two police officers were killed in the bombings, and 48 people were wounded, police officials said.        

Just after midnight on Saturday morning, gunmen broke into the house of a teacher in a small village near Tikrit, in central Iraq. They killed the teacher, Hassan Salman Younis, his wife and daughter and two sons and then fled in a car, security officials said. Officials said they did not know why the family was singled out.        

Meanwhile, Iraqi officials on Saturday bristled over published remarks from a visiting American congressman, Representative Dana Rohrabacher, Republican of California, who suggested that Iraq should one day consider repaying the United States for the billions of dollars spent here.        

Aliya Nasaif, a member of Parliament, said she would demand the Foreign Ministry seek compensation from the United States for the damage done to Iraq over the last eight years.        

And a government spokesman, Ali al-Dabbagh, told an Iraqi television station that the government had asked the visiting delegation to leave Iraq. By the time he spoke, however, the congressmen were already on their way back to the United States.        

A spokesman for the American Embassy in Baghdad would not comment on Mr. Dabbagh&rsquo;s remarks.        

&ldquo;Congressional visitors do not necessarily express the views of the U.S. administration or even a majority of the Congress,&rdquo; the spokesman, David J. Ranz, said. &ldquo;The visitors this weekend made that clear in their remarks.&rdquo;        

Mr. Rohrabacher said he was &ldquo;very shocked&rdquo; at the Iraqis&rsquo; response to what he called an honest exchange of views.        

&ldquo;The Iraqi people are going to be some of the richest people in the world,&rdquo; he said in a telephone interview, referring to Iraq&rsquo;s vast reserves of oil and gas. &ldquo;Once they start developing those natural resources and become more prosperous, there&rsquo;s no reason for us not to expect that they would consider paying back some of the enormous amounts of money that we&rsquo;ve spent on their behalf.&rdquo;        
Khalid D. Ali and Zaid Thaker contributed reporting from Baghdad, and Iraqi employees of The New York Times from Mosul and Salahuddin Province.
