
CAIRO &mdash; Forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi intensified their shelling of rebel positions near the city of Misurata, a rebel spokesman said Saturday, and news reports suggested that other pro-Qaddafi troops were on the move around the formerly rebel-held city of Zawiya, just west of Tripoli.        

The reports suggested an intensification of the fighting in western Libya around Tripoli. Rebels from Misurata have been trying to push toward Tripoli from the east, and opposition fighters operating in the Nafusah Mountains near Tunisia have been trying to squeeze the capital from the west.        

Neither group has conquered much ground. Rebels claim that a recent escalation of NATO airstrikes is emboldening uprisings in smaller cities ringing Tripoli, and even in the capital. Those reports could not be confirmed.        

But reporters for The Associated Press and Reuters traveling from the capital toward Tunisia on Saturday reported that pro-Qaddafi forces had closed the road around Zawiya, an important city at the doorstep of Tripoli that had rebelled in February. Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces fought for more than a week to recapture the city.        

In the Misurata area, rebels said, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces were shelling their forward position at Dafnia, about 20 miles west of the city. A rebel spokesman said that more than 30 people had been killed on Friday, bringing the toll for the last week of fighting to more than 120 dead and 350 wounded. &ldquo;We have to organize two ships to evacuate the wounded,&rdquo; said the spokesman, Mohamed. His full name was withheld to protect his family.        

He said rebels were also fighting in the Qaddafi garrison town of Zlitan, the biggest stop between Misurata and Tripoli. &ldquo;There were 21 dead in fighting in Zlitan,&rdquo; Mohamed said, citing reports from rebels there via satellite phone. By all accounts, however, the center of the town remained firmly in control of the government&rsquo;s forces.        
