
CAIRO &mdash; Syrian security forces bombarded the restive northern town of Jisr al-Shoughour for a second day Saturday with withering tank and helicopter fire as frightened people struggled to escape, residents reported.        

Mohamed al-Abdo, a refugee hiding in the hills above town, said he could hear the boom of explosions and the chop of helicopters from miles away.        

&ldquo;Helicopters and tanks are bombing Jisr from all the sides and the situation is extremely miserable &mdash; they are even targeting cars carrying civilians and the wounded,&rdquo; he said. Another resident who fled said those who stayed behind feared they would all be killed.        

Security forces, numbering in the thousands, had not yet staged a ground assault by early evening, according to residents. But after midnight, an activist group said one of its contacts in the town reported some tanks and armored personnel carriers had begun moving in. The group acknowledged, however, that it was becoming increasingly difficult to verify information since so many people had abandoned the area.        

The attack on the town appears to be part of a concentrated effort to suppress any further upheaval in a region with a history of resistance to the government and a combustible mix of ethnic groups, including Alawites and Sunni Arabs. The push began on Friday, when troops swept though more than a half-dozen towns on their way to Jisr al-Shoughour, terrorizing the population with arrests and attacks that residents said included firing at people in the streets and shelling some towns.        

A spokesman for the Local Coordinating Committees in Syria, the activist group, said at least 17 people had been killed in the area since Friday, a number it expected to rise as more information became available. The attacks on some nearby towns continued Saturday, the group said, including in one town where plain-clothes enforcers burned houses.        

The campaign has displaced hundreds, if not thousands, of residents who fled to nearby mountains or to the border with Turkey.        

Jisr al-Shoughour has been tense for days, since more than 120 members of the country&rsquo;s security forces were killed, according to state television. The report blamed the deaths on &ldquo;armed gangs,&rdquo; but many local residents said the troops were killed by loyalist soldiers when they and a large group of other troops tried to defect.        

If the residents&rsquo; claims are verified, they would reflect the first large-scale army defections and fighting among security forces. That would pose a grave challenge to the government of President Bashar al-Assad, who has relied on security forces to crush an unprecedented popular revolt against more than four decades of iron-fisted rule by his family.        

But even the government&rsquo;s version of events suggests that Mr. Assad&rsquo;s troubles are escalating, since the protests against the government had, until then, been mostly peaceful.        

It has been difficult to verify either account, and to sort fact from spin, since Syria has kept most foreign journalists out of the country.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, in Zambia, said Syria&rsquo;s government was &ldquo;engaged in horrific, revolting attacks against its own people&rdquo; and found herself forced to defend the lack of forceful international action. She said regional leaders did not support the sort of intervention under way in Libya. &ldquo;The region, however, is trying behind the scenes to get the government to stop,&rdquo; she said in an interview with &ldquo;Africa 360,&rdquo; a news program.        

Residents of Jisr al-Shoughour who were reached by phone on Saturday said that the eastern part of the town was too dangerous to enter because of heavy fire from nearby military units. The northern section of the town was safer, allowing more people to flee, but residents said they had to watch out for helicopters opening fire on &ldquo;anything that moves.&rdquo;        

On Friday, residents estimated that around 5,000 people remained in the town, out of a population of more than 50,000.        

Fadi, a 27-year-old resident who gave only one name for fear of government retribution, said security forces fired on his car Friday night as he fled. But he returned Saturday morning anyway, to help ferry refugees, including the elderly, to nearby mountains.        
Liam Stack reported from Cairo, and Sebnem Arsu from a refugee camp in Syria near the Turkish border. Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon, Steven Lee Myers from Lusaka, Zambia, and Katherine Zoepf from New York.
