
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; Fazul Abdullah Mohammed, Al Qaeda&rsquo;s leader in East Africa and the mastermind of the American Embassy bombings in Kenya and Tanzania, was killed in a late-night shootout at a security checkpoint in Mogadishu, Somalia&rsquo;s capital, Somali and American officials said Saturday.        

The killing, after Mr. Mohammed accidentally encountered a Somali checkpoint, was a major loss for the terrorist network, still reeling from the assassination of its founder, Osama bin Laden, in Pakistan last month.        

&ldquo;Fazul&rsquo;s death is a significant blow to Al Qaeda, its extremist allies and its operations in East Africa,&rdquo; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said. &ldquo;It is a just end for a terrorist who brought so much death and pain to so many innocents in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam and elsewhere &mdash; Tanzanians, Kenyans, Somalis and our own embassy personnel.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mohammed, who was one of the most wanted men in Africa and had a $5 million bounty on his head from the United States government, and another militant mistakenly drove up to a checkpoint run by Somali government soldiers late on Tuesday night.        

The Somali soldiers fired on their truck, a black Toyota four-by-four, and the men fired back, Somali officials said. Seconds later, Mr. Mohammed and the other militant were dead.        

Somali officials said that DNA tests carried out in Kenya &ldquo;by our friends&rdquo; &mdash; suggesting the Central Intelligence Agency, which has been working covertly in Somalia for years &mdash; confirmed Mr. Mohammed&rsquo;s identity on Saturday.        

An American official said that the United States identified Mr. Mohammed&rsquo;s body through DNA analysis. The official would not say what DNA the United States used to compare with the body&rsquo;s.        

&ldquo;This was lucky,&rdquo; a Somali security official said Saturday night. &ldquo;It wasn&rsquo;t like Fazul was killed during an operation to get him. He was essentially driving around Mogadishu and got lost.&rdquo;        

In recent years, American special forces have killed other high-level Qaeda operatives in Somalia but American officials said Saturday that no Americans were involved, only Somali soldiers.        

Mr. Mohammed, a master of disguises and several languages, is widely believed to have helped bring Qaeda-like tactics &mdash; suicide bombs, roadside bombs and a pipeline of foreign fighters &mdash; to Somalia&rsquo;s often messy and inchoate Islamist insurgency. According to Somali and American officials, he imported bomb-making materials, raised money in the Arab world for the insurgency and maintained a steady stream of hardened &mdash; or at least dedicated &mdash; foreign fighters from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Chechnya and even the United States.        

He wore two hats, officials said, as the leader of Al Qaeda&rsquo;s franchise in East Africa and a top field commander for the Shabab, the Somali militant group that started as a homegrown insurgency but has steadily drawn closer to Al Qaeda and expanded its ambitions, carrying out a suicide attack in Uganda last summer that killed dozens. The Shabab are often referred to as the Somali Taliban, sawing off thieves&rsquo; hands, stoning adulterers and even yanking out people&rsquo;s teeth, saying gold fillings are un-Islamic.        

Sheik Yusuf Mohamed Siad, a former Somali insurgent leader who joined the government a few years ago, has called Mr. Mohammed &ldquo;an expert at war.&rdquo;        

Officials with Somalia&rsquo;s transitional government hope that the killing could be a turning point against the Shabab, who once controlled large tracts of the country but recently have been pushed back. In the past few months, African Union peacekeepers and government-allied forces have been taking the offensive, steadily routing the Shabab in several neighborhoods of Mogadishu and some towns in southern Somalia.        

Scores of Shabab fighters have been killed, including many foreigners, and witnesses have described a growing desperation amid Shabab ranks, which might explain how a top Shabab commander could err so fatally as to drive into a heavily armed government checkpoint.        

But it was not clear that Mr. Mohammed&rsquo;s death on Tuesday had weakened the Shabab. On Friday, Somalia&rsquo;s interior minister was killed in an explosion at his home in the small patch of Mogadishu that the transitional government ostensibly controls. The Shabab claimed it placed a bomb under the minister&rsquo;s bed. Somali officials said it was a female suicide bomber, possibly the minister&rsquo;s niece, who was a secret Shabab agent.        

Mark Mazzetti, Scott Shane and Elisabeth Bumiller contributed reporting from Washington.
