
BEIJING &mdash; Authorities in a town near the southern metropolis of Guangzhou arrested 25 people after a dispute between street vendors and security guards grew into a confrontation with bottle-and-brick throwing onlookers, state news agencies reported Sunday.        

The clash, in Xintang, in south coastal China, was the latest in a series of violent protests that have struck Chinese cities in recent days. At least 1,000 riot police officers were patrolling the streets of Lichuan, in Hubei Province, after days of unusually large protests over the death of a local legislator who had been in police custody.        

In China&rsquo;s Inner Mongolia region, ethnic Mongolians clashed with security officers last week in protests over the death of a Mongolian who had been run over by a car driven by an ethnic Han.        

Chinese authorities recorded 127,000 so-called mass incidents last year, but most were too small to gain wide notice.        

The Xintang protest apparently sprang from a dispute Saturday night between security officers and two migrant street vendors in an industrial area filled with garment factories, The Associated Press reported. Onlookers, many of them also migrant workers, apparently sided with the vendors, and photographs posted on the popular Sina Weibo service, a Chinese version of Twitter, showed overturned police cars.        

In Lichuan, a city of about 850,000, around 2,000 protesters stormed government headquarters on Saturday to protest the death of a legislator, Ran Jianxin, a member of the local People&rsquo;s Congress who had been investigating accusations of corruption in a city-backed land deal. Mr. Ran, 49, was reported to have been under interrogation by the police or prosecutors when he died on June 4.        

Mr. Ran was arrested May 26 on bribery charges, which his family contends were concocted in an effort to silence his anticorruption investigation. Xinhua, China&rsquo;s official news agency, quoted a cousin as saying that Mr. Ran&rsquo;s body bore signs of an &ldquo;unnatural death.&rdquo;        

Photos posted online that purport to show his bloodied corpse set off a large demonstration on Thursday by crowds throwing eggs, bottles and garbage at city buildings. The protest drew a large contingent of the paramilitary People&rsquo;s Armed Police and columns of armored vehicles.        

Two city officials have been detained in connection with Mr. Ran&rsquo;s death, the Communist Party newspaper Global Times reported. Two others, a local prosecutor and a deputy director of the city&rsquo;s Communist Party, have lost their jobs, according to Agence France-Presse.        

State-approved land seizures for development, which frequently displace residents without adequate compensation or other recourse, are a common motivation behind public protests in China.        
