
DAR ES SALAAM, Tanzania &mdash; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton on Sunday honored those killed in the bombings in 1998 of the American Embassies here and in Kenya, a day after the authorities confirmed the death of the feared operative from Al Qaeda who masterminded the attacks.        

&ldquo;We have not forgotten your losses,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton told diplomats and employees at the embassy here, built after the attacks, which killed more than 200 people, including 12 Americans. She spoke after laying flowers in front of a stone memorial for the dead, accompanied by three Tanzanians who survived the bombing.        

&ldquo;And we have also not forgotten our pledge to seek justice against those who would commit such atrocities,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton added.        

The mastermind of the bombings, Fazul Abdullah Mohammed, Al Qaeda&rsquo;s leader in East Africa, was killed in a late-night shootout on Tuesday at a military checkpoint in Mogadishu, Somalia&rsquo;s capital.        

Somali and American officials confirmed his identity on Saturday, as Mrs. Clinton arrived in Tanzania on a visit intended to highlight American aid programs and the progress she said the country had made.        

Mr. Mohammed, also known by the American authorities as Haroun Fazul, had been indicted for his role in masterminding the bombings and remained on the F.B.I&rsquo;s most-wanted list, with a $5 million bounty offered for information leading to his capture. Rather than being the target of a military operation, he appeared to have blundered into a checkpoint in a part of Mogadishu controlled by the government and was killed in a firefight.        

Somali officials said that his identity had been confirmed through DNA tests and suggested that they had been helped by American intelligence officials.        

He was the third major figure in Al Qaeda killed in recent weeks, beginning with the death of Osama bin Laden in an American raid in Pakistan last month. An American drone strike killed Ilyas Kashmiri, a senior operation commander of the group, in Pakistan earlier this month.        

&ldquo;I know nothing can replace those who have been taken from us by such senseless violence,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said, &ldquo;but I know justice was served and I hope that can give you some measure of comfort.&rdquo;        
