
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; Leaders from across southern Africa, who have long deferred to President Robert Mugabe, Zimbabwe&rsquo;s 87-year-old strongman, dealt him a setback on Sunday, calling for speedier progress toward free and fair elections conducted &ldquo;on a level playing field&rdquo; and injecting the region more forcefully into the process of making that happen.        

They directed that South Africa, Zambia and Mozambique &mdash; a troika of nations working on the Zimbabwe issue &mdash; assign a team to work with Zimbabwean officials and hasten progress toward elections and the enforcement of a power-sharing deal Mr. Mugabe and his party, ZANU-PF, made with his political enemy, Morgan Tsvangirai, and the party he heads, the Movement for Democratic Change, after discredited 2008 elections.        

In March, the same three nations, acting on behalf of the region and led by South Africa&rsquo;s president, Jacob Zuma, called for a halt to the harassment, violence and politically motivated arrests that are hallmarks of Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s autocratic rule, prompting Mr. Mugabe to angrily declare that it was not the region&rsquo;s place to tell Zimbabwe what to do. On Sunday, Mr. Zuma reported that the political parties were making headway in devising a road map to elections.        

&ldquo;It is a new day, believe you me, from where we&rsquo;ve come from in the last decade,&rdquo; said Jameson Timba, a senior official in the Movement for Democratic Change. &ldquo;Solidarity with a dictator has now been ruptured. SADC is now in solidarity with the people of Zimbabwe,&rdquo; he said, referring to the Southern African Development Community.        

While regional leaders are talking far more openly about the need to push for democratic reforms in a nation that has endured repression and economic ruin during Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s three-decade-long rule, translating those aims into actions on the ground will be no simple task. Human rights monitors report that the army &mdash; loyal to Mr. Mugabe &mdash; has already deployed officers and soldiers to rural areas to intimidate voters ahead of elections Mr. Mugabe wants this year. Civic groups in Zimbabwe fear the military could seize power if Mr. Mugabe lost an election.        

The opposition Movement for Democratic Change has demanded reform of the security services, but there is a notable skittishness to confront the generals who are widely believed to have organized a campaign of beatings, torture and killings against Mr. Tsvangirai&rsquo;s supporters that ultimately forced Mr. Tsvangirai to drop out of a runoff against Mr. Mugabe in June 2008.        

&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s be frank, it&rsquo;s not an easy thing to deal with,&rdquo; said Lindiwe Zulu, an adviser to Mr. Zuma. &ldquo;You have to be sensitive. The military is sensitive. In the African context, it&rsquo;s worse. These guys are used to doing things in a certain way. When you start wanting to regulate, you&rsquo;re walking on thin ice.&rdquo;        

And there are other changes sought by the Movement for Democratic Change that ZANU-PF has made clear it will resist &mdash; for example, reforms to ensure that the state stops using its control of its television monopoly and many other media properties in a highly partisan way.        

Despite the daunting obstacles that remain, leaders of the Movement for Democratic Change, who have been repeatedly disappointed by the region&rsquo;s unwillingness to take a harder line with Mr. Mugabe, were savoring the progress they have made. Mr. Timba credited Mr. Zuma with setting the regional body, the Southern African Development Community on a new course. The Movement for Democratic Change had long complained that Mr. Zuma&rsquo;s predecessor, Thabo Mbeki, had favored Mr. Mugabe and never publicly challenged his use of violence to retain power.        

Tendai Biti, Zimbabwe&rsquo;s finance minister and a leader of the Movement for Democratic Change, said the summit here &ldquo;carries on the pattern of democratizing our country.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mugabe and the state media he controls have lashed out at Mr. Zuma and his adviser, Ms. Zulu, charging that they had swallowed the line of Mr. Tsvangirai, Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s political enemy, in blaming Mr. Mugabe for an upsurge in political violence.        

But at the conclusion of the two-day meeting, Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s loyalists were nowhere to be seen as Tomaz A. Salamao, executive secretary of the Southern African Development Community, read the communiqu&eacute; at a news conference. In the days leading up to the meeting, they had sought to convince the region that it was not their party, ZANU-PF, but the rival Movement for Democratic Change that was the real instigator of violence. Rugare Gumbo, ZANU-PF spokesman, reached on his cellphone Sunday in Harare, Zimbabwe&rsquo;s capital, said he had not heard what was in the communiqu&eacute;.        

Ms. Zulu said regional leaders had strongly backed Mr. Zuma&rsquo;s push to strengthen the electoral institutions needed to ensure that Zimbabweans will be able to vote without fear of reprisals.        
