
BERLIN &mdash; Germany, which declined to participate in the NATO air campaign against Libya, on Monday recognized the opposition National Transitional Council as the legitimate representative of Libya, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said during a visit to the rebel capital of Benghazi.        

The announcement by Mr. Westerwelle comes after weeks of hesitation by Germany over which rebel leaders or movements, if any, it would recognize as an alternative to the government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

&ldquo;The Transitional Council is the legitimate representation of the Libyan people,&rdquo; Mr. Westerwelle said after arriving in Benghazi. &ldquo;With this council, we want to support the building of a democratic and law-abiding Libya.&rdquo;        

Germany will open a small mission in Benghazi, joining the United States, the European Union, the United Nations, Britain, France, Spain, Malta and Qatar, which have established a presence there in the past several weeks. Washington, however, has not extended diplomatic recognition to the council.        

Mr. Westerwelle&rsquo;s announcement comes just days after Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany visited Washington in what was widely seen as a fence-mending mission designed to bury months of acrimony over the Greek debt crisis, the euro and Libya.        

Germany, which joined the United Nations Security Council in January, surprised its allies when it abstained from voting on a resolution that authorized a no-fly zone over Libya and airstrikes to protect the civilian population from Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces, which at the time were advancing toward Benghazi.        

The German government said then that it abstained because it opposed any military operation against Libya. It also said it was unsure of the goals of the mission, as well as whom the rebels represented and what their goals were.        

Despite Germany&rsquo;s reservations, which were shared by several other countries, including Turkey and Poland, it did not block NATO from taking the lead in the airstrikes against the Qaddafi forces. Germany remained insistent, however, that it would not participate in any military action, and it put under national command its ships in the Mediterranean that had been serving under a NATO flag.        

Thomas de Maizi&egrave;re, the German defense minister, said last week that Germany would consider providing troops to any European Union mission designed to provide protection for reconstruction and humanitarian efforts in Libya. During her talks with President Obama in Washington, Mrs. Merkel promised that Germany would contribute to the reconstruction of Libya.        
