
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Lebanon&rsquo;s new prime minister, Najib Mikati, announced on Monday a long-delayed government dominated by members and allies of the Shiite militant group Hezbollah, a move likely to alarm Western powers.        

Mr. Mikati was appointed in January after Hezbollah and its allies toppled the Western-backed government of Saad Hariri in a dispute over the investigation of the killing of Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s father, Rafik, a billionaire and former prime minister.        

Five months passed between Mr. Mikati&rsquo;s appointment and Monday&rsquo;s announcement, a protracted dispute that many Lebanese saw as emblematic of the country&rsquo;s political dysfunction. While bickering over posts in the cabinet and their distribution among sects and political powers was the ostensible reason for the delay, the arguments underlined a country deeply divided over questions of ideology, the power of foreign patrons and which community would hold sway over Lebanon&rsquo;s political landscape.        

As the cabinet was announced, many expressed relief, hoping for a respite from the crises that have marked Lebanon since Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s assassination in 2005.        

But only a couple of hours later, Talal Arslan, a state minister in the new cabinet, announced his resignation, accusing Mr. Mikati of being a "liar" and of seeking to deprive the minority Druse of key cabinet posts. In a rambling news conference, he also accused him of creating tension among political allies.        

&ldquo;I announce my resignation from the government of Najib Mikati, as it would shame me to sit on his right in a government he presides over,&rdquo; said Mr. Arslan, a junior Druse leader and a close ally of Hezbollah.        

Mr. Arslan said he wanted a more prestigious ministerial portfolio for the Druse, who make up less than 10 percent of Lebanon&rsquo;s population, which is divided among 18 sects and religions. By custom, power is allotted among them &mdash; the presidency to Maronite Catholics, the post of prime minister to Sunni Muslims and that of speaker of Parliament to Shiite Muslims, the largest group in Lebanon.        

Some analysts saw Mr. Arslan&rsquo;s resignation as a sign of impending tumult. Others warned that the preponderance of Hezbollah and its allies, along with the virtual absence of Mr. Hariri and the forces he still represents, would produce more crises.        

&ldquo;This is not going to be a long-term government,&rdquo; said Sateh Noureddine, a columnist with the newspaper As-Safir. &ldquo;Hezbollah wanted to form a government to move well beyond the Saad Hariri era, by any means.&rdquo;        

In announcing his cabinet, Mr. Mikati &mdash; like Mr. Hariri, a wealthy businessman &mdash; vowed that his cabinet would represent all Lebanese. Since his appointment, he has gone to great lengths to paint himself as a consensus candidate who would avoid being beholden to Hezbollah, the most powerful force here.        

In a largely rhetorical line that would nevertheless be welcomed by Hezbollah, which fought Israel in 2006, Mr. Mikati promised to pursue the liberation of &ldquo;land that remains under the occupation of the Israeli enemy.&rdquo;        

President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, who is under heavy criticism from the West for violently crushing protests in his country, welcomed the new cabinet. Even though Syria was forced to withdraw its troops in 2005, after a 29-year military presence here, it remains the most influential foreign country in Lebanon. Mr. Mikati, who has close ties with Mr. Assad, promised to pursue good relations with Syria.        

&ldquo;This government is committed to maintaining strong, brotherly ties which bind Lebanon to all Arab countries, without exception,&rdquo; Mr. Mikati said.        

Mr. Hariri has refused to join the new cabinet.        

&ldquo;This is a confrontational government,&rdquo; said Nouhad Mashnouk, a lawmaker from Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s parliamentary bloc. &ldquo;The Syrians declared the political confrontation. It is very obvious they are partners in the decision.&rdquo;        

One of the government&rsquo;s main tasks is to find a unified position on the United Nations-backed tribunal, which is expected to issue indictments that will implicate members of Hezbollah in the killing of Mr. Hariri. The group has denied any involvement in the bombing and wants the new government to stop backing the tribunal. The new cabinet must still win a vote of confidence from Parliament.        
