
BAGHDAD &mdash; A suicide bomber mingling in a crowd of prospective police recruits in Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s hometown detonated a vest of explosives on Tuesday in what was the worst single attack in Iraq in nearly three months.        

The bombing in Tikrit, north of Baghdad, killed at least 49 people, including police officers and men seeking jobs with the region&rsquo;s police force, according to a security official in the province, Salahuddin. Other officials and the Interior Ministry in Baghdad cited death tolls as high as 60, with the differences reflecting the chaotic aftermath that typically follows major bombings. At least 119 were wounded.        

Violence in Iraq has reached a low since the American invasion in 2003, but the Islamic State of Iraq and other insurgent groups continue to strike with regularity, if with less severity.        

They have attacked Iraq&rsquo;s government and security services in particular, and the latest violence prompted criticism of an apparent lapse of precaution, given that history.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m asking the security forces, isn&rsquo;t it enough?&rdquo; a member of Iraq&rsquo;s new Parliament from Salahuddin, Mutashar al-Samaraie, said in televised remarks from the chamber. &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t it time to take into account the previous events and attacks that have killed thousands of Iraqis?&rdquo;        

Tariq al-Hashimi, a former vice president who remains in Parliament, said in a statement, &ldquo;The army and police recruiting centers have become attractive targets that are easily reached.&rdquo; He also called for a review of policies after what he called &ldquo;repeated security breaches.&rdquo;        

Several hundred job seekers had assembled at a parade ground in Tikrit that had once been the site of political and military rallies during Mr. Hussein&rsquo;s rule.        

An attack at an army recruiting office in Baghdad last August killed 57 people.        

A commando-style raid struck that same compound the following month, killing 12, as well as 6 insurgents.        

Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki&rsquo;s office released a statement on Tuesday night, vowing to investigate anyone responsible for negligence.        

American troops appeared at the scene after the attack, while helicopters hovered overhead. &ldquo;My brother was there between the recruiters,&rdquo; a man who identified himself only as Abu Muhammad, or father of Muhammad, said outside the hospital, which was cordoned off by the police. A call to his brother&rsquo;s cellphone was not answered.        

There was no immediate claim of responsibility, but the tactic used was similar to previous suicide bombings carried out by the Islamic State of Iraq, an umbrella organization affiliated with Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia.        

The bombing was the worst since a convulsion of violence that began when insurgents from the Islamic State of Iraq, including several strapped with explosive vests, seized a Christian church in Baghdad on Oct. 31, starting a siege lasting hours.        

That attack ended with at least 58 killed, and prompted an exodus of Iraq&rsquo;s Christians to the relative safety of northern Iraq or abroad. Two days later a series of bombs exploded across Baghdad, raising the death toll from the series of attacks to 122.        
Yasir Ghazi contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an Iraqi employee of The New York Times from Tikrit.
