
MOSCOW &mdash; Call it the mac-and-cheese rebellion.        

Protests erupted Monday in Belarus after the authoritarian government issued rules making it illegal to export cheese, butter, macaroni and several other food items, along with refrigerators, kitchen stoves and gasoline. The unrest, along the border with Poland, was quickly suppressed by the police.        

The restrictions, announced over the weekend, were the latest in a long series of Soviet-style rules issued by the government of President Aleksandr G. Lukashenko to grapple with a worsening financial crisis.        

To soften the impact of a 36 percent devaluation of the currency, the government recently placed price controls on a range of basic goods and foodstuffs, like macaroni and cheese. Among other problems, the policies prompted a lively cross-border business for traders who obtained the goods at artificially low prices and sold them for a profit in Poland, creating shortages in Belarus.        

The new rules are aimed at stopping that trade.        

&ldquo;In the Republic of Belarus, prices are socially oriented,&rdquo; said Aleksandr Tischenko, the spokesman for the Belarussian border committee. &ldquo;Therefore, attempts to speculate on social prices, and make some money, is not commerce. It is illegal commercial activity.&rdquo;        

The rules prohibit individuals from crossing the border with more than four pounds of cheese, poultry or pork; two pounds of butter; two packs of Belarussian cigarettes; or five tins of canned milk or meat. To slow sales of gasoline, people are limited to one border crossing a day.        

The reaction on Monday was swift. Irate drivers stopped their cars in protest on the highway near the Bruzgi border crossing with Poland Sunday evening. Video footage on NTV, a Russian broadcaster, showed drivers milling about on the pavement beside their parked cars, chanting and ignoring a police officer with a bullhorn who was ordering them to disperse.        

The protest took on added significance because it lasted nearly a day, bold in a country where overt opposition is not tolerated.        

The protest ended Monday when riot police officers swept demonstrators off the road and detained 20 people, the Echo of Moscow radio station reported.        

The scuffle on the border coincided with the final day of a visit to Minsk, the capital of Belarus, by a mission from the International Monetary Fund. The head of the mission, Chris Jarvis, said at a news conference that Belarus would need to agree to structural reforms in its economy before a loan could be issued to stabilize the ruble.        

But experts say the chances of that are remote. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s nothing in his long track record to indicate any interest in true structural reform,&rdquo; Cliff Kupchan, an analyst at the Eurasia Group, said of Mr. Lukashenko in a telephone interview. &ldquo;Implementing a market economy means allowing at least some political space, which by definition would threaten his type of system.&rdquo;        
