
HATAY, Turkey &mdash; There was a growing urgency for tents and supplies as heavy rains fell on this border region where thousands sought refuge as the Turkish authorities rushed to open three more camps for those who fled a Syrian government crackdown that bombarded villages and burned fields to put down an armed uprising.        

An estimated 7,000 refugees fled the military crackdown, with about 5,000 making it to camps set up in Turkey, leaving thousands more to improvise shelter in open fields, some on this side of the border, others still on the Syrian side, witnesses said. Women in camps demanded medicine and water for children, while people here said some women had given birth in the fields.        

But the overarching sentiment among the refugees was relief that they had escaped &mdash; and fear for those they left behind.        

A man identifying himself only as Edib, fearful of being identified by Syrian surveillance, said: &ldquo;I heard gunshots. Things are getting bad there, across the border. People talk about the military firing at anyone they consider a threat.&rdquo;        

The Syrian refugee crisis accelerated days ago when it became clear that the government planned to storm Jisr al-Shoughour, where officials said that &ldquo;armed gangs&rdquo; had killed 120 soldiers and police officers. By Sunday night, when the military had retaken the town, most of the residents had fled, witnesses said, some to other Syrian communities, and thousands toward the border with Turkey, just 12 miles away. The number of white tents has grown daily as Turkish officials tried to accommodate the exodus.        

But not everyone made it into a tent.        

Hakan, a Turkish resident, who helped take supplies donated by villagers to those out in the fields, said he saw hundreds of civilian cars driving toward the border, where he said there were 10,000 people camping with only minimal supplies.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve already crossed 10 times to the other side, but it is never enough when more people, especially children, keep piling up fearing for their lives,&rdquo; Mr. Hakan said.        

Though the United Nations called on Syria to ensure the safe return of all refugees, that prospect seemed unlikely anytime soon. Syrian military forces were patrolling around Zaini, about 3.5 miles from the Turkish border, and gun shots could be heard behind hills, said a Syrian who drove around the border region on Monday.        

On Monday morning, victims of the crackdown were rushed to the hospital here. Ahmed Arafat, from Jisr al-Shoughour, and Abdul Hai from Latakia, were admitted with what were described as bullet wounds. Mr. Arafat was shot in the stomach and was unconscious when Mr. Hakan and his friends carried him across the border, where he was put in an ambulance.        

Mr. Hai told Mr. Hakan he was shot when he arrived in Latakia to collect his relatives to bring them to Turkey.        
