
LONDON &mdash; After enduring months of criticism over his bold proposal to drastically overhaul Britain&rsquo;s publicly financed National Health Service, Prime Minister David Cameron on Tuesday released a new, watered-down version of the plan designed to be more palatable to interest groups and to Parliament.        

The opposition Labour Party seized on the chance to accuse Mr. Cameron of making an embarrassing U-turn on a cherished policy. But the prime minister said that on the contrary, the new proposal showed that his Conservative-led coalition government was flexible and willing to modify its programs when the occasion called for it.        

&ldquo;We have listened, we have learned, and we are improving our plans for the N.H.S.,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said as he unveiled the new proposal at Guy&rsquo;s Hospital in London. &ldquo;We come here today with a substantive package of changes.&rdquo;        

But he said the basics of the plan &mdash; &ldquo;more control to patients, more power to doctors and nurses, less bureaucracy in the N.H.S.&rdquo; &mdash; remained the same.        

The original proposal, one of the cornerstones of Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s agenda when he took office a year ago, called for dispensing with several layers of bureaucracy in the health service and putting the country&rsquo;s general practitioners in charge of most of the health service budget by 2013. It also sought to open the health service to more competition, with health care providers &mdash; public and private &mdash; vying for business.        

Under the new plan, general practitioners would still have a larger role than they do now over how the health service spends its money. But they would be joined in the task by panels, or &ldquo;clinical commissioning groups,&rdquo; that would include hospital nurses and specialists. Overseen by a national commissioning group, they would have more time to adjust to their added responsibilities; the 2013 deadline would be scrapped.        

The initial plan proposed expanding the role of Monitor, the health service regulator, by giving it the job of &ldquo;economic regulator&rdquo; in addition to its current responsibilities, and by using it to promote competition. Under the current plan, Mr. Cameron said, Monitor would encourage competition not &ldquo;for its own sake, but to make life better for patients, &rdquo; and would focus on ensuring increased patient choice.        

In addition, the government said, the initial proposal to allow &ldquo;any qualified provider&rdquo; to compete to deliver health service would be introduced gradually, rather than immediately.        

The revised plan would also reinstate the health secretary&rsquo;s responsibility for ensuring the overall performance of the health service, a system that Mr. Cameron had originally sought to scrap.        

The government&rsquo;s original plan, presented in a bill to Parliament earlier this year, instantly became a political punching bag, opposed by unions, specialists&rsquo; groups, hospitals, many general practitioners and a number of prominent Liberal Democrats, who are the Conservatives&rsquo; partners in the government.        

Alarmed at the prospect that it might not pass, Mr. Cameron set up a group called the N.H.S. Future Forum to examine and report back on the bill, saying he wanted to &ldquo;pause, listen and engage.&rdquo;        

The group&rsquo;s report was published on Monday; the government&rsquo;s announcement on Tuesday was a response to its recommendations. Many interest groups said they were pleased that their main concerns appeared to have been addressed.        

Criticisms of the revised plan came from people on the right, who said the original legislation had been too diluted, and those on the left who said the government was unwise to go ahead with such a program when the health service was already being asked to make some $30 billion in efficiency savings.        

&ldquo;This is a complete humiliation for David Cameron, who has been forced to protect the health service from his own badly thought-through plans,&rdquo; said John Healey, a member of Parliament who is the Labour Party&rsquo;s health spokesman. &ldquo;The Tory-led government is reorganizing its own reorganization, wasting billions more pounds instead of focusing on patient care.&rdquo;        

Dr. Hamish Meldrum, chairman of the British Medical Association Council, said in a statement that he was happy at the government&rsquo;s changed proposal, but that it remained to be seen how the new system would work in practice. And he cautioned that &ldquo;there will need to be greater safeguards to ensure that vital services are not destabilized by unnecessary competition.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;Hanging over all this, however, is the fact that the N.H.S. is facing unprecedented financing pressures. The focus on structural care must not distract us from the task of minimizing the impact of funding cuts.&rdquo;        
