
MEXICO CITY &mdash; The former mayor of Tijuana was released from jail Tuesday after a federal judge threw out weapons charges against him, but state prosecutors immediately detained him in an investigation into the shooting death of his son&rsquo;s girlfriend.        

The attorney general for Baja California State, Rommel Moreno, told local reporters on Tuesday that a witness accused former Mayor Jorge Hank Rhon, of ordering the killing of Ang&eacute;lica Mar&iacute;a Mu&ntilde;oz, who was 24 when she was shot twice in her Tijuana apartment in August 2009.        

State prosecutors have not charged Mr. Hank Rhon in the Mu&ntilde;oz case. Their attempts to hold him without charge for 40 days, permitted under Mexican law, failed when a state judge declined to allow his detention and he was released late in the afternoon.        

The new state investigation suggests that Mr. Hank Rhon, long believed to be untouchable despite rumors, never proved, of ties to organized crime, may be losing some of his protection.        

The son of a powerful political figure, Mr. Hank Rhon built a gambling fortune in Tijuana.        

After a June 4 pre-dawn raid on the former mayor&rsquo;s enormous compound turned up 88 guns and almost 10,000 rounds of ammunition, the federal attorney general&rsquo;s office charged him with stockpiling weapons. Only 10 guns had a license, officials said.        

Baja California prosecutors said Sunday that evidence tied two of the guns found on the compound with the Tijuana killings of a used car salesman in June 2010 and a security guard in December 2009. They continue to investigate those cases.        

Judge Blanca Evelia Parra Meza ruled late Monday that the government had failed to present sufficient evidence to support the weapons charges against Mr. Hank Rhon. He had been held without bail since his arrest, and she ordered his release, along with 10 men who had been arrested at his compound, all of them apparently security guards.        

The attorney general&rsquo;s office said it would appeal the ruling.        

Mr. Hank Rhon, who was mayor between 2004 and 2007, lost a bid to become the state governor. His father was a leading politician in the opposition Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, which governed Mexico for 71 years before losing the presidency in 2000.        

National PRI leaders have said the arrest was aimed at tarnishing the party&rsquo;s reputation as it is staging a comeback.        
