
BAGHDAD &mdash; A team of six gunmen and suicide bombers dressed in police uniforms attacked a provincial council&rsquo;s offices in northeastern Iraq on Tuesday, the latest in a string of brazen assaults against police and government buildings aimed at puncturing the country&rsquo;s uneasy security.        

The assault began about 9:20 a.m. with a suicide car bomb attack at the gates of the Diyala provincial council&rsquo;s headquarters in Baquba. As police officers rushed to the scene, the other militants attacked a second checkpoint, one detonating a suicide vest and the others spraying guards and civilians with gunfire. The Interior Ministry said a second car bomb also exploded.        

By the time Iraqi security forces regained control of the compound about two hours later, four civilians and three police officers had been killed. Five of the attackers were also killed, and one was captured.        

As American forces prepare to withdraw, militants have been escalating attacks against bases, troops and convoys in an attempt to show that they are driving the United States out of Iraq. Last week, five American soldiers were killed in a rocket strike in Baghdad in the deadliest attack on the United States&rsquo; forces in two years.        

The attack on the Diyala council building resembled a far deadlier siege against a government compound in March in Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s hometown, Tikrit.        

In that attack, as many as a dozen militants dressed as security officers lobbed grenades as they stormed the Salahuddin provincial council&rsquo;s offices and took about 30 people hostage. When the resulting standoff ended, nearly 60 people had been killed, and the council building was scarred by shrapnel and bullets.        

Accounts from Baquba suggest that Tuesday&rsquo;s attack could have been far worse. No elected officials were among the dead, and security officials said the militants had not been able to storm the council headquarters.        

Still, local officials said the assault underlined the vulnerability of Iraqi security forces and demonstrated how a small group of militants could sow chaos in a heavily protected government compound despite layers of checkpoints, blast walls, police pat-downs and vehicle inspections.        

Delair Hassan, a member of the provincial council&rsquo;s security committee, said officials had been warned months ago about the possibility of an attack.        

The attacks against the council buildings in Tikrit and Baquba are part of a broader pattern of assassinations, bombings and assaults aimed at Iraqi politicians and security forces. Militants have killed scores of government officials and midlevel army and police officers in recent months. On Tuesday alone, three Iraqi soldiers and one army general were killed in attacks in Baghdad and the northern city of Mosul.        

The United States military initially said its forces had not assisted Iraqi troops in responding to the attacks beyond providing observation from helicopters, but it later corrected that account, saying a passing American patrol had helped search the council building after the attack and set up a cordon at the scene.        

The United States also said Tuesday that two American service members had been killed a day earlier on a route clearance patrol near the southern Iraqi city of Kut.        
Duraid Adnan contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an Iraqi employee of The New York Times from Baquba.
