
MILAN &mdash; Seven members of an Italian commission that assesses major risks like earthquakes have been indicted on manslaughter charges here for not adequately informing residents of the potential danger posed by the seismic activity that shook the Abruzzo region for months before the fatal earthquake that killed 309 people on April 6, 2009.        

They do not stand accused of failing to predict the earthquake; everyone agrees that would have been impossible. But prosecutors say that by playing down the risk of a major earthquake, the panel &mdash; the National Commission for the Forecast and Prevention of Major Risks &mdash; failed to uphold its mandate and did not allow the local population to make adequately informed decisions about whether to stay in their homes or move to a safer place.        

The defendants &mdash; seismologists, scientists and members of the federal Civil Protection Agency &mdash; deny the accusation. Marcello Melandri, a lawyer who is defending Enzo Boschi, president of the National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology, said his client &ldquo;always said that he couldn&rsquo;t exclude that an earthquake would come.&rdquo; Other defendants have said much the same.        

Since the indictment was handed down late last month, the blogosphere and parts of the scientific community have been decrying the case as a witch hunt and accusing the prosecutors of putting science on trial.        

Discussion of the Italian indictments was &ldquo;intense&rdquo; during meetings this week at the Southern California Earthquake Center, said its director, Thomas H. Jordan. &ldquo;We have been especially concerned that the prosecution is based on misconstrued notions about the role of scientists, which is to provide scientific information about potential earthquake hazards, and public officials, who must base their civil protection actions on this information but also on many other considerations.&rdquo;        

But some relatives of those who died in the rubble say their faith in science and scientists may have led to their deaths.        

&ldquo;I was there, I know perfectly well what I was thinking,&rdquo; said Vincenzo Vittorini, a surgeon in the picturesque town of L&rsquo;Aquila, the quake&rsquo;s epicenter, who lost his wife and his daughter when their house collapsed. Dr. Vittorini was extracted from the debris after eight hours, and his son survived because he happened to be on a field trip.        

&ldquo;I had been reassured,&rdquo; he said, by the encouraging statements some commission members gave to the news media. Without those assurances he would not have stayed in his home, he said. &ldquo;I kept my daughter at home, and no one will ever be able to feel what I feel about that decision.&rdquo;        

Dr. Vittorini&rsquo;s wife and daughter are among the 37 earthquake victims who have been recognized as injured parties in the trial, which will begin on Sept. 20.        

The crux of the accusation centers on a meeting of the Major Risks Commission six days before the earthquake struck. The consultation had been convened the day after several smaller quakes on March 30, including one of magnitude 4.1.        

Prosecutors say that the message passed on to the public in a news conference after the meeting was one of reassurance that a major quake was not on the horizon, a charge that the defendants reject.        

&ldquo;An earthquake is an unpredictable event, and the communication of that was correct. It was not reassuring, it was scientifically neutral,&rdquo; said Filippo Dinacci, a defense lawyer.        

Prosecutors also say that the message conveyed &ldquo;incomplete, imprecise and contradictory information on the nature, the causes, the potential danger and the future development of the seismic activity.&rdquo; They also accuse the commission of &ldquo;defeating the purpose&rdquo; of its mandate.        

&ldquo;You can&rsquo;t predict earthquakes,&rdquo; said the prosecutor for L&rsquo;Aquila, Alfredo Rossini. &ldquo;We all know this, but why did they tell people there was no reason to worry? Some people who might have saved themselves stayed home because they felt reassured.&rdquo;        

L&rsquo;Aquila sits in a seismic area (and had to be mostly rebuilt after the last major quake in 1703), so residents were &ldquo;used to earthquakes, and to sleeping outside in the cars in case of particularly strong quakes,&rdquo; said Roberta Galeotti, editor of the Abruzzo online news site ilcapoluogo.it.        

But after the intense seismic activity in late March, Ms. Galeotti said, &ldquo;we should have been a city on alert, with cars parked on the streets and not in garages, where many were crushed. We should have been told to stock up on medicine and water,&rdquo; she said. Instead, when the earthquake occurred shortly after 3 a.m. her family members rushed from their home with blankets and a package of cookies, with &ldquo;no idea where to go.&rdquo;        

Members of the commission have rejected the accusations.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a confused indictment,&rdquo; Mr. Dinacci said. &ldquo;On one hand they say they aren&rsquo;t accusing the commission of not predicting the earthquake, but then they accuse them of not predicting the risk of an earthquake, which as far as I&rsquo;m concerned is the same thing.&rdquo;        

Mr. Dinacci, who is representing Bernardo de Bernardinis, at the time vice president of Italy&rsquo;s Civil Protection Agency and today the president of Italy&rsquo;s Institute for Environmental Protection and Research, added, &ldquo;The indictment is a stretch, and we will prove that in court.&rdquo;        

Another defense lawyer, Alfredo Biondi, cited the case of Giuseppe Zamberletti, the former chief of Italy&rsquo;s civil protection agency. He was placed under investigation after he ordered the evacuation in 1985 of a series of towns in the Garfagnana, an area in the province of Lucca, because of unusual seismic activity there. Mr. Zamberletti, who is the current president of the Major Risks Commission but is not a defendant in this case, was accused of causing public alarm when the major earthquake never occurred. The case never made it to trial.        

&ldquo;You see, you can charge one man with one crime and another with the opposite for the same thing,&rdquo; Mr. Biondi said. In Italy, he said, &ldquo;often there&rsquo;s no punishment,&rdquo; but there are plenty of criminal charges to choose from.        
