
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Will the real Zabiullah Mujahid, mouthpiece of the Taliban movement in Afghanistan, please stand up?        

Afghan intelligence officials say he is really Hajji Ismail, a 42-year-old man from the Pakistani town of Chaman. In cellphone conversations, he insists that his real name is Zabiullah Mujahid, and that he is a middle-aged man living on the run in Afghanistan. American military intelligence officials prefer to call him the Zabiullah persona, saying that he is actually a team of Taliban operatives pretending to be the same man as they run what amounts to a media call center over the border in Pakistan.        

Whoever he may be, he has proved to be an effective communicator, as even some of his enemies acknowledge. The Taliban&rsquo;s message gets out through a number of different social media tools &mdash; cellphone calls, text messages, e-mails, postings on jihadi Web sites, Facebook accounts and, more recently, Twitter feeds. And, most important, the messages get out quickly, with the Taliban often claiming responsibility for an attack within minutes of its execution, and with just enough credible detail to be believable.        

Rarely are NATO communicators able to move with that sort of speed, hampered as they are by member nations&rsquo; competing restrictions on the release of information, as well as by a huge military bureaucracy that is not as nimble as one man, or a small staff, with cellphones &mdash; especially when truth is no obstacle.        

&ldquo;The facts are not really important to them,&rdquo; said Rear Adm. Gregory J. Smith, the former chief spokesman for NATO in Afghanistan. &ldquo;They have gotten away with that for a long time, and I would argue that is their greatest weakness as the media become more sophisticated.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mujahid stays in touch with some Afghan journalists on a nearly daily basis by cellphone, sending text messages to them and fielding calls from them. Every couple of weeks, and sometimes even more frequently, he changes his number, then sends text messages out with the new number. Signed z_m or z_mujahid, the texts go randomly to a few Afghan journalists, who then share the new number with their colleagues.        

There is another major Taliban spokesman as well, Qari Yousef Ahmadi, who concentrates mainly on southern and western Afghanistan. But Mr. Mujahid is much more active, giving the Taliban version of attacks carried out in Kandahar and through eastern and northern Afghanistan.        

Afghan journalists who talk to him regularly say they recognize his voice; he speaks Pashto with an accent from eastern Afghanistan, they say. The journalists also say they are convinced that they are talking to the same person each time, and have been for the past couple of years.        

No Western journalist has met him in person, except possibly for Nic Robertson of CNN, who conducted an on-camera interview in 2009 with someone who said he was Mr. Mujahid. The man&rsquo;s face was not shown during the interview.        

&ldquo;He is around 30, maybe a little younger, bearded but not heavily so,&rdquo; Mr. Robertson reported. &ldquo;He is slight but not weak and close to my height &mdash; a little over six foot.&rdquo;        

After that interview was broadcast, the Zabiullah Mujahid whom journalists in Afghanistan had been speaking to by cellphone repudiated it and said the interviewee was an impostor.        

One intelligence analyst said that CNN really had been talking to one of the multiple Zabiullah personalities but that the man&rsquo;s superiors were upset with the interview and decided to disown it.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s no way Zabiullah Mujahid could be one person,&rdquo; the analyst said. &ldquo;No one person could take that many calls from the media.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mujahid is at least determined to seem to be one person, and when the National Directorate of Security, the Afghan government&rsquo;s intelligence service, identified him as Mr. Ismail recently, he was indignant.        

&ldquo;The liar spokesperson expressed his views about my real name and place of work to provoke me,&rdquo; he said when reached by cellphone. &ldquo;The enemies have long tried to arrest me, but if they had such information they could have long ago. I am inside the country and living with other mujahedeen shoulder to shoulder in the jihadi trenches, not in an office nor in a foreign country&rsquo;s intelligence shelter.&rdquo;        

An American official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not allowed to discuss intelligence matters otherwise, disputed that, however. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s no question these guys are not in Afghanistan,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Most of them never have been. The last time they were in Afghanistan was probably six years ago.&rdquo;        

Reporting was contributed by Ray Rivera from Kabul and Afghan employees of The New York Times.
