
JERUSALEM &mdash; A  report  issued Tuesday shows unemployment in Gaza standing at 45.2 percent for the second half of 2010, one of the highest rates in the world, even though Israel eased its blockade of the Palestinian coastal strip in that period.        

The report, by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency, which aids registered Palestinian refugees and their descendants, shows the jobless rate up over the first half of the year, with a loss of some 8,000 jobs.        

But it also compared the second half of 2010 with the same period in 2009, a common approach for economies where many jobs are seasonal. That number shows that unemployment fell 1.09 percent, a figure more in keeping with other international analyses of the Gazan economy.        

One of the goals of Israel&rsquo;s economic embargo on Gaza, which began four years ago, was to weaken Hamas and its grip on Gaza. But most of the new jobs last year were accounted for by the public sector, meaning the Hamas government; there was only a slight increase in private commerce.        

Christopher Gunness, a spokesman for the United Nations agency, said, &ldquo;The hope was for a growth in the private sector, but exports are at a standstill.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Hamas has been able to increase public employment by at least one-fifth,&rdquo; Mr. Gunness said. &ldquo;The policy of weakening Hamas seems to have failed, but the policy has been highly successful at punishing the people of Gaza.&rdquo;        

He said that the number of Gazans coming to the agency because of special hardship, defined as earnings of $1.60 a day or less, had increased to 300,000 from 100,000 in the past four years. &ldquo;The very poorest of the poor are the hardest hit,&rdquo; Mr. Gunness said.        

The biggest source of regular income in Gaza is the Palestinian Authority, which is based in the West Bank and dominated by Fatah, the movement that is rival to Hamas. The Authority pays some 65,000 people not to work to protest Hamas&rsquo;s violent ouster of Fatah from Gaza in 2007, after Hamas won parliamentary elections the year before.        

Hamas is the next largest source of jobs, and it is growing the fastest, with some 25,000 people on its payroll.        

Recent reports by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have generally shown Gaza&rsquo;s economy to be growing. The data put out by the United Nations agency show 2008 to have had higher unemployment than the full year of 2010 &mdash; 44.9 percent versus 43.6 percent.        

Israeli officials said that the report seemed intended to paint as bleak a picture as possible. They also criticized the use of the so-called broad employment figures, which include the underemployed and those who have stopped looking for work &mdash; over the more commonly used number of those recently looking for work. The narrower number for Gaza unemployment in 2010, according to the Palestine Central Bureau of Statistics, is 37.8 percent.        
