
JERUSALEM &mdash; Zev Birger, an official in the young state of Israel who later revived and then led the Jerusalem International Book Fair, turning it into a major event on the literary calendar, died here on June 6 after being struck by a motorcycle. He was 85.        

Mr. Birger died of a head injury after being hit a few days earlier as he left a concert at the Jerusalem Theater, his son Doron said.        

A Nazi concentration camp survivor, Mr. Birger was part of a fading generation of European Jews who overcame personal calamities in the Holocaust and went on to fight for and help build the state of Israel. After rising to senior government positions in customs and commerce, he was asked by Mayor Teddy Kollek of Jerusalem to revive the book fair in 1981.        

By 1983, he was seeking ways to distinguish it from other international book fairs when, at a dinner at his home, he seized on an idea from Esther Margolis, now president and publisher of Newmarket Press in New York.        

Ms. Margolis, who felt that her young contemporaries in publishing were not being represented at the world&rsquo;s book fairs, proposed a program for promising midcareer editors who would be invited to attend a week of seminars and other events. Mr. Birger soon created an editorial fellowship program and later an agent&rsquo;s fellowship. Almost 400 editors and 70 agents from more than 20 countries are now alumni of the programs.        

As director and then chairman, he turned the book fair into a thriving biennial event. The 25th Jerusalem International Book Fair took place in February and awarded its Jerusalem Prize, for work that best promotes the freedom of the individual in society, to the British author Ian McEwan.        

Wolf Birger was born in Kovno, Lithuania, in 1926, and grew up in a cultured Zionist home where the family spoke Yiddish, Russian and German.        

After the German invasion in 1941, the family moved to one room in the Kovno ghetto. In 1944, Mr. Birger was separated from his mother and put on a cattle train to the concentration camps with his father and brother. He worked in forced labor in the camps around Dachau and was the only member of his family to survive.        

After being freed in April 1945, Mr. Birger, still a teenager, moved to Frankfurt and began helping the illegal emigration of displaced Jews to what was then the British Mandate of Palestine. He began calling himself Zev, Hebrew for wolf, and married Trudi Simon. In 1947, they settled in the port city of Haifa in what would soon become Israel.        

After working as a customs clerk and serving in a military unit protecting the port in the 1948 war for independence, he became director of customs for the new nation and moved to Jerusalem. He later held a senior post in the Ministry of Commerce.        

His memoir, &ldquo;No Time for Patience,&rdquo; was published in English in 1999 by Newmarket Press.        

In addition to Doron, Mr. Birger is survived by two other sons, Oded and Gil, and 11 grandchildren. His wife died nine years ago.        
