
Iran said it launched a satellite into orbit on Wednesday that Western aerospace experts said could be used for limited military reconnaissance and also to monitor crops and track damage from earthquakes, flooding and other natural disasters.        

It was the second time that an Iranian rocket had carried a satellite into orbit and took place more than two years after Iran joined the international space club by launching its first satellite.        

Iran released few details about the satellite, which it calls Rasad-1, or Observation-1. Western experts said it weighed about 100 pounds &mdash; meaning that the light payload and the modest rocket carrying it bore little resemblance to an intercontinental missile and its heavy warhead.        

Still, aerospace experts said the successful launching demonstrated Iranian engineers&rsquo; growing skill and contrasted with the repeated failures endured by North Korea in trying to place payloads into orbit.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a significant step forward for the Iranians,&rdquo; said Charles P. Vick, an expert on Iranian rockets at GlobalSecurity.org, a private research group in Alexandria, Va.        

Still, it did not come as a surprise to those who monitor Iran&rsquo;s efforts. &ldquo;Everybody&rsquo;s been expecting this,&rdquo; said Marcia S. Smith, founder of SpacePolicyOnline.com, a news blog in Arlington, Va.        

Mr. Vick noted that the Iranians had announced that Rasad-1 would be lofted last summer, but the mission then was delayed.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s taken them far longer than they advertised,&rdquo; Mr. Vick said in an interview.        

The reason, he added, appeared to be managerial failures and &ldquo;sanctions that have been having a significant impact on their getting foreign technology and hardware.&rdquo;        

He described the Iranian satellite as an experimental craft designed mainly for tracking the Earth&rsquo;s resources from space. But the spacecraft, he said, &ldquo;could also be used for low-resolution reconnaissance.&rdquo;        

Iranian news reports said that the Rasad-1 was built by the Malek-Ashtar University. Analysts in the American intelligence community view the university as having close ties to the Revolutionary Guard, the Islamic Republic&rsquo;s main enforcers.        

Iranian scientists have long hailed the benefits of Earth-observation satellites for tracking floods, fighting fires, gauging earthquake damage, finding evacuation routes and identifying high-risk areas.        

In February, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad announced plans to launch several Iranian-built satellites this year, including at least one for reconnaissance. He also repeated a claim that Tehran would send an Iranian astronaut into space by 2020.        

Iran placed its first satellite into orbit in February 2009. The nation&rsquo;s 5,000 rial banknote, the equivalent of 50 cents, bears the satellite&rsquo;s image. The Iranians called it a rudimentary communications craft.        

The announcement of the launching on Wednesday came on the country&rsquo;s Arabic-language television channel, Al-Alam.        

The channel said a rocket known as Safir, or messenger, fired the satellite into an orbit with a maximum height of 162 miles. &ldquo;It is capable of photographing the Earth,&rdquo; the report said of the satellite.        

The channel said Rasad-1 would circle the Earth 15 times a day and should operate for two months. Iranian media reports have said the Safir rocket can carry a satellite weighing 110 pounds into elliptical orbits as high as 280 miles.        

Western nations fear that Iran is trying to develop a missile capability under cover of its space program that could also threaten to deliver nuclear warheads.        

Iran denies that it has any ambition to develop an atom bomb and asserts that both its space and nuclear programs are peaceful.        

But it is openly developing a group of increasingly large rockets. In theory, the biggest might eventually be powerful enough to hurl not only satellites into space, but also warheads between continents.        
