
JERUSALEM &mdash; The offices of the French news agency in the Jordanian capital, Amman, were attacked on Wednesday by about 10 men who broke windows and destroyed furniture, a day after several hundred people demonstrated against the bureau, accusing it of harming the kingdom through its dispatches.        

The agency, Agence France-Presse, angered some loyalists of King Abdullah II when it reported on Monday that his convoy was attacked with rocks and bottles during a visit to Tafileh, a long-neglected tribal area 125 miles south of the capital. Similar reports appeared in other news outlets, including The New York Times, although they were less specific about whether the assault was on the convoy itself.        

The royal court denied that the convoy was attacked, a denial that was carried by the agency in its subsequent reports.        

The longtime Amman bureau chief of Agence France-Presse, Randa Habib, said in a telephone interview that she had received a phone call accusing her of seeking to harm the country&rsquo;s security. &ldquo;We will make you pay,&rdquo; she quoted the caller as saying. Ms. Habib reported the threats to the authorities but no protection was provided.        

A colleague, Kamal Taha, was in the office when the attack occurred on Wednesday but managed to escape. A neighbor called the police.        

The demonstration on Tuesday was led by Yahya Abu Saud, a member of Parliament, who called for the bureau to be shut down.        

Ms. Habib said Prime Minister Marouf al-Bakhit called to express his concern over what happened.        

Ms. Habib, who has been the agency&rsquo;s bureau chief since 1987 and is the author of a book on King Abdullah and his father, King Hussein, was singled out for censure before when she reported on tribal complaints of corruption by the monarchy. A French citizen of Lebanese origin who is married to a Jordanian, she is known for her reporting enterprise and independence.        

Jordan has been far less affected by the uprisings in the region than many of its neighbors, like Syria and Egypt. But demonstrations calling for transparency and democracy have led to promises of change. The king has increased salaries and pensions, and promised that in the future the government would be elected rather than appointed.        
