
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; Jeremy Ractliffe, a South African businessman left holding a bag of mysterious diamonds given to him by the supermodel Naomi Campbell, was found not guilty here on Wednesday of charges that he violated laws against possessing uncut gems.        

So ended a sideshow to a far more serious matter, the trial at The Hague of the former Liberian dictator Charles G. Taylor, accused of murders, rapes, kidnappings, mutilations and the use of child soldiers during brutal wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone from 1989 to 2003 that killed 250,000 people.        

The diamonds were gifts, given in the afterglow of a delightful evening. In September 1997, Nelson Mandela, who was then the president of South Africa, gave a charity dinner at the presidential residence in Pretoria. Among the notable guests were Ms. Campbell; Mr. Taylor; the actress Mia Farrow; the musician Quincy Jones; a Pakistani cricketer and politician, Imran Khan; and the future Mrs. Mandela, Graca Machel.        

Late that night, two unidentified men came to Ms. Campbell&rsquo;s room, awakening her to present a small pouch. Testifying at The Hague last August, she said that she did not open the gift until morning and that she had been unimpressed with the few &ldquo;very small, dirty-looking stones&rdquo; inside.        

Ms. Farrow remembered things somewhat differently, testifying that Ms. Campbell had arrived at breakfast the next morning &ldquo;excited and happy&rdquo; about receiving &ldquo;a huge diamond&rdquo; from Mr. Taylor.        

The testimony was relevant because Mr. Taylor is accused of carrying &ldquo;blood diamonds&rdquo; as he traveled throughout Africa, hoping to exchange the uncut stones for weapons, an accusation that Mr. Taylor denies.        

Celebrity appearances at the trial in The Hague were a contrast to the many victims of atrocities who told their stories in court, showing how their limbs were amputated or describing how loved ones were eviscerated. Ms. Campbell, not a major witness for the prosecution, was nevertheless a huge draw for the news media.        

Among the revelations in the testimony were the disposition of the diamonds. Ms. Campbell said she gave them the following day to a friend, Mr. Ractliffe, who was then chief executive of the Nelson Mandela Children&rsquo;s Fund.        

Put on the spot, Mr. Ractliffe said he had secretly stowed the three gems in a safe for 13 years, afraid that the gift would damage reputations and that it might be illegal. He eventually turned the diamonds over to the police and resigned as a trustee of the charity. In October, he was arrested for having held the uncut jewels.        

But on Wednesday the prosecutors did not seem well prepared to pursue their case. As evidence that the stones were indeed diamonds, they entered an affidavit from an expert. But Magistrate Renier Boshoff insisted that the testimony be rendered in person. &ldquo;You can&rsquo;t cross-examine a statement,&rdquo; he said, according to local news reports.        

The magistrate declared that the state had not proved its case.        

Afterward, Mr. Ractliffe, 74, told reporters, &ldquo;I did what I did for what I felt were totally valid reasons,&rdquo; adding that &ldquo;I have always thought I was innocent, and it was very nice to have this proven.&rdquo;        

The diamonds now belong to the South African government. Mr. Taylor remains on trial at The Hague.        
Barry Bearak reported from Johannesburg, and J. David Goodman from New York.
