
KHIRBET AL-JOUZ, Syria &mdash; Hundreds of displaced Syrians were gathered at a makeshift refugee camp in a plum orchard near the Turkish border on Thursday, growing increasingly anxious after Syrian security forces attacked two nearby towns.        

The attacks on the towns of Shighr and Armala, just a few miles away, represent the security forces&rsquo; closest advance to the border with Turkey, which is strung with a necklace of refugee settlements similar to the clump of tents and cars here in the fields and orchards of Khirbet al-Jouz.        

Syrian forces entered the two farming towns, opening fire in the streets and driving still more people to seek safety across the border with Turkey, or within sight of the border, according to local residents and human rights activists. Turkish officials say they have taken in more than 8,000 refugees since fighting began in Idlib Province about two weeks ago.        

Many here in the country&rsquo;s restive northwest fear that forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad will continue advancing toward the border; the areas closest to it have been an unofficial haven since violence began to flare in the region.        

Abu Mohamed, 30, fled from Jisr al-Shoughour when the military attacked the town last weekend. On June 4 and June 5 military defectors, armed antigovernment factions or a mix of both fought with security forces there.        

&ldquo;They don&rsquo;t need to come into the valley to kill us, they could just shoot from the hillside,&rdquo; he said of the Syrian military. &ldquo;They burned all our fields, killed our animals and raped women. They will do anything.&rdquo;        

As sunset approached, a tinny warning blared from a loudspeaker atop the mosque in the village of Khirbet al-Jouz, across a cow pasture from the tent city. The army was getting closer, a prayer leader said, and people should be prepared.        

&ldquo;Every day they get closer to here, and I am afraid they will arrive soon,&rdquo; Mohamed Ahmed, 28, said as he smoked a cigarette in front of a tent. He said he and his family fled the town of Armala when security forces attacked with helicopter gunships, armored personnel carriers and machine guns.        

&ldquo;They want to get rid of everything that is here,&rdquo; he said, gesturing to the settlement around him. &ldquo;They want to bury it.&rdquo;        

The sound of explosions from the attack on Shighr, which is six miles away, echoed through the valleys at dawn on Thursday, people on both sides of the border said. Later in the morning, residents of Shighr and Armala, which is only three miles away, streamed into the camp, a collection of tents created with blankets and tarp. Many quickly crossed into Turkey.        

Those who are allowed to cross the border are whisked to one of several refugee camps administered by the Turkish Red Crescent, where they stay in neat rows of white tents. Some of those who remain in the informal settlements here on the Syrian side of the border are unwilling to submit to the regimen of a formal refugee camp, where they cannot bring cars or livestock and face restrictions on phone calls and family visits, according to human rights activists. Refugees in Turkey are also not permitted to speak to the media.        

Families here in the settlement outside Khirbet al-Jouz struggle to find food and shelter, living off a mixture of donated supplies and unripe fruit plucked from the orchards. The camp teems with children who play in the dirt and sleep under the trees. Young men dart across the fields on motorcycles or meander slowly down dusty paths with livestock brought with them from their hometowns.        

Selwa Nawaf and her husband, Nazir Abu Khaled, arrived with nothing. An elderly couple, they said they had fled Jisr al-Shoughour with only a copy of the Koran after plainclothes paramilitary forces smashed in their door and set fire to their house.        

Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu of Turkey said Thursday that his country would send food, water, medicine and other aid to the refugees living in camps on the Syrian side of the border, The Associated Press reported. The plan was announced after a meeting with a Syrian envoy. &ldquo;We have taken precautions, and humanitarian aid will be supplied for around 10,000 people who are waiting on the Syrian side of the border,&rdquo; Mr. Davutoglu said, according to the news agency.        

Despite the brutal government crackdown and the hardships they face living in the open, some people in the camp spoke passionately about the uprising against Mr. Assad, whose family has ruled for four decades.        

&ldquo;A hard revolution is better than an easy revolution,&rdquo; said one young man, who gave his name as Omar, as he led a cow up a steep road. Another, who said his name was Mohamed, had &ldquo;Youth of the Revolution&rdquo; written across his forearm with a black marker.        

Mr. Mohamed of Jisr al-Shoughour said he would try to take his family over the border into Turkey if Syrian forces attacked the valley, but otherwise he would stay here &ldquo;until Bashar leaves.&rdquo; He was living with more than a dozen relatives of all ages, sleeping in a tent and their car.        

&ldquo;We want to stay here,&rdquo; he said, gesturing to the steep slopes on each side of the border. &ldquo;Between these two mountains we can live in freedom. It is not much freedom, but it is much better than Bashar.&rdquo;        
