
VANCOUVER, British Columbia &mdash; Canada&rsquo;s grand obsession, hockey, led to great national embarrassment when the defeat of the Vancouver Canucks set off one of the country&rsquo;s worst episodes of rioting in recent decades.        

Shortly before the crushing end of the final game of the Stanley Cup playoffs Wednesday night, with the home team trailing the Boston Bruins, 4-0, angry fans embarked on a four-hour rampage through the heart of the city, setting cars ablaze, attacking firefighters, looting and burning stores, and forcing frightened department store employees to take refuge in bathrooms for hours.        

On Thursday, while workers replaced windows and covered storefronts in plywood and hundreds of volunteers picked up debris, a nation that takes pride in its reputation for peaceful coexistence wrestled with questions about possible flaws in the national character.        

Some feared that the good will that Vancouver had created with its successful hosting of the Winter Olympic Games last year had been lost. Many wondered why the police, who had successfully kept larger crowds under control despite some tense moments during the Olympics, had lost control so badly this time.        

&ldquo;We were supposed to wake today hung over from a Stanley Cup victory,&rdquo; Ian Mulgrew, a columnist for The Vancouver Sun, wrote Thursday. &ldquo;Instead the city opens its bloodshot eyes to the much sadder reality of a tarnished reputation.&rdquo;        

Hockey riots are not unknown in Canada. In 1994 after the Canucks lost the Stanley Cup to the New York Rangers, rioting broke out in Vancouver. Montreal seems particularly prone to them. But the intensity and scale of the violence in Vancouver on Wednesday, swiftly captured by cellphone and camera users and disseminated through the Internet, dwarfed previous outbursts. There were no official damage estimates on Thursday, although the news media reported it was easily in the millions of dollars.        

Mayor Gregor Robertson promised an inquiry but refrained from criticizing the police.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ll definitely look at all of the issues that unfolded last night and what gaps emerged as the hooligans ransacked the city,&rdquo; he said, speaking at an intersection that 12 hours earlier was the scene of random assaults, looting and cars in flames. &ldquo;The scale and organization of the criminals was a difficult challenge.&rdquo;        

While there was widespread property damage, injuries were relatively few. The Vancouver Coastal health authority said that about 170 people had been treated at two hospitals and that 4 of them remained hospitalized Thursday afternoon. The police said the injured included five police officers.        

About 100 people were reported arrested, but that number was expected to grow. Many of the rioters made no effort to hide their identities, and the police have asked the public to send in videos and photos.        

Christopher J. Schneider, a sociologist at the University of British Columbia who studies social media and crime, said that many rioters described their exploits on Facebook and Twitter, often including information about their identities.        

&ldquo;Bragging about these things in cyberspace and detailing their criminal exploits is really going to catch up with people,&rdquo; he said.        

The police had repeatedly assured the city that their $1.3 million security plan, which included closing all downtown liquor stores the afternoon before the last two games, would avoid a repetition of the 1994 riot, which was much smaller but nevertheless caused more than $1 million in damage.        

Jim Chu, the chief constable of the Vancouver Police Department, rejected suggestions that his force had been ill prepared.        

&ldquo;When there&rsquo;s a large number of criminals and anarchists that have a common purpose and intent to break the law, it&rsquo;s very difficult to stop that,&rdquo; he told reporters Thursday. &ldquo;The crowd was quite large, and it was hard to get in to do anything effectively.&rdquo;        

A crowd estimated at 100,000 people had been watching the game on giant televisions outdoors in free public viewing areas downtown.        

The police were not the only ones in difficulty &mdash; some fires went unchecked for hours after firefighters were attacked or had their hoses slashed and had to retreat.        

As looters and vandals rampaged through the Hudson&rsquo;s Bay Company department store, whose white terra cotta facade dominates the city&rsquo;s shopping district, some employees locked themselves for hours in a upper-floor bathroom until they were rescued by firefighters. An amateur video showed a man outside the store who was trying to stop the looters being thrown to the ground and kicked by the crowd.        

Not far from the Sutton Place Hotel, the National Hockey League&rsquo;s headquarters during the Stanley Cup finals, people ran through the street with arms full of electronics. A reporter was offered a camera, price tags still attached, for purchase.        

The inability of the police to deal with the violence contrasted sharply with their performance at the Olympics, where, backed by officers from across Canada, they successfully controlled much larger crowds and some politically motivated, violent demonstrations.        

Irwin M. Cohen, the director of the criminology department at University of the Fraser Valley in Abbotsford, British Columbia, said that the police probably avoided additional violence by initially limiting their numbers and their use of force. But he added that they might have stationed reinforcements from neighboring municipal forces and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police in the city rather than waiting to summon them during the riot.        

&ldquo;We were just on the world stage during the Olympics, and people were speaking highly of Vancouver,&rdquo; said Geoff Matthews, 34, who lives downtown. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a great city and country to live in, and to see this, it&rsquo;s heartbreaking.&rdquo;        
Jeff Z. Klein reported from Vancouver, and Ian Austen from Ottawa.
