
SANTIAGO, Chile &mdash; A white gas mask hanging from her neck, Paula Ba&ntilde;ados strode side by side with 30,000 other marchers through this capital one recent Friday, a determined look on her face.        

&ldquo;Patagonia without dams!&rdquo; Ms. Ba&ntilde;ados, 19, shouted with the others, pumping a fist in the air.        

&ldquo;The government is saying we will be left without energy, but it&rsquo;s a lie,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;They are just trying to scare us. But we won&rsquo;t be scared away, because we know we&rsquo;re right.&rdquo;        

By the time Ms. Ba&ntilde;ados reached Chile&rsquo;s presidential palace, some demonstrators had begun hurling stones and pieces of wood at the armored police vehicles. As sirens blared, the police responded by firing water cannons on the crowd, driving protesters back.        

Other protests took place in several more Chilean cities. In what has become a surprising national movement, organizers have mounted large protests for several weeks since a government environmental commission in May approved the $3.2 billion HidroAys&eacute;n dam complex in a pristine region of Patagonia, known for breathtaking glaciers and lakes, that draws thousands of tourists a year.        

The protest movement, which has resulted in 28 police officers&rsquo; being injured and more than $100,000 in damage to public property, has rattled the government of President Sebasti&aacute;n Pi&ntilde;era. His approval rating fell to 36 percent in May from 41 percent in April, in part because of the outcry over HidroAys&eacute;n, according to Adimark, a Santiago-based research group.        

While the government supports expanding hydroelectric power production, more than 60 percent of Chileans are against HidroAys&eacute;n, polls show. After the commission&rsquo;s decision, now the fight turns to the 1,912-kilometer (about 1,200-mile) transmission line yet to be approved. Many Chileans consider Patagonia a national treasure, and the battle to stop the project has inspired people to join the anti-dam cause to an extent that other environmental protest movements in South America have not.        

HidroAys&eacute;n is an especially tense subject in Chile because the country, more than its neighbors, is struggling to secure energy supplies to keep up with its economic growth. Chile will need to double its electricity capacity generation over the next 10 to 15 years, according to government officials and private energy analysts.        

Chile has little oil or natural gas of its own. Importing gas became unreliable after Argentina began reneging on its commitments to ship gas to its neighbor starting in 2004. After the earthquake in Japan this year, Chile&rsquo;s mining and energy minister, Laurence Golborne, said it would be &ldquo;very difficult&rdquo; now to build a nuclear plant, given fears that the quake raised about Chile&rsquo;s own earthquake-prone geology.        

Government officials say more energy is needed to raise the economic level of poorer Chileans, and to lower electricity prices, which in southern Chile average about twice those in Brazil.        

More energy also will be needed to expand Chile&rsquo;s mining sector &mdash; the engine of Chile&rsquo;s economy, said James Brick, an analyst with Wood Mackenzie, an energy consultancy.        

Brazil has embraced hydroelectric power, which produces about 80 percent of the country&rsquo;s electricity. Chile produces about 40 percent of its energy from hydroelectric power. But HidroAys&eacute;n, a planned complex of five dams on two rivers, would produce 18,430 gigawatts a year, which was about 35 percent of Chile&rsquo;s total consumption in 2008. It would also flood a large part of a region dominated by national parks and reserves, say people opposed to the dams.        

&ldquo;This project is the tip of the spear to convert our Patagonia into a true service patio for energy generation,&rdquo; said Luis Rend&oacute;n, coordinator of Acci&oacute;n Ecol&oacute;gica, an environmental group.        

Those opposing the dams say the government should focus on improving energy efficiency and boosting capacity for nonconventional renewable fuels like wind, solar and geothermal power.        

&ldquo;Compared to Brazil or Argentina, Chile is doing very little to incentivize renewables,&rdquo; said Roberto Rom&aacute;n, an associate professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Chile. &ldquo;In 5 to 10 years, solar options will be cheaper than HidroAys&eacute;n.&rdquo;        

Aaron Nelsen and Pascale Bonnefoy contributed reporting.
