
BAGHDAD &mdash; For the second time in two days, Iraqi security forces came under attack by a suicide bomber when an ambulance packed with explosives blew up outside a police headquarters on Wednesday in Diyala Province, north of Baghdad.        

The explosion killed at least 5 people and wounded 76, according to Duler al-Hassan, the deputy of the security committee of the Diyala Provincial Council, although other news reports said up to 12 people had died. Part of the building was leveled in the blast.        

The bomb left a crater nearly seven feet across, indicating a charge of about 450 pounds of explosives, according to a person in the explosives division of the Iraqi police. A witness, Saad al-Qiasi, said the ambulance was moving very quickly toward the main entrance of the Facilities Protection Service building in Baquba, the provincial capital, driven by a &ldquo;bearded man with a dark face.&rdquo;        

Inside the building, Imram Ahmed, an employee, described the blast as a &ldquo;death storm.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We felt that life was over and it was Judgment Day,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Everything collapsed.&rdquo;        

The shock waves reached a nearby maternity hospital, where Najeeba Saad, a patient, said pregnant women panicked.        

An intelligence officer in Diyala said that the police had reports of four vehicles equipped with explosives in the city as early as two weeks ago, but that they had failed to prevent the attack.        

&ldquo;What happened today shows that security measures were not good,&rdquo; the officer said, speaking on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to brief reporters. He added that the police were still searching for the remaining three cars.        

In a second, unrelated attack, a suicide bomber wearing an explosive belt blew himself up near a convoy carrying a provincial politician on a visit to pilgrims marching to commemorate the Shiite holiday of Arbaeen.  The blast killed 2 people and wounded 15, including Sadiq al-Husseini, vice president of the Diyala Provincial Council, and four of his bodyguards.        

On Tuesday, a suicide bomber blew himself up among a crowd of police recruits in Tikrit, the hometown of Saddam Hussein, killing at least 49 people, the worst single attack in Iraq since late October.        

Violence over all has ebbed, but there remains a steady trickle of deadly attacks, most often focused on security forces, government officials or, in recent months, Iraq&rsquo;s Christian minority.        

The three-month gap since the last major attack on a single target &mdash; the siege of a Baghdad church that left nearly 60 people dead &mdash; demonstrates the progress made by Iraq security forces as American troops prepare to withdraw at the end of this year, said Lt. Gen. Robert W. Cone, deputy commanding general for operations of American forces in Iraq. Attacks in 2010 dropped by 20 percent from the previous year, despite political uncertainly and the drawdown of American troops to fewer than 50,000, from twice that figure in 2009, the general said.        

Still, for Iraqis each attack leaves new suffering and renewed anger that the government is unable to protect them, along with speculation that some members of the security forces are conspiring with the attackers.        

Security forces near Baquba came under attack on Jan. 3 when a car carrying 300 pounds of explosives blew up outside an intelligence compound, killing 2 passers-by and wounding 16, many of them girls from a nearby school.        

The city, which is the capital of Diyala Province and was a stronghold of Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, a Sunni extremist group, remains one of the more dangerous places in Iraq, although violence has dropped there as well.        

Also in Iraq on Wednesday, gunmen opened fire on a group of Iranian pilgrims in Kabashi, in Diyala near the Iranian border, wounding six. The pilgrims were headed toward the Shiite holy city of Karbala in commemoration of Arbaeen.        
An Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Diyala Province.
