
KHIRBET AL-JOUZ, Syria &mdash; Jamil Saeb stared intently into the bluish light of his laptop screen, feverishly editing video as antigovernment chants rose up the hillside from the makeshift refugee camp on the valley floor below.        

The air was thick with cigarette smoke inside the concrete shack that he and a group of friends had transformed into a revolutionary media center, one bare room whose floors were covered with thin mattresses strewn with digital cameras, laptops, modems and a tangle of cords.        

There have been few outside witnesses to the three-month popular uprising against the Assad family&rsquo;s 40-year rule of Syria, which has unfolded behind a rolling Internet blackout and efforts to bar foreign journalists from the country. The world has depended largely on online videos of both protests and the government&rsquo;s violent crackdown, which activists say has left more than 10,000 jailed and over 1,300 dead.        

Many of those videos stream through this bare-bones media center in a hillside olive grove near the border with Turkey, where a group of a dozen revolutionaries-turned-refugees work, eat and sleep.        

&ldquo;We try to capture all the crimes committed by the government to show to the global media,&rdquo; said Mr. Saeb, 34, who fled here last week after security forces attacked his hometown, Jisr al-Shoughour. They also recorded the testimonies of six army officers who had recently defected and fled for the border.        

It is a risky mission that requires a modicum of technical skill and a great deal of stealth. Last week, three of their colleagues disappeared while filming a military operation in the village of Al Sarmaniyah.        

&ldquo;We have to hide, because as far as the security forces are concerned we are all terrorists,&rdquo; Mr. Saeb said. &ldquo;They think we are like Osama bin Laden.&rdquo;        

Most of the videos they produce are shot in their region, the poor and neglected rural northwest, as well as the busy streets of the Mediterranean port of Latakia. Their work is part of a patchwork of YouTube channels and Facebook groups, with names like SyrianRevolution, that have helped convey their country&rsquo;s historic unrest to the outside world.        

The operation here, which started in March, has grown in importance in the last two weeks, since Syrian forces moved into the region with tanks, artillery and helicopter gunships. By this weekend, the activists had loaded more than 250 videos onto their YouTube channel, Freedom4566, which have been viewed more than 220,000 times.        

Hiding behind shuttered windows, down dark alleys or on hilltops high above besieged towns, the activists shoot video of the security forces as they push the violent crackdown across Syria&rsquo;s rural northwest. The men (none of the activists in the media center are women) upload their videos to social media sites like Facebook and YouTube, which Mr. Saeb praises as &ldquo;the most realistic.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;It is like watching the security forces live,&rdquo; he said.        

That was especially true on Saturday, when security forces moved into Badama, a town of 10,000 about five miles from the border, with tanks, armored personnel carriers, busloads of plainclothes forces, and snipers, said a witness reached by phone.        

Most residents of Badama fled to Turkey in recent days, but on Saturday, cyberactivists rushed there to take video of the military&rsquo;s forces as they rolled in.        

Their cameras captured armored trucks whizzing through the streets and fires burning the valley&rsquo;s slender evergreens, which they said were set ablaze by the army. By afternoon the smoke could also be seen from the tent city below the media center.        

Life for the activists was not always like this, they said.        

For many, their cameras started to roll at the dawn of the protest movement in mid-March. Mr. Saeb used to record protests and uploaded the video using a dial-up modem. That was until he lost Internet service several weeks ago when the government cut it off in Jisr al-Shoughour and the surrounding countryside, he said.        

He and the others then moved to the border zone. Here, people are as likely to speak Turkish as Arabic, and cellphones are as likely to pick up a signal from Turkcell as from Syriatel, a telecom giant owned until recently by a cousin of President Bashar al-Assad, which cut off mobile Internet 3G service here weeks ago.        

Now that they are refugees they live for their media work. Their thin mattresses serve as both bed and office, and some go for days without leaving the tiny building.        
Daniel Etter contributed reporting.
