
BAGHDAD &mdash; Inside a crumbling Baghdad apartment building, past spouting drainpipes and up a gloomy staircase, a tiny revolution is playing out in oil and acrylic paint.        

In a studio lighted by one fluorescent bulb, a 34-year-old artist named Haleem Kasim paints images of war and pain almost unknown in Iraqi art before the American invasion, and seldom seen in the years since. Black streaks slash across his chaotic canvases. Faces howl. Ghostly hands grasp at something unseen. &ldquo;I used to paint the happy life &mdash; nature and things like plants and roses to make me happy,&rdquo; Mr. Kasim said. &ldquo;I thought there was a pretty life waiting for me. The environment around you forces you to change.&rdquo;        

A new generation of Iraqi artists, one molded by bloodshed and occupation, is finding its voice in a place reshaped by eight years of war. They grew up under Saddam Hussein and stayed in Iraq through the killing and mayhem that scattered hundreds of Iraq&rsquo;s most prominent artists into exile in Europe, Jordan and America. &ldquo;Young Iraqis are able to create a new kind of painting to fill this vacuum,&rdquo; said Mohammed al-Kanani, the head of Iraq&rsquo;s high committee for the arts. &ldquo;They are a window.&rdquo;        

At least three new art colleges have opened in northern and southern Iraq in the past few years. Applications to Baghdad art schools have risen by 25 percent since 2008. Young artists are setting up studios in neighborhoods where militants once carried out kidnappings and executions.        

But they are straining against the same forces that stifled a youth-led protest movement earlier this year: a calcified political and social elite that wants to control the country&rsquo;s narrative. While the fall of Mr. Hussein gave artists a new freedom to paint what they want, including once-forbidden political subjects, the artists say they are still rebuked, even sometimes intimidated, by the artistic and political establishment for expressing a grim vision of Iraq. Their elders would prefer them to avoid uncomfortable subjects like the corruption and violence that continues to plague the country.        

&ldquo;Galleries and committees stopped giving me prizes,&rdquo; said Mr. Kasim, whose art darkened after he saw a double car bombing outside his home in 2006. &ldquo;They always ask me to make a painting for decoration, that pleases people. They didn&rsquo;t see what we saw. They don&rsquo;t have the suffering we have inside.&rdquo;        

The pressure to conform only adds to a list of frustrations unsurprising in a country emerging from years of war; artists say they have a hard time finding good-paying work or well-heeled patrons. Basim Shakir, 24, is one of those testing the bounds of free expression in Iraq&rsquo;s tenuous democracy &mdash; so far with limited success. He has won prizes outside the country for his realistic portraits of an Iraqi woman begging in the street and a boy with a prosthetic leg selling cigarettes. In 2008, he decided to make a more pointed statement, and painted a group of children tearing up a campaign poster with the logo of one of Iraq&rsquo;s leading political alliances.        

Mr. Shakir said his painting was briefly shown inside Iraq&rsquo;s Parliament before offended lawmakers demanded that it be taken down. A few weeks later, he said, friends with connections to the police began warning him of threats against his life. Mr. Shakir said he fled to Syria for several months. &ldquo;I am not afraid,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I will continue painting what I see.&rdquo;        

Even Mr. Kanani, who oversees about 2,000 students in one of Baghdad&rsquo;s leading art colleges, said he tried to steer his students away from subjects like death and conflict. That kind of art does not help, and it just does not sell, he tells students. Why focus on the killing?        

Walking through a student gallery recently, he frowned at a haunting relief of screaming ceramic faces molded into the shape of the Iraqi map. This was not good art, he said. He preferred a nearby painting of women celebrating their independence through a trip to a beauty salon. &ldquo;We need beauty and happiness,&rdquo; he explained.        
Yasir Ghazi and Duraid Adnan contributed reporting.
