
WASHINGTON &mdash; As the Obama administration nears a crucial decision on how rapidly to withdraw combat forces from Afghanistan, high-ranking officials say that Al Qaeda&rsquo;s original network in the region has been crippled, providing a rationale for an accelerated reduction of troops.        

The officials said the intense campaign of drone strikes and other covert operations in Pakistan &mdash; most dramatically the raid that killed Osama bin Laden &mdash; had left Al Qaeda paralyzed, with its leaders either dead or pinned down in the frontier area near Afghanistan. Of 30 prominent members of the terrorist organization in the region identified by intelligence agencies as targets, 20 have been killed in the last year and a half, they said, reducing the threat they pose.        

Their confidence, these officials said, was buttressed by information found in Bin Laden&rsquo;s compound in Pakistan. They said the trove revealed disarray within Al Qaeda&rsquo;s leadership, with a frustrated Bin Laden indicating that he could no longer direct terrorist attacks by lieutenants who feared for their own lives.        

The American success in the counterterrorism campaign would seem to bolster arguments for a swift withdrawal from Afghanistan &mdash; an issue the administration is currently examining. The officials emphasized that Mr. Obama had not yet made a determination on that question.        

Fighting Al Qaeda, they noted, was the main reason Mr. Obama agreed to deploy 30,000 more troops last year, even as he adopted a broader, more troop-intensive and time-consuming strategy of making key towns in Afghanistan safe from the Taliban and helping the Afghans to build up security forces and a better-functioning government.        

The focus on progress against Al Qaeda was also a counter to arguments made by Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates and other military officials in recent days that the initial reduction of troops should be modest, and that American combat pressure should be maintained as long as possible so that the gains from the surge in troops are not sacrificed.        

The military has been pressing for a plan under which only a few thousands troops out of the 100,000 currently in Afghanistan would come home immediately, with the bulk of the 30,000 troops sent last year remaining for another year or more.        

The officials declined to discuss Mr. Obama&rsquo;s views on how many troops should be withdrawn, or how quickly. But their analysis of the counterterrorism operations clearly reflected conclusions presented to the president as the deliberations over force levels reach their final stage. The conclusions would seem to give Mr. Obama room to justify a more accelerated withdrawal than the plan sought by the Pentagon.        

The White House appears to be moving swiftly to conclude the internal debate, with officials saying that the president may announce a decision as early as next week, avoiding the kind of drawn-out deliberations that preceded Mr. Obama&rsquo;s decision in late 2009 to increase troop levels in Afghanistan by 30,000.        

Mr. Gates, in an interview on Friday, said: &ldquo;This was a much more abbreviated process. Nobody wanted to go through what we went through in the fall of 2009.&rdquo;        

In the 18 months since then, one official said, Mr. Obama has developed strong views about what has worked in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The infusion of troops into Afghanistan, he said, had broken the momentum of the Taliban, which in 2009 had made alarming inroads toward its goal of toppling the Afghan government.        

But the success in singling out terrorists in neighboring Pakistan has been far more striking, with another official saying that the United States was &ldquo;poised&rdquo; to defeat Al Qaeda in what was once its most thriving haven. The organization could no longer use that region as a &ldquo;launching pad for attacks,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The safe haven is a misnomer now,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;It is anything but safe for Al Qaeda.&rdquo;        

Officials acknowledge that worldwide, Al Qaeda is far from broken. They consider Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula to be the most immediate threat to the United States homeland, hatching plots from its base in Yemen like the attempt to blow up a jetliner over Detroit on Christmas Day in 2009.        

The recent success against Al Qaeda also does not guarantee that its militants will not take root again in Afghanistan, particularly as the United States turns security over to a shaky Afghan government. And a fast reduction of troops could allow the Taliban, which is stalled but not destroyed, to regain power it recently lost to the surge.        

David E. Sanger, Thom Shanker and Eric Schmitt contributed reporting.
