
The prosecutor of the International Criminal Court said this month that evidence was emerging that Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi had authorized his soldiers to rape Libyan women, an assertion that seemed to support months of rumors about a brutal, continuing campaign.        

&ldquo;We have information that there was a policy to rape in Libya those who were against the government,&rdquo; the prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, said at a recent news conference. There is evidence, he said, that anti-impotence drugs were bought in bulk and supplied to soldiers. In some parts of Libya, he said, there may have been hundreds of victims.        

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo cautioned that these were only allegations, however, and human rights investigators have since raised questions about the assertions.        

Amnesty International said its researchers had not turned up &ldquo;significant&rdquo; evidence to support the claim of mass rapes. And M. Cherif Bassiouni, chairman of a United Nations commission investigating human rights violations in Libya, said he and his team had so far interviewed only one victim and had been told about a handful of other cases.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m not saying it isn&rsquo;t true,&rdquo; he said in an interview. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m saying I don&rsquo;t have the evidence for it yet.&rdquo;        

Some confusion was to be expected: it is notoriously difficult to investigate allegations of sexual violence in war zones, where traumatized victims already burdened with the stigma of rape remain vulnerable to renewed attacks. But in Libya, infighting among doctors and other health workers in rebel-held areas who are trying to investigate rapes has deepened the uncertainties.        

They have criticized one another, squabbled about how to conduct a proper investigation and argued about whether there were any rapes at all.        

The claims of widespread sexual violence have been cited by foreign officials calling for Colonel Qaddafi to step down.        

In a recent statement, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton cited the allegations by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, and said that Colonel Qaddafi and other leaders in the region were &ldquo;trying to divide the people by using violence against women and rape as tools of war.&rdquo;        

Much of the controversy &mdash; as well as the early, unconfirmed evidence of mass rapes &mdash; has centered on the work of a Libyan psychologist in Benghazi, Dr. Seham Sergewa.        

Dr. Sergewa said that she had identified at least 259 victims of rape from more than 60,000 responses to surveys she and other volunteers distributed over several weeks in eastern Libya and along the Tunisian border. She said she had personally interviewed 140 rape victims.        

But other doctors have attacked her research and methods, saying it seems unlikely that she could have distributed so many surveys, even in the best of times. The doctors, including the head of Benghazi&rsquo;s Psychiatric Hospital, Dr. Ali M. Elroey, say she has been unwilling to open her research for peer review.        

&ldquo;I find it a bit exaggerated,&rdquo; Dr. Elroey said in an interview at the hospital, where Dr. Sergewa, until recently, kept a small office. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think in three weeks you can distribute that many fliers.&rdquo;        

Dr. Sergewa&rsquo;s colleagues have also criticized her for talking to the news media. &ldquo;The rape question is highly sensitive everywhere in the world, and even more so in a conservative society like ours,&rdquo; said Essam Gheriani, a psychologist who is leading one of several efforts to help victims of sexual violence.        

The attention is discouraging victims from coming forward, Mr. Gheriani said, and &ldquo;asking for the help they should be asking for.&rdquo; But others said that the opposite was true and that media attention could encourage women to report the attacks.        

As researchers fight among themselves, unconfirmed accounts of sexual violence continue to circulate. Rebel officials said they had discovered condoms and packets of Viagra in tanks and other vehicles captured from Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s soldiers. Many people say they have seen cellphone videos of rapes, though such videos have been hard to locate &mdash; because, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s opponents assert, cellphone users quickly deleted them to protect the women.        
Lobna el-Gerbi contributed reporting from Benghazi, Libya.
