
LONDON &mdash; Prime Minister David Cameron on Wednesday proposed a radical reorganization of England&rsquo;s health care system, introducing legislation that would hand responsibility for most of the country&rsquo;s health budget to its 42,000 general practitioners and, his political opponents say, open the door to private competition that could threaten the foundations of socialized care.        

Mr. Cameron argues that the bill, said to be the biggest overhaul of the National Health Service since it was founded in 1948, is essential to increase efficiency and allow doctors, patients and localities more control of how the health budget is spent.        

Yet the prime minister, who promised during last year&rsquo;s election campaign that he had no radical plans to change the health service, faces formidable opposition from a wide array of critics. These include the British Medical Association, members of Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s own Conservative Party, patient advocates, health care specialists, health workers&rsquo; unions and even many of the primary care doctors who are supposed to benefit under the proposals.        

&ldquo;We feel, and many others feel, that this reform is too much, too complicated and not necessary in terms of organizational change,&rdquo; Dr. Clare Gerada, chairwoman of the Royal College of General Practitioners, said in an interview. &ldquo;Nobody&rsquo;s been able to convince anyone I&rsquo;ve spoken to why we&rsquo;re doing it.&rdquo;        

The complaints include criticisms that the plan is ill thought out, that it will prove too costly at a time of budgetary retrenchment and that the competition and choice it promises will cause confusion and duplication, and encourage decision-making based on cost rather than quality. In the eyes of conspiracy-minded Labour politicians, however, the bill is a stalking horse for the eventual privatization of health care.        

&ldquo;My concern, in the long run, is that this is opening up the whole of the N.H.S., all areas, to competition and private health companies,&rdquo; John Healey, the Labour health spokesman, told The Daily Telegraph.        

The bill would allow general practitioners to commission services from &ldquo;any willing provider,&rdquo; which the government says would encourage efficiency and quality, as providers competed for business.        

But the N.H.S. Confederation, which represents organizations in the health service, says this will lead to the closing of some hospitals and a move toward a more disjointed system in which private companies pick up the slack. Already there are signs that American companies are stepping in to provide consulting and commissioning services.        

&ldquo;Forcing commissioners of care to tender contracts to any willing provider, including N.H.S. providers, voluntary sector organizations and commercial companies, could destabilize local health economies and fragment care for patients,&rdquo; Hamish Meldrum, chairman of the British Medical Association Council &mdash; the group&rsquo;s executive committee &mdash; said in a statement.        

Other critics said the changes would simply not deliver the results Mr. Cameron promised. &ldquo;The real choice is not between stability and change, but between reforms that are well executed and deliver results for patients, and reforms that are poorly planned and risk undermining the N.H.S.,&rdquo; Chris Ham, chief executive of the King&rsquo;s Fund, an independent research group focusing on health care, said in a statement.        

But Mr. Cameron is committed to making &ldquo;fundamental&rdquo; changes. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think there is an option of just quietly standing still, staying where we are and putting a bit more money into the N.H.S.,&rdquo; he told BBC Radio this week.        

Under the government&rsquo;s plan, some $127 billion a year &mdash; about 80 percent of the total health care budget &mdash; would be handed directly to the country&rsquo;s 42,000 general practitioners, who would join together into consortia that would negotiate to buy treatment from hospitals and specialists. The 151 bodies that currently make such spending decisions, known as primary care trusts, would be abolished, as would another layer of bureaucracy, 10 regional groups known as Strategic Health Authorities.        

In order to help take politics out of the system, the government says, the N.H.S. would be administered by a new, independent body, known as the N.H.S. Commissioning Board.        
(Page 2 of 2)
The changes apply only to England; other parts of Britain have separate systems. Despite the opposition to the proposals, the government&rsquo;s parliamentary majority means that the bill is likely to pass, possibly in altered form after it has made its way through the legislative process.        

The government argues that the plan will cut waste, allow patients more autonomy over their treatment and give doctors and localities, rather than bureaucrats, more direct control of the system. Like other health care systems around the world, the N.H.S., which provides treatment free at the point of service, has struggled to keep up with rising costs and increased demand.        

The government points out that  doctors across nearly half of England have already formed consortia. Dr. Ken Aswani, who works in Waltham Forest outside London, told the BBC: &ldquo;We will be looking to build on what we have been doing in recent years. That means getting services out of hospitals and into the community where they are more accessible.&rdquo;        

Dr. Michael Dixon, chairman of the N.H.S. Alliance, which supports clinicians&rsquo; ability to commission health care, said it was inevitable that the proposals would provoke opposition.        

&ldquo;Giving power to frontline clinicians and their patients is bound to upset those with vested interests, such as some of the more centralist senior N.H.S. managers who are used to ruling the roost,&rdquo; Dr. Dixon said.        

But opposition has been gathering since Mr. Cameron gave notice of his intentions last summer. One issue, Dr. Gerada said, is that the reorganization &mdash; which was included in the small print of the governing coalition&rsquo;s election manifestos, but not raised in the campaign &mdash; seems like another in a wearying series of changes.        

In the 1990s, John Major&rsquo;s Conservative government gave general practitioners the option of being &ldquo;fundholders,&rdquo; letting them buy treatment for their patients. About half of England&rsquo;s general practitioners joined the program, which was scrapped when Labour took power in 1997. Labour then introduced the Strategic Health Authorities, which the government seeks to abandon.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve had so many top-down reorganizations in this health service,&rdquo; Dr. Gerada said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s like planting a plant, pulling it up every few years, looking at its roots and then putting it back into the earth &mdash; instead of plucking out the weeds and trimming back the overgrowth while letting the garden flourish.&rdquo;        

Other critics say the proposals are too expensive, particularly when the health service is being deprived of the huge spending increases it received under 13 years of Labour government. Despite pledges to preserve the health budget from the severe cuts affecting most departments, the government is still demanding that the N.H.S. make $32 billion in efficiency savings by 2014.        

The government estimates that 20,900 N.H.S. workers, mostly from the primary care trusts, are expected to lose their jobs, The Guardian reported, though some would probably be rehired by general practitioner groups.        

One of the plan&rsquo;s boldest components is the pledge that patients will now get to choose their doctors, their hospitals and their treatments &mdash; a radical proposal for a service in which patients can now sometimes wait months for specialist care.        
