
KANDAHAR, Afghanistan &mdash; Toor Jan, who used to kill Americans and Canadians here, does not want much from the Afghan government. A home. A job. And, yes, eight security guards.        

He needs them. As one of the few Taliban commanders to switch sides, he is a target. In a rare interview, the 28-year-old, who is tall, thin and has a full black beard, is somber about the step he has taken, although he is one of the success stories of the government&rsquo;s biggest and best-financed peace program, which aims to bring Taliban fighters over to the government side, sapping the insurgency&rsquo;s strength.        

&ldquo;When I decided to switch sides, I was fed up with fighting,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I cannot pull the trigger anymore. I am just tired of it.&rdquo;        

Toor Jan&rsquo;s switch may represent a hopeful sign for the government&rsquo;s plan to reintegrate the Taliban into Afghan society &mdash; but it is also a rarity. Of the 1,700 fighters who have enrolled in the 10-month-old program, only a handful are midlevel commanders, and two-thirds are from the north, where the insurgency is much weaker than in the south, said Maj. Gen. Phil Jones, the director of a NATO unit that is monitoring the program.        

The total is only a fraction of the 20,000 to 40,000 Taliban insurgents, and many of the fighters who have taken advantage of the program may not even be Taliban, just men with weapons.        

The Taliban&rsquo;s leaders, most of whom are in Pakistan, have yet to embrace reconciliation. Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates acknowledged publicly Sunday that the United States had begun preliminary reconciliation talks with members of the Taliban, but he expressed skepticism about the results. Other diplomats said that a significant number of Taliban fighters will not switch sides unless such talks advance.        

But Western governments are committed to the plan to persuade fighters to switch sides. It is well financed, with $140 million of the $150 million pledged from Western governments, much of it from the United States and Japan, already in Afghan accounts, according to a Western military official.        

The money provides a small, short-term stipend to fighters who change sides, and then rewards their communities with generous development and job programs &mdash; rather than handing out money or jobs to fighters. The incentives were designed to prevent abuses of past programs, under which fighters would change sides with the seasons, collecting money in the winter, then resuming the fight in the spring or summer.        

General Jones said the program has grown more slowly in the south and east because many fighters fear that if they lay down their arms, the Taliban will take revenge on them or their families. A Western diplomat here who is familiar with the preliminary negotiations with the Taliban said, &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll only see big numbers when there is a little more progress on the political track.&rdquo;        

For that to happen, he said, &ldquo;it&rsquo;s important how Pakistan responds.&rdquo;        

Even so, Western officials say they hope that fighters who have local gripes can be persuaded to enroll in the program.        

&ldquo;You have to look at the motivation of the people doing the fighting,&rdquo; said a Western diplomat in Kabul. &ldquo;A number of people became involved because of local disputes over land, over power, over family honor.        

&ldquo;You don&rsquo;t need a deal with the Taliban leadership to solve those,&rdquo; the official said. &ldquo;The Taliban is a flag of convenience for them.&rdquo;        

The program&rsquo;s relatively slow growth points to an array of difficulties, according to interviews with Afghan governors, NATO officials, members of the High Peace and Reintegration Council and Western diplomats.        

There are logistical problems: each province must have a peace and reconciliation committee to serve as an intermediary between active Taliban commanders and the government.        

Special bank accounts had to be set up to keep track of the money sent to the provincial governors to run the program. Afghan and NATO officials also have difficulty confirming the identities of those who say they want to switch.        

In Kunduz Province, many of the 400 Taliban who have changed sides in recent months have gone back to their villages to form armed groups known locally as arbakai, according to the leader of the peace and reconciliation committee there.        

&ldquo;A number of them were given guns to secure their own villages after we received guarantees from the village elders about their honesty and loyalty to the government,&rdquo; said the committee leader, Asadullah Omerkhel.        

Some of those fighters are accused of taxing local people, running protection rackets and even rape, raising the question of whether they are just criminals.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Toor Jan is not the only Taliban commander in the south to come over to the government&rsquo;s side. But the other prominent commander there who has switched may not be who he says he is. That commander, Maulavi Noorullah Aziz, said he wanted to make the move in April and turned to a friend from his youth, Haji Fazaluddin Agha, who is now the governor of the Panjwai District in Kandahar Province.        

Mr. Agha sponsored him and introduced him to the provincial governor, Wesa Toorylai, who held a ceremony to welcome him and at least 30 of his followers.        

As proof of his identity, he offered a letter appointing him as the Taliban shadow governor of Kunduz that bore the stamp of the Quetta Shura, the Taliban leadership group. But some of his claims did not check out. For example, although he said he had controlled a district in Helmand Province, elders there said they had never heard of him.        

Western intelligence officials now question his story, although they still think he probably is or was a Taliban operative.        

In the meantime, Mr. Aziz has had his eye on a government job and has received a house, protection and food money for an entourage that includes his family and most of his men.        

Toor Jan&rsquo;s experience was more difficult, in part because he lacked a wealthy political patron. He said it took him a year and a half to reach the decision to leave the Taliban, which he joined in 2002.        

He did so, he said, because he had lost friends in the fighting, seen Afghan civilians killed when his men&rsquo;s bombs detonated accidentally and, in December, learned that American forces had detained his brother, who he said had done nothing wrong.        

He came in, exhausted, with 12 men in February, hoping that the government would fulfill its promise to protect him, give jobs to his fighters and secure his brother&rsquo;s release. His negotiations were with the intelligence department chief in Kandahar, whom he had known since childhood and who agreed to pay $120 a month to each of Toor Jan&rsquo;s men and $150 a month to Toor Jan himself &mdash; the standard amount for Taliban who decide to switch sides. He is living in an abandoned and decrepit former Russian Army base.        

His brother was released in April, raising Toor Jan&rsquo;s spirits, but his men are still awaiting jobs. &ldquo;The government cannot stand on its promises,&rdquo; he said.        

&ldquo;A good example is my defection: in the last five months I have received none of what they promised me: no salary, no good accommodations. Those who are fighting now say: &lsquo;Your men are jobless. What have you achieved?&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        
