
WASHINGTON &mdash; In the 18 months since President Obama ordered a surge of 30,000 troops into Afghanistan, he has scaled back, time and again, Washington&rsquo;s goals in a country that the British, the Soviets and ultimately the Americans tried, and failed, to change.        

Now, as he enters the last few days of decision-making about how fast to bring those surge troops home, that relentless narrowing of objectives has boiled down to one central measurement: Whether Al Qaeda is capable of again mounting an attack on the United States from Afghanistan, the origin of the 9/11 attacks, or from the nearby mountains of Pakistan.        

Officials familiar with the Situation Room briefings that Mr. Obama has received in recent days say he has been told that Al Qaeda is now too crippled to conduct such a strike from either side of the border.        

In essence, the administration&rsquo;s argument is that while the war to remake Afghanistan has taken far longer and has been far bloodier and more frustrating than Americans envisioned a decade ago, the drone-and-commando war to protect America from Al Qaeda&rsquo;s home base has taken a surprising turn for the better. (Yemen and other newer Qaeda bases still pose a sizable threat, the assessments added.)        

It now seems likely that Mr. Obama will invoke that rationale to announce a more rapid reduction in forces than desired by commanders on the ground or his departing defense secretary, Robert M. Gates. They would like to keep as many combat troops in the country as possible through the summer of 2012.        

But if troops begin to flow out faster, history may view his decision as the crucial turning point &mdash; for good or ill &mdash; in the longest war in American history.        

No matter what he decides, Mr. Obama will almost certainly argue he is hardly walking away from Afghanistan: even after the 30,000 troops who made up the &ldquo;West Point surge&rdquo; (named for where he gave the 2009 speech) are withdrawn, 68,000 Americans will remain. That is more than twice as many as were on the ground the day that President George W. Bush left office.        

Mr. Obama&rsquo;s political advisers say that number will be repeated, over and over leading up to next year&rsquo;s election, to make the case that the president has committed far greater resources to the war than the man who had ordered the initial invasion.        

But by returning to the initial objective of that invasion, getting Osama bin Laden and hobbling Al Qaeda, the terror group he built, Mr. Obama is taking several risks. He is betting that an American force that may remain in Afghanistan for years or decades, upward of 25,000 troops if the Afghan government agrees, will prevent the country from again becoming a terrorist enclave. And he is essentially downgrading the grander vision for transforming Afghanistan, which Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, among others, have described as the ultimate firewall against Islamic extremism.        

&ldquo;The weak point in America&rsquo;s strategy has always been this endless debate about whether we were just there to protect ourselves or had a grander vision for Afghanistan,&rdquo; Mr. Obama&rsquo;s special envoy to the country, Richard C. Holbrooke, said about two weeks before he died last year.        

By the end of this month it seems likely that debate will be just about over, with Mr. Obama taking it back to its starting point, which was crippling Al Qaeda.        

Mr. Obama never embraced Mr. Bush&rsquo;s oft-expressed dream of creating a strong, central Afghan state in which democratic ideas and religious tolerance pervades the land. Unlike Mr. Bush, Mr. Obama rarely talked about how, thanks to the American intervention, girls now go to school in Afghanistan. But he did agree to a vast increase in aid for Afghanistan, tied to a &ldquo;diplomatic surge&rdquo; that was never executed with the vigor of the military surge.        

The White House debate has also been colored by the reality that the Afghan government has not been able to clear the hurdle Mr. Obama set for it as part of his decision in 2009 to increase troop levels. At that time the White House declared that American troops should never &ldquo;clear, build and hold&rdquo; territory in Afghanistan that it could not soon &ldquo;transfer&rdquo; to Afghan control.        

For the last year, the Pentagon has been presenting numbers to show that transfer is taking place. But plot those on a map, and it becomes clear that with a few notable exceptions, the transfer has happened largely in areas not hotly contested with the Taliban. In their more candid moments, Mr. Obama&rsquo;s aides acknowledge there is little evidence that the Afghan government will be ready to control the fought-over territory in the south by the end of 2014, the date set for the withdrawal of all NATO forces.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s been painfully slow,&rdquo; one of Mr. Obama&rsquo;s aides said recently, noting that the United States pays more to train the Afghan army and police than Afghanistan spends on its entire government budget. &ldquo;But we&rsquo;re learning to live with &lsquo;good enough.&rsquo; &rdquo;        

As he prepares to make a decision this time, Mr. Obama is facing a set of political pressures that were more muted when he ordered the surge in 2009. In his West Point speech, he talked of containing the costs of the war; since then, spending has mushroomed to $2 billion a week, a price that seems even more crushing now, in an age of painful austerity, than it did then.        

Public rants by the Afghan president, Hamid Karzai, describing the Americans as &ldquo;trespassers and occupiers&rdquo; in the country for their own purposes, have come at a particularly delicate time &mdash; just as Mr. Obama must make the case that the commitment of tens of thousands of troops should continue for years. That may explain why the American ambassador to Afghanistan, Karl W. Eikenberry, shot back at Mr. Karzai so directly on Sunday.        

&ldquo;When we hear ourselves being called occupiers and worse, and our generous aid programs dismissed as totally ineffective and the source of all corruption, our pride is offended and we begin to lose our inspiration to carry on,&rdquo; he said.        

The tension with Mr. Karzai is not new. But the latest eruptions are feeding into an atmosphere in which Mr. Obama appears to be looking for rationales to explain why a conflict he called a &ldquo;war of necessity&rdquo; two summers ago may no longer be as necessary.        
