
BERLIN &mdash; When the euro became the common currency for many Europeans less than 10 years ago, it was feted by supporters as a grand opportunity, turning a historic page toward integration. Now, with the euro-zone debt crisis threatening to spread from Greece, the single currency represents an equally epochal challenge to shield the broader European project from derailment.        

And, in that effort, perhaps no other European leader has come under the same pressure to display leadership, or under the same scrutiny for failing to do so, than Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, the steward of Europe&rsquo;s most powerful economy.        

Less than two weeks ago, Mrs. Merkel stood in the Rose Garden at the White House alongside President Obama, basking in diplomatic accolades: an unusual state dinner and the award of the Presidential Medal of Freedom. But just two days ago, she stood alongside President Nicolas Sarkozy of France in her own chancellery to announce a retreat from the central element of Germany&rsquo;s plan to rescue the Greek economy even as she struggled with domestic political woes.        

&ldquo;The balance sheet is miserable,&rdquo; the columnist Daniel Br&ouml;ssler wrote in the newspaper S&uuml;ddeutsche Zeitung. &ldquo;Merkel is failing to secure German demands in Europe, and she has not succeeded in winning Germans over to the rescue of the euro.&rdquo;        

At the heart of that assessment lies the sense among many Germans that they are no longer prepared to bankroll Europe as they once did. That readiness began to ebb when Germans realized the perils of institutionalized bailouts after their own reunification in 1990, said the economist Christian Deubner, and ended up transferring billions into the poor states of the former communist East. The experience has left them ever more reluctant to divert their public money to rescue Greece, widely seen here as profligate and ill disciplined.        

For some, there is the broader issue of European leadership, long entrusted to a succession of French and German leaders who together provided the motor of European integration. &ldquo;They consulted every day to avoid surprises,&rdquo; the  columnist Andrea Seibel wrote in the conservative newspaper Die Welt, referring to previous German chancellors. &ldquo;Kohl did it intensively, Schr&ouml;der less so, and Merkel not at all.&rdquo;        

She said: &ldquo;France and Germany need each other. But they are speaking with their backs turned to each other. This is not the way to solve the situation in Greece.&rdquo;        

For many of Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s Western partners, misgivings about her position intensified in March when Germany refused to support NATO&rsquo;s air campaign in Libya, abstaining from the United Nations Security Council vote to support rebels opposed to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

&ldquo;It was a serious political blunder, the greatest mistake of Merkel&rsquo;s government in foreign policy,&rdquo; said Heinrich August Winkler, a history professor at Humboldt University here. The move reflected &ldquo;the primacy of domestic politics,&rdquo; he said, in a land where the desire to support democratic stirrings in North Africa was outweighed by a historical reluctance to send troops abroad, reinforced by Germany&rsquo;s military experience in Afghanistan.        

By turning away from their allies, German leaders &ldquo;underestimated the impact on the European and American view of Germany,&rdquo; Professor Winkler said. The decision also fed a creeping sense that, after decades promoting the European ideal, Germany had resolved to embark on a go-it-alone pursuit of self-interest.        

That began to be recalibrated after Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s visit to Washington. Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle traveled to Benghazi and offered German recognition of the rebels as &ldquo;the legitimate representation of the Libyan people.&rdquo; Days earlier, Defense Minister Thomas de Maizi&egrave;re had said Germany might deploy troops for reconstruction efforts in a post-Qaddafi era.        

&ldquo;The Germans are now in their own retreat,&rdquo; said Gero Neugebauer, a political scientist in Berlin. &ldquo;The special way is a dead end, and they have seen where it ends. So, in small steps, they are turning from right to left and at some point they will be back to where they came from.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Merkel, 56, became chancellor in 2005 &mdash; the first woman and the first former East German to lead her country &mdash; and was re-elected in 2009. Elections are set again for 2013. Conversations with several analysts left a clear impression that, midterm, she is caught uneasily between the demand for leadership within Europe and the shifting ground of domestic politics, where the governing coalition of her Christian Democrats and the Free Democrats is under increasing strain.        

&ldquo;In foreign policy, she has power, and Germans recognize that,&rdquo; said Richard Hilmer, a leading pollster. &ldquo;But in domestic politics, it&rsquo;s different.&rdquo;        

Compounding her woes at home, Mrs. Merkel has done little to shore up the governing coalition, said Gerd Langguth, a political scientist at the University of Bonn, displaying &ldquo;no real interest&rdquo; in allowing her Free Democrat junior partner to &ldquo;have its victories or successes.&rdquo;        

Rather, many analysts depicted Mrs. Merkel as a pragmatist, driven by expediency without the finer political instincts of her mentor, former Chancellor Helmut Kohl. To that extent, her reversal on Friday alongside Mr. Sarkozy &mdash; abandoning Germany&rsquo;s demand for measures to force private lenders to participate in the Greek rescue &mdash; may have won some breathing space.        

In Luxembourg early Monday morning, European finance ministers failed to agree on the immediate release of about $17 billion more for Greece. &ldquo;The fact that Paris and Berlin have manifestly narrowed the gap between them offers a ray of hope,&rdquo; G&uuml;nther Nonnenmacher wrote in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. But if the debt crisis is permitted to smolder, he said, &ldquo;sooner or later, it will inevitably ignite the whole European project.&rdquo;        
