
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Yemeni security forces continued to battle Islamic militants in southern Yemen, leaving at least 21 dead over the weekend, according to a military official and a local doctor.        

On Saturday, in the coastal city of Zinjibar, 12 militants and two soldiers were killed during a clash after soldiers came across militants planting a roadside bomb in an apparent effort to attack security forces entering the city, said a military official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he is not authorized to speak to the news media.        

Five other soldiers were killed on Sunday there, the official said, and a doctor at a local Zinjibar hospital said he had received the bodies of two dead militants.        

In late May, militants took over Zinjibar, the capital of Abyan Province. The initial fighting was minimal, but since then security forces have been shelling the city, forcing hundreds of civilians to flee and seek shelter in schools in the nearby port city of Aden. In March, militants overran Jaar, another city in Abyan.        

Last week, the militants in Zinjibar circulated a communiqu&eacute; throughout the city calling themselves the Supporters of Shariah. The statement lashed out at security forces and named 12 military commanders whom they wanted dead or alive. Zinjibar residents said that when the militants take control of a government building, a banner with Supporters of Shariah on it is hung on the front of the building.        

Other attacks between armed militants and security forces have occurred recently in the southern provinces of Lahij and Shabwa as divergent groups appeared to be taking advantage of the security vacuum created by the continuing political crisis in Sana, the capital.        

President Ali Abdullah Saleh and a half-dozen other government officials left the country and went to Saudi Arabia for medical treatment earlier this month after a deadly attack on the presidential palace on June 3. In accordance with Yemen&rsquo;s Constitution, the country&rsquo;s vice president, Abed Rabbo Mansour al-Hadi, became acting president in Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s absence.        

Meanwhile, Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s son, Ahmed Ali Saleh, has moved into the presidential palace, creating serious doubts about whether the president&rsquo;s relatives who hold leading positions in the armed forces have recognized Mr. Hadi&rsquo;s leadership.        
Yasser Alarami contributed reporting.
