
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; In his first address in two months, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria on Monday offered a national dialogue that he said could usher in change to a country where his party and family have monopolized authority for four decades.        

Deep skepticism greeted the proposal, and even some who were sympathetic to the leadership said they doubted that Mr. Assad was ready to surrender absolute power, at least for now. But as the country wrestles with its gravest crisis in a generation, the question remains: If the government is in fact sincere, whom would it talk to?        

An opposition abroad, without set leaders or programs, which sought to organize in meetings in Turkey and Europe, has ruled out engaging the government. Many activists who claim to speak for those in the streets shaken by three months of protests are too afraid to surface. Even opposition figures in Damascus who have talked with officials lately said Monday that they would not attend the dialogue Mr. Assad outlined until security forces ended their crackdown.        

The government, which long equated almost any dissent with sedition, has suggested it may choose whom it will speak to; Mr. Assad mentioned the possibility of more than 100 people, though the government has yet to say who they may be.        

The divide seemed to underline the criticism voiced by many opposition activists on Monday: The proposal is a bid for time in a country that may be running out of it.        

&ldquo;The street hasn&rsquo;t managed to break the bones of the authority, and the authorities haven&rsquo;t managed to break the bones of the street,&rdquo; said Louay Hussein, an opposition figure in Damascus, the capital. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re passing through an intractable period before the crisis.&rdquo;        

Diplomats and opposition figures have spoken in darker tones lately about what may be ahead in Syria: a failed state perhaps, or sectarian conflict playing on Syria&rsquo;s potentially volatile diversity. While noting that the protests remain largely peaceful, American officials acknowledge that the makings of an armed insurgency have begun to emerge. Despite promises to diplomats, Syrian officials have continued to preside over a ferocious crackdown that has killed more than 1,400 people, by activists&rsquo; count.        

One opposition figure warned of the prospect of a coming &ldquo;civil war.&rdquo;        

For days, Mr. Assad&rsquo;s speech was awaited in the hope that it would offer a crucial insight into the leadership&rsquo;s willingness to compromise in the face of the uprising and mounting pressure from Turkey, the United States and the European Union. Mr. Assad offered at least a theoretical path for change, even if the speech lacked specifics and delivered somewhat vague deadlines.        

Some of the changes he outlined Monday have been on the table since 2005, including a new law that would allow parties other than the Baath Party, which is the instrument of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s power, its pre-eminence enshrined in the Constitution. He also spoke of a committee to study amending the Constitution or drafting a new one.        

&ldquo;This dialogue is a very important issue which we have to give a chance because all of Syria&rsquo;s future, if we want it to be successful, has to be dependent on this dialogue in which all the different parties in the Syrian arena will participate,&rdquo; Mr. Assad said.        

In some ways, the speech seemed to suggest a different inflection to the government&rsquo;s longstanding message. For weeks, it has offered a mantra that has underlined its many years in power: either us or chaos. On Monday, Mr. Assad appeared to offer himself as the best means to bring about a change in one of the region&rsquo;s most authoritarian states. Rather than us or chaos, his message was that he alone could deliver.        

The response in the street was abrupt, though it was hard to gauge the size of the demonstrations. &ldquo;Liar!&rdquo; activists quoted people chanting in the coastal city of Latakia.        

&ldquo;Are they able to open up?&rdquo; asked Wissam Tarif, executive director of Insan, a human rights group. &ldquo;Even if Bashar decides, how much can the system respond to such demands?&rdquo;        

Nada Bakri and Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.
