
PARIENG, Sudan &mdash; Underneath the wisp of shade he now calls home, Hamed El Bardi is a leader of a lost community. With more than 100 of his fellow Nubans huddled in the backyard of a county office in this southern Sudanese village, Mr. El Bardi tabulates newcomers and tries to figure out what to do next.        

&ldquo;I will be going back,&rdquo; insists Mr. El Bardi, 42. But fear persists.        

&ldquo;If you take my picture, when I go back,&rdquo; the northern government &ldquo;will try to find me and kill me,&rdquo; he said.        

Over the last two weeks, northern Sudanese forces have led an unbridled assault in the volatile Nuba Mountains region of southern Kordofan. Witnesses describe execution-style killings of ethnic Nubans. In surrounding areas, the Sudanese government has acknowledged carrying out an aerial bombardment, forcing tens of thousands to flee.        

The north says it is fighting rebels, but survivors have described the bombing campaign as crude and indiscriminate.        

Mr. El Bardi says he last saw his own family last week in the border town of Jaw, bombed by a swarm of Antonov aircraft that had chased them away from their Nuba Mountains home in Awda just days earlier. Now he is on the other side of the divide.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve become a southerner,&rdquo; he said.        

Humanitarian officials say thousands of civilians have gathered here in the thatch-roofed villages of Panyang and Parieng, just within the cusp of southern Sudan. Many of them are Nubans, but officials warned that because Sudan is still one country (southern Sudan is due to formally separate from the north on July 9), they would not qualify for refugee status.        

Nubans fought alongside southerners against the north during Sudan&rsquo;s civil war, but they are a distinct society. Many are Muslim, like northerners, and the belongings they have carried to Parieng are an iconography of lives left behind. A hookah pipe. Worry beads.        

From between shreds of wooden fence, ethnic Dinka children peer at the strangers. Others may be watching, too: an administrator in Parieng said an Antonov was seen flying over the southern Sudanese village last Thursday.        

In a nearby infirmary, Yisah Kherkon, a devout Muslim from the Nuban village of Abu Hashim, nurses a nasty leg wound. Mr. Kherkon, 58, said he left Abu Hashim days earlier, to visit two of his sons who worked in the market in Jaw. He was stepping out of a mosque during Friday Prayer when the bombs began falling.        

Like everyone else, Mr. Kherkon ran. When he saw the deep cut on his right leg, he says, he kept going, until he reached one of his sons&rsquo; homes. The next morning he was tied up in a truck, and taken here.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s difficult to understand,&rdquo; Mr. Kherkon said of the northern attack. &ldquo;We are similar, we were brothers. One religion.&rdquo;        

This has happened before. During the civil war, many Nubans were incarcerated in so-called peace camps, while some villages were simply wiped off the map.        

For James Orma, who tended a market stall with his wife and six children in Jaw before fleeing the bombs, the recent conflict is not a surprise. Growing up as young boy in the Nuba Mountain village of Toraje during the civil war of the 1980s and 1990s, he said he would tune in on his father&rsquo;s prized radio.        

&ldquo;We would listen to the news,&rdquo; Mr. Orma, 36, said. At night, he would hear planes buzzing overhead.        

Still, Mr. Orma said he never thought the north would bomb Jaw, a popular trading center for Nubans where the southern Sudanese military also has a base. Now three of his children are missing.        

&ldquo;My father used to tell me we were southerners, that all Nubans were southerners,&rdquo; said Mr. Orma. &ldquo;Even if the conflict ends, I will stay here.&rdquo;        
