
HONG KONG &mdash; Hong Kong Customs announced on Wednesday that it had seized 640 pounds of high-grade cocaine concealed in two shipping containers that arrived from Chile and were scheduled for shipment to mainland China, the latest sign of what experts describe as China&rsquo;s growing problem with recreational drug use.        

China has struggled for years to prevent heroin from entering the country from Myanmar to the south, and sometimes by indirect routes from Pakistan and Afghanistan to the southwest. But experts said that other drugs were becoming a problem as well, although there had been limited evidence until now of large shipments from South America.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a lot of people with money, particularly in Guangzhou, Shanghai and Beijing, and the recreational drug use has increased,&rdquo; said Stephen G. Vickers, a former top official in the Hong Kong police who is now the chairman of FTI-International Risk, a consulting firm in Hong Kong. &ldquo;The drug seizure is not a surprise, but the scale of it is.&rdquo;        

According to customs officials, the cocaine arrived in containers with labels that said &ldquo;woodworking products.&rdquo; Using drug-sniffing dogs and X-ray scanners, the local authorities, who were already more wary of cargo from South America, found the shipment in 88 hollowed-out wood planks. The retail value of the narcotics was estimated at $33 million, customs officials said.        

The drugs were discovered on Dec. 29, but no arrests have been made so far in Hong Kong or on the mainland.        

John Lee, the head of the Drug Investigation Bureau of the customs office in Hong Kong, said in a statement that his staff would continue to work with mainland and overseas drug enforcement agencies.        

China detains drug addicts at treatment centers. Human Rights Watch strongly criticized conditions at these centers in a report a year ago.        

The seizure was the largest ever of cocaine by Hong Kong Customs, but not the largest ever in Hong Kong. Last April, the police found 820 pounds of cocaine of unclear origin on the roof of a three-story suburban house.        
