
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; A Tunisian court sentenced the country&rsquo;s ousted president, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, and his wife, Leila Trabelsi, to 35 years in prison and a fine of roughly $66 million after a trial in absentia for embezzlement and misuse of public funds, state news media said Monday night.        

He still faces charges for the possession of illegal drugs, firearms and archaeological relics found in his palaces, as well as for ordering the killing of civilians in his bid to cling to power. The verdict Monday, after the one-day trial, focused on $27 million in jewels and public money reportedly found at one of his mansions.        

Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s ouster in January started the Arab Spring and inspired the Egyptian uprising that toppled President Hosni Mubarak a month later. Egyptians are watching the court proceedings closely as they prepare for Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s trial this summer. Both have stirred debate over how to balance public demands for swift justice with a more deliberative demonstration of the rule of law.        

Mr. Ben Ali and his wife are in exile in Saudi Arabia, which refused Tunisian extradition requests. They are reviled in Tunisia for presiding over a corrupt administration that enabled Ms. Trabelsi, a former hairdresser from a humble family, to help her relatives quickly achieve vast fortunes and opulent lifestyles.        

The most notorious of her kin, Sakher el Materi &mdash; known derisively as &ldquo;Mr. Son-in-Law&rdquo; &mdash; kept a caged tiger that ate four chickens a day and he boasted of the Roman columns, frescoes and lion&rsquo;s head fountain at his villa.        

Evidently unrepentant, Mr. Ben Ali issued a statement through lawyers calling the proceedings &ldquo;a false and shameful image of victor&rsquo;s justice,&rdquo; according to news reports.        

Defending his 23 years in power, Mr. Ben Ali referred to street protests and strikes that have persisted in Tunisia since the revolution, asking if the purpose was &ldquo;to divert the attention of Tunisians from the turmoil that nobody can accuse him of or hold him responsible for.&rdquo;        

He did not flee Tunisia, the statement said, but rather left &ldquo;to avoid a bloody confrontation among the Tunisian people who are always in his thoughts and heart.&rdquo; His former prime minister has reportedly said that Mr. Ben Ali left the country for Saudi Arabia planning only a short absence that has turned into a permanent exile.        

His trial in absentia has stirred a furious debate in Tunisia over whether the interim government should have held out for his physical presence on the witness stand or pushed ahead without him.        

&ldquo;His trial before an &lsquo;empty chair&rsquo; has raised many questions about the point of these trials, which some have considered to be purely for show, like a farcical play,&rdquo; the Tunisian newspaper As Sabah wrote, referring to Mr. Ben Ali by his new popular title, &ldquo;the deposed.&rdquo; The trial&rsquo;s sentences, no matter how harsh, &ldquo;will not be able to quell the fire of the Tunisian people, who had hoped &lsquo;the deposed&rsquo; would be brought in and tried in an actual trial, to return faith and confidence to all Tunisians.&rdquo;        

Many Tunisians, however, say they are also eager to see a legal verdict rendered on their former dictator as soon as possible, with or without his physical presence.        

His trial on the drug, firearms and archaeological charges is expected to take place at the end of this month.        
Lara El Gibaly contributed reporting from Cairo.
