
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Reports that a guard at the hotel housing foreign journalists here had been fatally shot sent a tremor of anxiety through the Qaddafi government&rsquo;s media operation on Monday.        

While Qaddafi loyalists said the guard accidentally shot himself with his own weapon while eating a late dinner at the end of the hotel two days earlier, at least two people working for the government said on the condition of anonymity that he was killed by rebel snipers.        

The guard had been assigned to protect a prominent state television commentator known for his outspoken criticism of the rebels. The commentator, Yousef Shakeer, had taken refuge with his family inside the safety of the hotel because of rebel death threats against him.        

In a brief interview, Mr. Shakeer said the government had identified his would-be assassin as a past member of the Libyan Islamist Fighting Group, a jihadist group that dates back years, and he affirmed the government&rsquo;s account that the guard accidentally shot himself on Saturday night.        

While the details of the shooting could not be confirmed, it came amid growing reports of episodes of violence between local rebels challenging the government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and his security forces. Some Tripoli residents said Monday that the sense of danger from the ground was compounding the effect of the escalation of NATO strikes from above.        

On Monday, the Qaddafi government made new charges that a NATO airstrike had killed civilians, including children, when it hit a palatial country estate and wild game farm belonging to Khoweildi al-Hamidi, a former military officer and close associate of Colonel Qaddafi who participated in his 1969 coup.        

Qaddafi officials said eight rockets destroyed several homes near the farm around 4 a.m. A government spokesman, Moussa Ibrahim, said that Mr. Hamidi was unharmed but that among the dead were three of his young granddaughters.        

Government officials took foreign journalists to the farm to see the wreckage and then to a hospital to show them several bodies, including some charred and some belonging to children. Still, their connection to the bombing could not be confirmed.        

Speaking at the scene of the strike, Mr. Ibrahim called it proof that NATO was moving toward &ldquo;deliberately targeting civilians&rdquo; in order to &ldquo;break our spirit.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Do you think this will finish in one month&rsquo;s time or two months&rsquo; time?&rdquo; he asked, predicting that memories of the attacks would produce &ldquo;hateful generation after hateful generation to come in Libya, and those hateful generations will make the world a very dangerous place.&rdquo;        

The tour of the devastated property revealed the lavish lifestyle available to those close to Colonel Qaddafi. According to photographs and accounts from journalists who made the trip, the property included at least five large villas; vast stores of pasta and bottled water; at least one large swimming pool; aviaries; and a menagerie including horses, camels, antelopes, llamas, ostriches and deer.        

In a statement, NATO called the bombing &ldquo;a precision strike on a legitimate military target &mdash; a command-and-control node which was directly involved in coordinating systematic attacks on the Libyan people.&rdquo;        

The alliance added, &ldquo;While NATO cannot confirm reports of casualties, we would regret any loss of civilian life.&rdquo;        

On Sunday, the alliance admitted for the first time that one of its missiles had accidentally hit a civilian neighborhood and might have killed civilians. Reporters saw five bodies in that case; the Libyan government claimed that nine civilians had been killed.        

NATO maintains that the objective of its mission is to prevent Colonel Qaddafi from harming Libyans opposed to his rule, but European and American political leaders behind the campaign have said they mean to help the Libyan rebels topple him.        

Residents of Tripoli on Monday continued to describe hard-to-confirm bursts of violence. On Friday, a Qaddafi soldier in the rebellious neighborhood of Souq al-Juma told a reporter that he feared for his life after a nighttime rebel guerrilla attack had killed a fellow soldier and seriously wounded another.        

Residents of the same neighborhood later told CNN that Qaddafi forces had killed three people who had tried to protest there on Friday, according to a report on the network&rsquo;s Web site.        

On an official trip to a Tripoli university, a student, speaking on the condition of anonymity for his protection, said rebels in his own neighborhood had tried to ambush some police cars but were instead arrested and had their own houses trashed. Another rebel sympathizer relayed reports of clashes on Friday in the rural districts of the Tajura area of greater Tripoli.        

A trip on Monday to the western neighborhood of Jansour turned up extensive recently painted-over graffiti &mdash; a sign that Qaddafi supporters have been covering up anti-Qaddafi scrawl &mdash; and second-hand reports of clashes there as well.        

At the same time, some Tripoli residents also say they support Colonel Qaddafi and resent the NATO airstrikes.        

But foreign journalists here are largely confined to the Rixos Hotel, usually permitted to travel the city only with official minders, and none of the reports of strife could be confirmed.        
Moises Saman contributed reporting.
