
MOSCOW &mdash; Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, the former Russian oil company owner and convicted felon who has already served one prison sentence in Siberia, was sentenced this month to serve his second term in a penal colony in a northern region bordering Finland.        

Following Russian penal authority practice in transporting inmates, Mr. Khodorkovsky, who left Moscow on June 10, has been kept incommunicado since then. His lawyer said on Monday that Mr. Khodorkovsky had arrived at an unspecified prison in the Karelia region northwest of the capital, after a long ride on a prison train.        

Such trains typically crawl along and make many stops, so that a long suspense about Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s eventual destination became a matter of speculation, given the emblematic nature of the case as one of the most politically charged in Russia today.        

The government&rsquo;s prosecution of Mr. Khodorkovsky is sometimes seen as showing a return of Soviet-style judicial practices.        

So it did not help Russia&rsquo;s image that he was sent to serve his first term of eight years in a part of Siberia &mdash; the region of Chita &mdash; that is so remote and inhospitable that it is evocative of hardship and frigid winters even to Russians.        

Mr. Khodorkovsky, who was first convicted in 2005, was returned to Moscow for a second trial and convicted of embezzlement in December 2010. He was sentenced to six more years in prison. A court reduced his total sentence by one year, to 13 years, at his appeal this spring.        

Rights groups say his real offense was sponsoring opposition political parties in the early years of the last decade and negotiating to sell 50 percent of his oil company, Yukos, to Exxon-Mobil of the United States without the Kremlin&rsquo;s approval, just as oil prices started to soar and Yukos became extremely valuable.        

Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s new destination in the region of Karelia, a forested area with a Finnish-speaking minority in some locales, is closer to Moscow. But it is also historically a center of the harsh gulag prison system.        

As such, it was unclear whether this choice of a prison, however symbolically important for being outside of Siberia, signaled any softening in official attitudes toward Mr. Khodorkovsky, or indeed whether it would make his time inside any more comfortable.        

In another soft signal on the Khodorkovsky case, over the weekend Russia&rsquo;s president, Dmitri A. Medvedev, suggested Mr. Khodorkovsky may qualify for early release.        

In an interview with The Financial Times, Mr. Medvedev said Mr. Khodorkovsky had the right to a parole hearing and was eligible for a presidential pardon, without clarifying whether he intended to issue one. Formerly, officials had maintained that Mr. Khodorkovsky would have to admit guilt, something he has said he will not do, before qualifying for a presidential pardon.        

On the prospect of parole, Mr. Medvedev reiterated his assertion that Mr. Khodorkovsky poses no threat to society. &ldquo;What dangers may arise?&rdquo; he asked.        

Vadim V. Klyuvgant, Mr. Khodorkovsky&rsquo;s lawyer, dismissed both Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s slightly warmer comments and the non-Siberian prison as not indicative of any change in attitude toward his client. Under a Russian law intended to improve prison conditions, he said, inmates are supposed to serve near their place of residence, in this case Moscow, so any remote penal colony is a violation.        

Authorities, meanwhile, have not confirmed which prison in Karelia has been assigned to house Mr. Khodorkovsky.        

Russian news agencies, citing unidentified police and court officials, reported he would go to Penal Colony No. 7, near the town of Segezha, and join a team of inmates assigned to clean barracks and do other household chores. He may later work at a sewing shop or furniture factory, the reports said. In Chita, Mr. Khodorkovsky worked in a sewing shop.        
