
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; The Sudanese government has agreed to pull its troops out of the flashpoint Abyei area and allow Ethiopian peacekeepers to come in, the result of a deal signed Monday that could ease tensions along Sudan&rsquo;s disputed north-south border.        

The status of Abyei, which straddles northern and southern Sudan and is claimed by both, has been one of the most volatile issues facing Sudan as it prepares to split in two. On July 9, after decades of guerrilla war, southern Sudan will separate from northern Sudan and become an independent country. But in the past few months, southern and northern forces have repeatedly clashed in Abyei, which is also coveted because it produces some oil.        

In May, the northern army stormed into Abyei and seized it. More than 100,000 people fled, creating a humanitarian emergency along the border. Some of the refugees had so little food they have been eating leaves.        

Under the agreement, which was witnessed by Thabo Mbeki, the former South African president who has played the role of mediator, an armored brigade of Ethiopian peacekeepers, about 4,000 troops, will patrol Abyei and be a buffer between the northern and southern armies.        

A joint administration will be set up, similar to the one that was in place before the northern forces seized Abyei, and both sides will contribute police officers. The United Nations will pay for the Ethiopian peacekeepers, who will most likely be deployed in the next few weeks. All this, though, is temporary.        

&ldquo;The parties reiterate their commitment to resolve peacefully the final status of Abyei,&rdquo; the agreement said.        

The 10-page pact, which was backed by the United States and Britain, among others, also welcomed back the refugees, saying, &ldquo;all displaced former residents of Abyei have the right to return to their former places of residence.&rdquo;        

Under a treaty signed in 2005, the people of Abyei are supposed to hold a referendum to decide if they want to join the north or south. Most permanent residents of Abyei are from the Ngok Dinka ethnic group and consider themselves southerners. But Abyei&rsquo;s fertile grazing grounds are also used, during certain times of the year, by the Misseriya, a nomadic Arab group long close to the powers in Khartoum, Sudan&rsquo;s capital.        

Plans for a referendum were scrapped in December after northern and southern officials could not agree on who was eligible to vote.        

There is still intense fighting and bombing in the Nuba Mountains, just north of the border, where rebel fighters allied with the south have refused to disarm. Furthermore, northern and southern officials have yet to agree on a formula to share the revenue from Sudan&rsquo;s oil, most of which lies in the south.        
