
BAGHDAD &mdash; Suicide bombers detonated two car bombs on Tuesday outside the governor&rsquo;s compound in a city in southern Iraq, killing at least 27 people, many of them police officers, and wounding dozens of others, local officials said.        



The governor, Salem Alwan Hussein, was &ldquo;fine&rdquo; after the attack in the city of Diwaniya, a local security official said. The bombings were part of a spike in violence across Iraq on Tuesday.        

Roadside bombs were detonated near American convoys in the cities of Hilla, Tikrit and Samarra, and militants fired rockets into a United States military base in Baghdad, where five soldiers were killed in a rocket attack two weeks ago and a sixth later died of wounds.        

A United States military official said only that a United States convoy in Basra was attacked on Tuesday, adding that there were no injuries. The official said that mortars were fired at the military base in Baghdad but that none of them landed in the base and there were no injuries.        

Although violence in Iraq has decreased significantly in recent years, there is still a steady stream of attacks, particularly against government officials and security forces. Last week, suicide bombers attacked a provincial council office in the city of Baquba, killing seven.        

On Tuesday, the first suicide bomber in Diwaniya detonated a car packed with explosives around 7:30 a.m., according to local officials. In a common tactic for the insurgents, a second bomber detonated himself minutes later after security forces and emergency response units arrived at the scene.        

The suicide bombers had tried to break through a gate near blast walls at the back of the governor&rsquo;s house, according to a spokesman for the Defense Ministry.        

Hussein Mohammed Ali, 29, a police officer, said he was at one of the checkpoints surrounding the governor&rsquo;s house at the time of the first blast.        

&ldquo;I then felt myself on the ground and blood coming down my body and it hurt very much,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Moments later, I heard another blast and I lost consciousness.&rdquo;        

In Baghdad, a roadside bomb went off in the eastern part of the capital near an Iraqi Army patrol, killing one and wounding five. A minibus driver was killed and three people were wounded in eastern Baghdad when an improvised explosive device was detonated near the vehicle.        

Meanwhile, four people were wounded in an explosion near a grocery shop near Baquba.        
Khalid D. Ali contributed reporting.
