
LONDON &mdash; Prime Minister David Cameron issued a stern rebuke Tuesday to Britain&rsquo;s top military commanders in the air campaign against Libya after they warned in the last week that British forces would come under heavy strain if the air operations continued indefinitely.        

&ldquo;There are times when I wake up and read the newspapers and think, &lsquo;I tell you what, you do the fighting and I&rsquo;ll do the talking,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Cameron told a Downing Street news conference.        

Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s outburst seemed to be prompted by a lead article Tuesday in The Daily Telegraph, a Conservative newspaper with strong military links, that quoted the officer in overall command of Britain&rsquo;s air operations in Afghanistan and Libya as warning of serious consequences for Britain&rsquo;s air combat capacity if the Libya operation runs beyond September.        

The warning by a top Royal Air Force commander, Air Chief Marshal Sir Simon Bryant, following similar remarks last week by the highest-ranking officer in the Royal Navy, Adm. Sir Mark Stanhope, added to the growing disquiet in Western capitals over the Libyan operation.        

Originally envisaged as lasting a matter of weeks, the air campaign is now into its fourth month. It has seen NATO conduct nearly 12,000 air missions over Libya, about one-third of them involving strikes by bombs or missiles, some of them seemingly intended to kill the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

The airstrikes have virtually obliterated Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s Bab al-Aziziya command compound in Tripoli, the Libyan capital, and reduced the fighting capacity of the Libyan forces by about 50 percent, according to Pentagon estimates. But there has been no sign that the Qaddafi government is at risk of crumbling under the pressure, at least not soon.        

Much of the pressure NATO is facing over the Libyan operation comes from the dissent within NATO itself, with some member nations saying the campaign has gone beyond the mandate given by a United Nations Security Council resolution in mid-March that approved NATO action to enforce a no-fly zone over Libya and to undertake other missions to protect the country&rsquo;s civilian population from the Qaddafi forces.        

Those misgivings seemed to be compounded in recent days by two NATO strikes that, for the first time since NATO took command of the air operations from the United States on March 31, appeared to have caused significant numbers of civilian casualties. The first of those strikes, in the early hours of Sunday, struck what Libyan officials described as an apartment building in Tripoli, killing nine people, including women and children.        

But NATO is now investigating the possibility that the building might have been hit by a Soviet-made SA-6 surface-to-air missile from a Libyan stockpile that was hit in an airstrike that night, rather than an errant NATO missile.        

&ldquo;When reports of the building being hit first appeared, NATO looked to see if there were planes nearby, and there were,&rdquo; said a NATO official who spoke on ground rules of anonymity. &ldquo;There was a report of a weapons failure, and NATO concluded that this may explain what happened. Subsequently, we learned about the SA-6, which came from a site we were targeting at the same time.&rdquo;        

One sympathizer with the Libyan opposition, speaking on the condition of anonymity for his safety, said that the destroyed home had belonged to a well-known Qaddafi opponent.        

Nevertheless, the episode amounted to at least a temporary propaganda coup for the Qaddafi government, which has insisted for weeks that the airstrikes were deliberately targeting civilians, and called on world opinion to force NATO to abandon the attacks.        

Mr. Cameron has been keen to resist those pressures, and last week &mdash; as NATO extended the mandate for the airstrikes by 90 days &mdash; he spoke strongly in favor of continuing the attacks until Mr. Qaddafi is driven from power.        

&ldquo;The pressure is building militarily, diplomatically, politically and economically on Qaddafi, who is running out of time, running out of friends &mdash; his oil minister is gone, his foreign minister is gone, the pressure is building,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said.        

With that debate under way, Mr. Cameron could not have welcomed his military commanders questioning how long Britain could continue the fight. But his dispute with them has centered, in part, on the operation&rsquo;s costs, and how that affects the armed forces&rsquo; long-term fighting capacity.        

Although Britain&rsquo;s air combat role in the Libyan conflict involves a relatively small number of Tornado and Typhoon attack jets, as well as Apache attack helicopters, the government has admitted that the operation could cost hundreds of millions of pounds at a time when the Cameron government has imposed stringent budget cuts on the armed forces, amounting to an 8-percent reduction over four years in a defense budget of about $60 billion.        

But Mr. Cameron, after summoning Air Chief Marshal Bryant and Admiral Stanhope to Downing Street, said at his Tuesday news conference that British forces would remain committed to the Libyan operation for as long as was needed. &ldquo;Generally speaking,&rdquo; he said, referring to the two commanders, &ldquo;they are absolutely clear that we can keep up this mission as long as is necessary, and that time is on our side, not Qaddafi&rsquo;s.&rdquo;        
Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Stuttgart, Germany, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Tripoli, Libya.
