
NEW DELHI &mdash; Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, facing public anger over corruption scandals and the lagging performance of his government, shuffled his cabinet on Wednesday, demoting if not firing several ministers who had been either brushed by scandal or criticized for poor work.        

Taken as a whole, the changes amounted to tinkering rather than the wholesale overhaul that many analysts had thought necessary to energize the national government. Speaking with Indian reporters, Mr. Singh described the moves as &ldquo;minor&rdquo; and predicted that a &ldquo;more expansive exercise&rdquo; would occur after the completion of the budgetary session of India&rsquo;s Parliament.        

&ldquo;It is the entree before the main course,&rdquo; said Mahesh Rangarajan, a political analyst in New Delhi. &ldquo;The main course will only be served after the budget.&rdquo;        

Shahnawaz Hussain, speaking for the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party, said: &ldquo;There is no political message in this reshuffle. The government did not show any courage to remove those who are involved in corrupt practices.&rdquo;        

For months, even as India&rsquo;s economy has grown at roughly 9 percent, the coalition national government, led by the Indian National Congress Party, has often seemed adrift, battered by a litany of corruption scandals and criticized for failing to meet goals on road building, power generation and a host of other issues.        

As the head of the government, if not the head of the Congress Party, Mr. Singh has taken his share of blame as opposition leaders have blasted him as weak and ineffective. His reputation for honesty, integrity and good management has taken a beating as critics have faulted him for failing to stop the graft and corruption in his administration &mdash; even if he has not personally been accused of any wrongdoing.        

Indian commentators mostly seemed unimpressed with Wednesday&rsquo;s changes, which culminated in a nationally televised swearing-in ceremony for new ministers at the presidential palace in New Delhi. But the thrust of the changes seemed intended to signal to the public that Mr. Singh and Sonia Gandhi, president of the Congress Party, were moving to tackle corruption.        

The three most telling moves involved the ministries that oversee petroleum, aviation and roads and highways. Each involves lucrative contracts and has been brushed by allegations of scandal. Yet none of the incumbents were fired, only moved to arguably lesser positions.        

Kamal Nath was moved from road transport to urban development. Praful Patel, formerly responsible for aviation, was moved to the Ministry of Heavy Industry. And Murli Deora was shifted from the Petroleum Ministry to the lesser perch of corporate affairs. In each case, their successors were figures with upright political reputations.        

&ldquo;They are trying to respond to the season of scandals with clean r&eacute;sum&eacute;s,&rdquo; Mr. Rangarajan, the analyst, said. In addition, M. S. Gill, whose Sports Ministry was strongly criticized for the poor handling of the Commonwealth Games, was demoted to the ministry overseeing statistics. Mr. Rangarajan also noted that Sharad Pawar, a key coalition partner in the government, had important pieces of his portfolio as agriculture minister taken away.        

Though Mr. Singh leads the government, analysts say the cabinet changes reflect a joint decision by the prime minister, Mrs. Gandhi and powerful leaders in the Congress Party and other parties in the coalition.        
