
MEHTARLAM, Afghanistan &mdash; When Specialist Devin Snyder, a 20-year-old from the Southern Tier of New York State, was killed by a bomb planted on a highway near this town in eastern Laghman Province on June 4, she became the 28th female American soldier to die in Afghanistan.        

Servicewomen have died in all of America&rsquo;s wars, but usually they were support personnel such as nurses and clerks. In Afghanistan, most women who have died were killed in combat situations, as Specialist Snyder was, despite the military&rsquo;s official prohibition on women in combat jobs.        

The same has been true in Iraq, where 111 female soldiers have died, according to data compiled by icasualties.org, an independent organization that tracks military fatalities. In both wars, 60 percent of those deaths are classified by the military as due to hostile acts.        

Wars with no clear front lines have put women in harm&rsquo;s way more than ever before, blurring the boundaries between combat jobs that are outlawed for women, and support jobs that are often as dangerous and in some cases even more so.        

Perhaps the most remarkable thing about Specialist Snyder&rsquo;s death, however, was how little anyone noted that there was anything unusual about it.        

&ldquo;Out here, there is no male gender and no female gender,&rdquo; said Staff Sgt. Vincent Vetterkind, one of her fellow platoon members. &ldquo;Our gender is soldier.&rdquo;        

While there is still a debate back home about the role of women in the military, here on the ground that battle seems to have been largely, if quietly, won during nine years of deployments where women have increasingly shared the same risks as men.        

&ldquo;To tell you the truth, I didn&rsquo;t even think about that issue,&rdquo; said her platoon commander, also a woman, First Lt. Riannon Blaisdell-Black, 24, of Virginia Beach. &ldquo;Out here we don&rsquo;t see gender, we don&rsquo;t see race.&rdquo;        

Lieutenant Blaisdell-Black, whose Third Platoon of the 164th Military Police Company arrived in Afghanistan only in April, has seen her unit lose an eighth of its strength from two bombs in the first couple of months of their deployment. In addition to Specialist Snyder, three other M.P.&rsquo;s from the Third Platoon died from the same bomb, along with an American civilian contractor. An earlier bomb, on the sixth day of the Third Platoon&rsquo;s deployment here, sent one of the other women in the force home with serious injuries, and wounded two men as well.        

&ldquo;There were five of us, sharing the same B-Hut,&rdquo; Lieutenant Blaisdell-Black said, using the term for barracks here that normally sleep eight soldiers each. &ldquo;Now there are three.&rdquo;        

Specialist Snyder was a high school track star in Cohocton, N.Y., from a military family; her father had been in the Navy and her sister is, while a brother is in the Army. She enlisted straight after graduation, choosing the military police, because, as one of her platoonmates put it, &ldquo;We had the best and biggest guns.&rdquo;        

With sleeve tattoos down both arms, Specialist Snyder toyed with the idea of becoming a tattoo model, and also expressed interest in becoming a deception analyst in what is known as the military&rsquo;s psychological operations. Her physical fitness scores often exceeded the Army&rsquo;s perfect 300, and she was determined to become a sergeant &mdash; an honor awarded to her now posthumously.        

At the same time, on deployment she carried a hot pink pocket knife and pink duct tape, and at her unit&rsquo;s base in Fort Richardson, Alaska, she kept an off-road vehicle, also painted pink. &ldquo;She definitely had her feminine side,&rdquo; said Lieutenant Blaisdell-Black. &ldquo;Even her tattoos were all flowers and girly things.&rdquo;        

The military police is a common job choice for women who want to get into combat, but not the only one. Nowadays combat arms specialties in the infantry and armor units are the only major specialties closed to women &mdash; although even there they can go into combat as medics or combat logistics specialists.        
(Page 2 of 2)
The infantry battalion that the M.P.&rsquo;s Third Platoon was attached to here, First Battalion, 133rd Regiment, has 40 women among its 600-plus soldiers. &ldquo;To the average soldier who&rsquo;s out there on a mission, it doesn&rsquo;t make a difference,&rdquo; said the battalion commander, Lt. Col. Steven Kremer. &ldquo;Can that person on my left or right shoot is what matters. I got to tell you the females in my battalion are absolutely amazing.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Really the only time it&rsquo;s an issue is when you&rsquo;re out on a three-day patrol, and you need to find a place to pee,&rdquo; Lieutenant Blaisdell-Black said. The Army has a solution even for that, a device that enables women to urinate standing up, which the women have nicknamed She-wees.        

The night before Specialist Snyder and her comrades were killed, Specialist Shakira Lamb, the platoon&rsquo;s medic, said she had a dream: &ldquo;Someone came in to my hooch, blood and chunks all over her.&rdquo;        

When the squad went out the next morning, &ldquo;I knew something was going to happen,&rdquo; Specialist Lamb said. They were headed to a mentoring session at an Afghan police station in Alingar, and had to pass a choke point on Route Iowa through the village of Khandah, where on the platoon&rsquo;s sixth day in Afghanistan three of its members had been wounded by a bomb.        

As Specialist Lamb watched, a buried bomb in the same spot exploded under the first vehicle in their convoy, with such force that the blast killed three of the four soldiers inside instantly, Specialist Snyder among them. One soldier, Pfc. Robert L. Voakes Jr., lived long enough to be medevaced, but died shortly later.        

Private Voakes, 21, an American Indian from the Keweenaw Bay tribe in upper Michigan, was proud that he and his brother were the first members of their tribe to serve in Afghanistan. Killed with him was Sgt. Christopher R. Bell, 21, of Golden, Miss., who had a 1-year-old daughter, a girl so perfect, he told his fellow platoon members,&nbsp;that he and his wife, Sam, had no need for any more children.        

Also killed was Sgt. Joshua D. Powell, 38, a Texan with a perpetual wad of chewing tobacco and a thick drawl, who was on his second tour in Afghanistan &mdash; the first earned him a Purple Heart and an award for valor.        

He had been in the Third Platoon only a few weeks, having volunteered to replace one of the soldiers wounded earlier. The fifth victim was Brett Benton, 37, a veteran policeman from Kentucky, one of two DynCorp contractors who accompanied the platoon on their mentoring missions.        

&ldquo;It was likely they didn&rsquo;t feel anything, didn&rsquo;t even know what happened,&rdquo; said the squad leader, Sgt. Jonathan Enlow. &ldquo;The medic was having a hard time letting go.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;There wasn&rsquo;t much I could do for them and that was hard,&rdquo; said Specialist Lamb, the medic. &ldquo;Bell looked surprised. Voakes, he looked the same as he always does. Snyder, I could see her eyes, and her smile.&rdquo;        

Four days later, Lieutenant Blaisdell-Black said, the platoon sent another squad back up Route Iowa again, on the same mission. &ldquo;All the guys are really determined to carry on,&rdquo; said Sergeant Enlow, adding, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not like it was a waste or anything.&rdquo;        
