
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria offered a broad amnesty and rallied tens of thousands of supporters in Damascus and other cities on Tuesday in the latest move to blunt an uprising that poses the gravest challenge to his rule.        

The scenes across the country illustrated the complexity of the three-month crisis in Syria, which has deeply isolated Mr. Assad&rsquo;s leadership. Though orchestrated, the rallies underlined the reservoirs of support Mr. Assad himself still draws on. But even as his government sought to suggest at least the intention of reform, violence erupted again as security forces fired on counterprotests, killing nine people, activists said.        

The rallies came a day after Mr. Assad offered a national dialogue and somewhat vague promises to bring about change in one of the Middle East&rsquo;s most authoritarian governments. Though some opposition figures said parts of the speech were encouraging, many more dismissed the initiative as a step that came too late and gave too little.        

&ldquo;We wish you wouldn&rsquo;t have talked!&rdquo; some dissidents shouted Tuesday.        

Since the uprising erupted in mid-March in the poor southern town of Dara&rsquo;a, the government has sought to stanch dissent through tentative reforms, with little real impact so far, while deploying the full coercive force of the state. At times, the government has also organized rallies to demonstrate its public backing, and those convened Tuesday in Syria&rsquo;s five biggest cities &mdash; Damascus, Aleppo, Homs, Deir al-Zour and Hama &mdash; appeared to be some of the biggest yet.        

While Mr. Assad still enjoys support in Syria &mdash; particularly among minorities, the middle class and the business elite &mdash; opposition figures said people were bused in and state employees forced to attend the pro-government rallies. Companies owned by figures allied with the government also insisted that their employees go, they said. Syrian television declared that millions had taken part in the rallies, though the numbers, at least anecdotally, seemed smaller.        

&ldquo;We will sacrifice ourselves for you, Bashar!&rdquo; some shouted. Others yelled, &ldquo;God, Syria and only Bashar.&rdquo; The slogans themselves seemed antiquated in the midst of the uprising.        

&ldquo;I will stand with the president to end all those destructive elements that are hiding themselves amid peaceful demonstrators,&rdquo; said Najwa Hiddar, 20, a Damascus University student. &ldquo;I think all Syrians stand with Assad.&rdquo;        

But even within the rallies, there were voices of dissent. An employee of a private company forced by his manager to attend said he resented that at a time of economic crisis, companies and the government came to a standstill for a political ploy.        

&ldquo;Me and most of my colleagues prefer to keep our mouths shut and participate,&rdquo; said the man, who gave his name as Ali. &ldquo;We waste a workday to satisfy the regime.&rdquo;        

In several locales, counterdemonstrations were organized, and protesters occasionally clashed with government supporters. In Deir al-Zour, security forces began firing as rival crowds fought, and at least three people were killed, activists said.        

Four people were killed in Homs, Syria&rsquo;s third-largest city, and two in Idlib, a restive northern province where the military has deployed, said Wissam Tarif, head of Insan, a Syrian human rights group. He said 153 people had been arrested.        

In Hama, a large city in central Syria, security forces blocked antigovernment demonstrators from approaching the crowds convened in support of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s rule.        

&ldquo;The people want an interpretation of the speech!&rdquo; opponents shouted there, in a play on the slogan made popular in Tunisia, &ldquo;The people want the fall of the regime.&rdquo;        

Had Mr. Assad&rsquo;s speech come before the uprising, it might have been a turning point in the four decades of repressive rule by his family. But as a ferocious crackdown continues, sentiments have hardened, and protesters&rsquo; demands have grown.        

&ldquo;Assad is trying to preserve exactly the same regime with minor tweaks and that&rsquo;s not enough anymore, for most people,&rdquo; said a Syria-based analyst who spoke on the condition of anonymity. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s impossible to decipher any strategy, any vision, any policy, and most importantly, any way forward &mdash; a credible solution to the crisis.&rdquo;        

But other analysts suggested Mr. Assad may be interpreting the lessons of Egypt and Tunisia, where concessions only emboldened protesters, who eventually succeeded in toppling longtime authoritarian leaders.        

When genuine, the rallies Tuesday demonstrated sentiments that had &ldquo;less to do with support for Bashar and more to do with not wanting to descend into the unknown,&rdquo; said Bassam S. Haddad, director of the Middle East Studies Program at George Mason University. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a lot of orchestrating going on, but it&rsquo;s not all orchestration.&rdquo;        

As the rallies gathered in Damascus and elsewhere, the government offered a broader amnesty for any crimes committed until June 20, a move Mr. Assad hinted at in Monday&rsquo;s speech. It was the second such amnesty in a month, and though rights groups say hundreds of prisoners were released under the first one, a ferocious crackdown that has killed 1,400 people and led to the detention of more than 10,000, by activists&rsquo; count, has overshadowed any real change that the amnesty may have represented.        

&ldquo;This decision won&rsquo;t do anything to alleviate the pressure from the street,&rdquo; said Khalil Maatouk, a lawyer and activist in Damascus. &ldquo;The amnesty should release all political prisoners. That would mean good intentions and indicate something new.&rdquo;        
Hwaida Saad and Nada Bakri contributed reporting from Beirut, and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria.
