
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Gunmen attacked the main prison in the southern Yemen port city of Mukalla in a coordinated strike on Wednesday that freed at least 40 prisoners, according to security and ruling party officials.        

The attack underscored the country&rsquo;s worsening security situation and came as the State Department envoy Jeffrey D. Feltman began two days of meetings in the capital, Sana, with Yemen&rsquo;s vice president and leading members of the opposition. They were to discuss the political crisis here, which deepened this month when President Ali Abdullah Saleh was forced to seek medical treatment in Saudi Arabia after an attack on his presidential compound.        

Ahmed Sofan, a prominent ruling party official, said the jailbreak provided &ldquo;another sign of what happens when a country is collapsing.&rdquo;        

He said that many of the escaped prisoners were Islamic militants but that it was unclear whether they were members of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the local branch of the terrorist network. News agencies, citing anonymous Yemeni security sources, reported that many of the prisoners belonged to the group.        

A military official in Mukalla, 310 miles east of the southern city of Aden, said about 20 gunmen were involved in the attack, which lasted about 30 minutes and appeared to have been coordinated with the prisoners inside.        

The political crisis in Yemen entered a tense and uncertain phase after the strike on the presidential palace June 3. Mr. Saleh was severely burned in the attack, and a number of leading ruling party officials were injured and also left Yemen for treatment in Saudi Arabia. The state of Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s health is not known.        

The vice president, Abed Rabbo Mansour al-Hadi, has been technically in charge in Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s absence, but he has not stepped up as a leader, and rumors have circulated about Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s return.        

The United States has played an important role in the negotiations for a peaceful transfer of power in Yemen. But Mr. Saleh, an American ally who has ruled for 33 years, has repeatedly avoided signing any negotiated deal despite promises to do so.        

On Wednesday, Mr. Feltman, the American assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs, met with Mr. Hadi and condemned the attack on Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s palace while calling for a dialogue to prevent the country from falling further into crisis, the official Saba news agency reported.        

During the evening meeting with the opposition, Mr. Feltman reiterated the United States&rsquo; commitment to transferring political power to Mr. Hadi, but urged the opposition leaders to cooperate more with the vice president, according to a member of the opposition who was present at the meeting.        
Nasser Arrabyee and Yasser Alarami contributed reporting
