
CAIRO &mdash; A special military court in Bahrain convicted 21 mostly Shiite activists on Wednesday on charges of conspiring to overthrow the government during street demonstrations this year, sentencing eight to life in prison and the others to terms of up to 15 years.        

Ibrahim Sharif, a secular Muslim who was the only Sunni among the defendants, received a relatively short sentence of five years.        

The monarchy has accused the men of conspiring with the Shiite government of its increasingly powerful neighbor, Iran.        

A government spokesman, Luma E. Bashmi, released a statement saying the defendants had brought the country &ldquo;to the brink of total anarchy&rdquo; and that the long terms were sending the message that &ldquo;law and order will be preserved and therefore reassuring the majority of the population of Bahrain that their security will not be allowed to be compromised by violence or attempts to overthrow the regime or by the calling for the establishment of an Islamic Republic.&rdquo;        

Of the 21 sentences, seven were handed down in absentia, mostly to men thought to be in Britain. One, Ali Mushaima, 28, has been living in Britain; his father, the opposition leader Hasan Mushaima, was among those sentenced to life.        

&ldquo;Our people will not give up,&rdquo; the younger Mr. Mushaima said, adding, &ldquo;Today in Bahrain, in every village, people must take to the streets.&rdquo;        

After the sentencing, the police fired tear gas to stop marchers in Manama from reaching a central section of the city, Pearl Square, in one of the first demonstrations in months, The Associated Press reported, citing witnesses.        

In the courtroom in Manama, the capital, the defendants pumped fists in the air and shouted &ldquo;peacefully&rdquo; &mdash; a mantra from the protests &mdash; as guards dragged them away, according to witnesses who gave their accounts to Reuters.        

The protests broke out in the winter, as members of Bahrain&rsquo;s Shiite majority, inspired by the Tunisian and Egyptian revolutions, mounted demonstrations to accuse the Sunni monarchy of discrimination in housing, education and employment, and call for justice. King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa responded with a crackdown in which more than 30 demonstrators were killed, according to human rights groups. In mid-March, he decreed a state of emergency and tamped down the protests with the aid of troops from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.        

The Bahraini authorities insisted that the judicial process was legitimate and that the defendants had access to legal advice and representation. The prosecutor&rsquo;s office said in a statement that the accused could appeal within 15 days , and that representatives of human rights organizations in Bahrain attended the trial, as did representatives of local and foreign news media and relatives of the accused.        

But human rights organizations condemned the proceedings as being purely political.        

Faraz Sanei, a researcher with Human Rights Watch, described the defendants as &ldquo;prominent opposition figures and leaders,&rdquo; people who have been known in Bahrain for years. The arrest and prosecution of Mr. Sharif, the leader of a political organization called Waad, had come as a particular shock, Mr. Sanei said.        

&ldquo;Like the others, he was picked up by masked gunmen, in the middle of the night, held incommunicado,&rdquo; Mr. Sanei said. &ldquo;A lot of people were surprised he was arrested, and it seemed that the government&rsquo;s motivation to do so was that he doesn&rsquo;t fit the mold of the rabid Shiite opposition activist that they are always trying to present. He was part of an organization which wasn&rsquo;t even outlawed.&rdquo;        

International criticism over his arrest might help to explain Mr. Sharif&rsquo;s relatively light sentence, Mr. Sanei said.        

Another defendant, Abduljalil al-Singace, had been imprisoned in August, along with more than 20 others. Mr. Sanei said the arrest of Mr. Singace, a member of Al Haq, a banned opposition movement, was &ldquo;one of the catalysts for the protests that happened earlier this year.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;In fact,&rdquo; he continued, &ldquo;many of the same people arrested in August are the ones who were arrested again and charged in this case. As a gesture of good will, the king released them while protests were ongoing, in February.&rdquo;        

Proceedings at the special military court &ldquo;do not in any way satisfy international trial standards,&rdquo; Mr. Sanei said, noting that while the government says the Court of National Safety is not a military court, a military judge presides and the military provides the prosecutor, though two civilian judges are present. The defendants did not have access to lawyers, he said, and were held incommunicado with no access to their families for weeks.        

&ldquo;Quite a few of them have told us that they were subjected to torture in detention, as well,&rdquo; he added.        

The king, who has called for dialogue and reconciliation, ended the country&rsquo;s state of emergency on June 1, but the situation remains tense, with security checkpoints and a heavy police presence around the country.        

Meeting with President Obama last week, the Bahraini crown prince, Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa, reaffirmed his father&rsquo;s commitment to dialogue and reconciliation. Human rights groups say the trials are incompatible with those goals.        

Bahrain, an archipelago of 36 islands off eastern Saudi Arabia, is an important regional ally of the United States, serving as the base of the United States Navy&rsquo;s Fifth Fleet.        

In 2002, King Hamad promulgated a constitution promising democratic measures inspired by those of countries like Britain and Denmark, but opponents say he has failed to deliver.        
Lara El Gibaly reported from Cairo, and David Jolly from Paris. Ravi Somaiya contributed reporting from London.
