
Brian Haw, who day after day and night after night for nearly a decade maintained a vigil outside Parliament in London to protest the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, becoming an annoyance to some politicians and a stopping point for tour guides, died on Saturday. He was 62.        

Mr. Haw died in Germany, where he had been receiving treatment for lung cancer since March, his family told The Associated Press.        

On June 2, 2001, Mr. Haw &mdash; an evangelical Christian who had previously taken his one-man world peace mission to Northern Ireland during the so-called Troubles and to the killing fields of Cambodia as that country tried to heal &mdash; set up a makeshift camp on the grassy area in Parliament Square.        

At first, his protest was directed at the impact of United Nations economic sanctions, imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990, on the children of Iraq. After the American-led invasion of Iraq in 2003, which Prime Minister Tony Blair&rsquo;s government supported, it became, to use Mr. Haw&rsquo;s preferred term, a protest for peace.        

Not long after, he moved to the pavement opposite the Houses of Parliament and began building what grew into a wall 20 yards long of peace flags, handmade placards (&ldquo;Stop Killing My Kids&rdquo;) and photographs (Mr. Blair with a Hitlerish mustache). The police would tear down that wall in 2007, but Mr. Haw, with one sign, stayed.        

Parliament Square became his home. His mail was delivered there. It was his registered address when he ran for Parliament in 2004, receiving 298 votes. People gave him food, coffee, tobacco. He slept under a green tarp and spent his days hectoring the powerful across the road through his bullhorn. Drivers would honk in support. Three times, he said, his nose was broken by irate passers-by.        

City officials and members of Parliament passed several measures to oust him. Most were overturned. One, which required protesters to have authorization from the police &ldquo;when the demonstration starts,&rdquo; could not be applied to him retroactively.        

He continued to demonstrate &ldquo;because our country is committing infanticide, genocide, the looting of nations,&rdquo; he told reporters in 2010. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m determined to be there until they kill me.&rdquo;        

Brian William Haw was born in Barking, near London, on Jan. 7, 1949. He served in the Merchant Navy before attending a religious school in Nottingham for one semester, after which he embarked on his world peace mission.        

Mr. Haw is survived by seven children. He and his wife, Kay, divorced in 2003, a year and a half into his round-the-clock demonstration in Parliament Square. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t kiss my own child each night, but I&rsquo;m doing this for all the children,&rdquo; he told The New York Times in 2005.        

On Monday, his camping chair and footstool remained in place across the street from Parliament.        
