
BEIJING &mdash; The Chinese legal authorities released the dissident artist Ai Weiwei on Wednesday after a three-month detention, apparently ending a prosecution that had become a focal point of criticism of China&rsquo;s eroding human rights record.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m released, I&rsquo;m home, I&rsquo;m fine,&rdquo; Mr. Ai said in English after being reached on his cellphone shortly before 12:30 a.m. Thursday. &ldquo;In legal terms, I&rsquo;m &mdash; how do you say? &mdash; on bail. So I cannot give any interviews. But I&rsquo;m fine.&rdquo;        

Photographs of Mr. Ai taken as he arrived after 11 p.m. Wednesday at his vast studio in the Caochangdi arts district of northeast Beijing showed him smiling, wearing a blue T-shirt, and with his trademark bushy beard streaked with gray. The shirt hung loosely on him, his girth reduced during his time in custody.        

The release of Mr. Ai, 54, who is widely known and admired outside of China, appeared to be a rare example in recent years of Beijing bowing to international pressure on human rights, though the terms of his release may silence him for months or even years, giving hard-liners here at least a partial victory. Mr. Ai was the most prominent of hundreds of people detained since China intensified a broad crackdown on critics of the government in February, when anonymous calls for mass protests modeled after the revolutions in the Arab world percolated on the Chinese Internet.        

China&rsquo;s move to douse any flicker of dissent was the harshest in years outside of the restive ethnic regions in the far west, and the vast majority of those detained in the crackdown were, like Mr. Ai, held in secret locations for weeks with no legal justification.        

Chinese officials announced in May that the authorities were investigating Mr. Ai on suspicion of tax evasion, after police officers took him from the main Beijing airport on April 3 as he prepared to board a flight to Hong Kong. Supporters of Mr. Ai said the tax inquiry was a pretext to silence one of the most vocal critics of the Chinese Communist Party.        

Mr. Ai is presumed to be well connected because he is the son of Ai Qing, one of the most beloved poets of modern China. His detention was nearly certain to have been approved by top Chinese leaders. It is unclear what kinds of discussions took place within elite political circles that ultimately led to his release.        

But China came under unusually heavy pressure from all corners of the globe, not only from standard diplomatic channels but also from prominent people like Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York, who harangued China in May at a Manhattan opening of an outdoor sculpture exhibition by Mr. Ai, and Anish Kapoor, a leading sculptor in Britain who this month canceled a show planned for the National Museum of China in Beijing. Prime Minister Wen Jiabao of China was scheduled to visit Britain and Germany starting on Saturday, and he almost certainly would have encountered protests and condemnation, whether on the streets or in private meetings.        

&ldquo;Without the wave of international support for Ai and the popular expressions of dismay and disgust about the circumstances of his disappearance and detention, it&rsquo;s highly unlikely the Chinese government would have released him,&rdquo; Phelim Kine, an Asia researcher for Human Rights Watch, said in an e-mail. &ldquo;The public announcement of his release signals that the Chinese government has had to respond to this pressure and that the cost-benefit ratio of continuing to detain him was no longer tenable.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kine noted that less visible Chinese remain missing and &ldquo;at high risk&rdquo; of torture. Among them are Wen Tao, a former journalist and aide to Mr. Ai, and other associates of Mr. Ai, including Hu Mingfen, Liu Zhenggang and Zhang Jinsong.        

Gao Ge, Mr. Ai&rsquo;s sister, said in a telephone interview that Mr. Ai&rsquo;s wife, Lu Qing, got a call on Wednesday and was told to go to a police station in Beijing. &ldquo;She didn&rsquo;t know what would happen, and then the police said that Weiwei was free to go with her back home,&rdquo; Ms. Gao said. Mr. Ai got home before midnight, and his mother went to meet him.        

&ldquo;All I care about is that he&rsquo;s home now,&rdquo; Ms. Gao said.        

Word of Mr. Ai&rsquo;s release first emerged in a report posted online Wednesday night by Xinhua, the state news agency. It said in English that the Beijing police had released Mr. Ai on bail &ldquo;because of his good attitude in confessing his crimes as well as a chronic disease he suffers from.&rdquo;        

Xinhua also quoted the police as saying that Mr. Ai had repeatedly said he was willing to pay the taxes he had evaded. The news agency reported the authorities as saying that Beijing Fake Cultural Development Ltd., a company controlled by Mr. Ai, evaded &ldquo;a huge amount of taxes and intentionally destroyed accounting documents.&rdquo;        

Mia Li contributed research.
