
CAIRO &mdash; Iran&rsquo;s state-run Press TV announced on Wednesday that the government of the Islamic Republic had arrested 30 people in May on suspicion of spying for the United States.        

The report quoted Haida Moslehi, the director of Iranian intelligence, as saying that that an additional 42 people had been identified as C.I.A. operatives in various countries.        

Operatives working in the United Arab Emirates, Turkey, and Malaysia, among others, were used to make contact with Iranians who could provide important information on everything from key infrastructure elements to the oil and gas industry to the nuclear program, it said.        

The alleged espionage operation used various companies, including a job-finding center, for its work, said the English-language report. It suggested that there were double agents involved, and that at least one of those arrested had already been convicted.        

The report identified Jamshid Sadegh Hosseini as a &ldquo;convicted U.S. nuclear spy&rdquo; who had handed over &ldquo;valuable information&rdquo; about the nuclear program from work at the Kalaye Electric Company.        

Mr. Hosseini was quoted as saying in the report that he had been called by a recruitment agency, asked to come to a meeting and then enticed by an agency operative to report on activities with promises of more education abroad as well as a foreign bank account.        

&ldquo;In general, he offered me a world which was really enchanting,&rdquo; Mr. Hosseini was quoted as saying. &ldquo;He was really kind to me and complimented me on everything, even on my looks.&rdquo;        

The Press TV report said Mr. Hosseini was directed on where to collect his money from Google Earth, the mapping service. Google Earth has often provoked the ire of officials in Iran and elsewhere because political opposition groups have used it to help pinpoint areas of police operations during pro-democracy demonstrations.        

Iran has a history of leveling spying charges against people without producing evidence or holding open trials for them.        

Three American hikers were arrested inside Iran near the Iraqi border in July 2009 and have never been brought to trial nor any evidence presented. Two of them, Joshua F. Fattal and Shane M. Bauer, both 28, remain jailed in Tehran.        

The third hiker, Sarah E. Shroud, 32, who was released on bail for medical reasons last September, said they only crossed the border from Iraq&rsquo;s Kurdistan region into Iran after an Iranian border guard waved to them to come talk to him. Then they were detained and accused of spying, she said.        

The Press-TV report said Iranians who graduated from a top university were targeted once they applied for visas. The report, in somewhat breathless language, said one person figured out there was something amiss because the cell phone number of the person who pretended to be calling from the United States did not have an American area code, while the report said spies were recruited to gather information about cash machines and the Tehran subway system.        

That was part of a plan to disrupt Iran&rsquo;s infrastructure, the report said, as was the gathering of information about the electricity grid. The story suggested the alleged spy ring was meant to help foment disruptions in day-to-day life that would make Iranians unhappy with their country.        

The operatives sought information from Iran&rsquo;s scientific, research and academic centers, particularly concentrating on the air and defense industries and nuclear energy, the report said. Iran had been tracking the ring for a year, it said.        
