
WASHINGTON &mdash; Hours after the Sept. 11 attacks, Pakistan&rsquo;s leaders were given an ultimatum by the Bush administration: Because the looming war in Afghanistan could not be won without Pakistan&rsquo;s help, Islamabad would have to choose between continuing its alliance with the Taliban or joining forces with the United States.        

Just shy of 10 years later, President Obama&rsquo;s announcement on Wednesday night that he is beginning the long-anticipated withdrawal from Afghanistan marks another step in the gradual reversal of that calculus. Though the president could not say so directly, one of the constraints on America&rsquo;s retreat from a hard and bloody decade is the recognition that, more than ever, the United States will be relying on Afghanistan&rsquo;s help to deal with the threats emerging from Pakistan.        

The administration argues that the killing of Osama bin Laden last month at his compound deep inside Pakistan, combined with scores of other counterterrorism strikes, have given it greater leeway to reduce its troop numbers in Afghanistan. Yet Pakistan&rsquo;s angry reaction to that raid also makes it more urgent than ever that the United States maintain sites outside the country to launch drone and commando raids against the militant networks that remain in Pakistan, and to make sure that Pakistan&rsquo;s fast-growing nuclear arsenal never falls into the wrong hands.        

What the raid of the Bin Laden compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, &ldquo;demonstrated more vividly than ever is that we need a base to strike targets in Pakistan, and the geography is simple: You need to do that from Afghanistan,&rdquo; said Bruce Reidel, a retired C.I.A. officer who conducted Mr. Obama&rsquo;s first review of strategy in the region.        

As such, there are two reasons American planners hope to negotiate with the government of President Hamid Karzai an agreement to keep upward of 25,000 American forces in Afghanistan, even after the 30,000 &ldquo;surge&rdquo; troops are withdrawn over the next 14 months, and tens of thousands of more by the end of 2014.        

Their first is to assure that Afghanistan never again becomes a base for attacks on the United States. But the more urgent reason is Pakistan. In his speech, Mr. Obama invited Pakistan to expand its peaceful cooperation in the region, but he also noted that Pakistan must live up to its commitments and that &ldquo;the U.S. will never tolerate a safe haven for those who would destroy us.&rdquo;        

Pakistan has already made it clear, however, that it will never allow American forces to be based there. As relations have turned more hostile with the United States in recent months, it has refused to issue visas to large numbers of C.I.A. officers and seems to be moving quickly to close the American drone base in Shamsi, Pakistan.        

For their part, administration officials make it clearer than ever that they view Pakistan&rsquo;s harboring of terrorist groups as the more urgent problem. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t see a transnational threat coming out of Afghanistan,&rdquo; a senior administration official said Wednesday in briefing reporters before the president&rsquo;s speech. Later he added, &ldquo;The threat has come from Pakistan.&rdquo;        

Those realities have placed increasing pressure on Obama administration officials to secure some long-term success from the war in Afghanistan. That is by no means guaranteed. As the bulk of international forces leave, the country may yet descend into civil war and chaos.        

Indeed, several senior administration officials acknowledged in recent days that the announcement by Mr. Obama merely put the best face possible on a three-year plan to retreat from what was once an expansive experiment in nation-building.        

The key goal now will be a diminished one &mdash; counterterrorism work to finish off Al Qaeda &mdash; that is far closer to the mission that Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and some political aides at the White House argued for 18 months ago. With Wednesday&rsquo;s announcement, President Obama indicated that he has slowly inched toward that view as well.        

&ldquo;The hard part over the next few years will be proving to the Afghans that there is something in this for them,&rdquo; Mr. Reidel said.        

That is particularly difficult because what the Afghans may well draw from Mr. Obama&rsquo;s prime-time speech is that the Americans are leaving again &mdash; just as they did after the Soviet Union gave up its war in 1989 &mdash; but this time more slowly.        

Over the past decade, the Afghans heard many promises from Washington. Months after ordering the invasion that drove out the Taliban government, President George W. Bush declared that the United States would initiate a new Marshall Plan for Afghanistan; it never fully materialized.        

In 2009 Mr. Obama spoke of a &ldquo;civilian surge&rdquo; of &ldquo;agricultural specialists and educators, engineers and lawyers&rdquo; who would train Afghans how to create a modern country. The results have been limited, and Mr. Obama never mentioned those goals in the speech Wednesday night.        

Administration officials insist that those efforts will continue, despite the drawdown. Even after all the &ldquo;surge&rdquo; forces return home, there will still be 68,000 American troops on the ground next year &mdash; more than twice the number that were in Afghanistan the day Mr. Obama took office.        

But over time, the counterterrorism mission will require fewer troops in the region, administration officials said.        

&ldquo;When we think about Al Qaeda and we talk about them within Afghanistan, we say it is about 50 or 75 folks who are actually in there as fighters, and mostly they are embedded within Haqqani units,&rdquo; one senior administration official said in an interview last week, referring to a militant network based in Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal areas.        

The official made clear that the administration&rsquo;s primary focus now was a much larger, and more dangerous, presence of insurgents remaining in Pakistan.        

The essence of Mr. Obama&rsquo;s decision is to accelerate what&rsquo;s working &mdash; no matter how loudly the Pakistanis protest about drone strikes and violations of their sovereignty.        

Over the past few weeks, officials have used that same logic to justify a steeper reduction of forces in Afghanistan.        

&ldquo;What they are doing, of course, is changing the metrics of success,&rdquo; said David Rothkopf, who wrote a leading history of the National Security Council, which has led Mr. Obama&rsquo;s effort to narrow the objectives in Afghanistan &mdash; and focus anew on counterterrorism strikes inside Pakistan.        

&ldquo;It was only a few years ago that we debated how long it would take to train the Afghan military to take the lead in securing the most violent, contested parts of the country,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;Or how long it would take to build schools and courts and provide basic services. No one wants to talk about that very much any more &mdash; the time lines are longer and the costs larger than the politics here at home will bear.&rdquo;        
