
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The Syrian foreign minister on Wednesday denounced new European sanctions aimed at top military and government officials, saying in a televised news conference that they were &ldquo;targeting the livelihood of the Syrian citizens&rdquo; and &ldquo;tantamount to war.&rdquo;        

The minister, Walid al-Moallem, spoke the day after the European Union extended sanctions to four Syrian firms linked to the country&rsquo;s armed forces and a number of officials who are believed to be involved in the brutal crackdown against protesters seeking to end four decades of Assad family rule.        

In May, the United States imposed sanctions on President Bashar al-Assad and six other senior Syrian officials, and the European Union followed suit a few days later.        

Both the United States and the European Union added other sanctions &mdash; including some focused on Mr. Assad himself &mdash; as the Syrian crackdown grew in intensity. But Syrian officials are thought to be more concerned with steps by Europe, given its proximity to Syria and closer economic ties.        

On Monday, Mr. Assad delivered his third speech since the protests erupted in mid-March, calling for a national dialogue and promising somewhat vague reforms. Some opposition figures said there were positive elements in the speech, though many denounced the initiative as coming too late and not going far enough.        

Mr. Moallem followed with warnings on Wednesday against foreign meddling and threats to shift Syria&rsquo;s orientation away from the West, reversing initiatives Mr. Assad had planned before the unrest that called for Turkey to serve as the country&rsquo;s gateway to Europe.        

&ldquo;We will forget that Europe is on the map,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;And we will turn to the east, to the south and all directions that extend a hand to Syria. The world is not only Europe, and Syria will remain steadfast like always.&rdquo;        

The foreign minister also said that despite mounting foreign pressure on Damascus over the crackdown, from friends like Turkey and foes in Europe and the United States, he was confident that there would be no international military intervention.        

Syria has suffered international isolation for years, only to re-emerge as crises subside. But the steps taken by Europe and the United States have made Syria more isolated than it has been in decades. Even Turkey, long reluctant to criticize its southern neighbor, has become sharper in its condemnations, testing the friendship that Mr. Assad has built with its prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan.        

In his speech, Mr. Moallem made several appeals to Turkey to rethink its position. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to analyze the Turkish reasons, but I tell some friends to reconsider their decisions,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We want the best relations with Turkey.&rdquo;        

Mr. Moallem also denied that Iran and Hezbollah, the Shiite Lebanese militant group, had intervened militarily to aid Syria in crushing the antigovernment protests. Some opposition figures have contended that foreigners have participated in a crackdown that has stretched across the country. He also accused Al Qaeda of being behind some of the violence, judging by the pattern and style of killings of security personnel and soldiers.        

&ldquo;I cannot hide the fact that some of the practices that we have seen in the killings of security personnel&rdquo; indicate that these acts were carried out by Al Qaeda, he said.        

Mr. Assad pledged in his Monday speech to introduce reforms and invited Syrians to a dialogue. But political opponents and world leaders dismissed the promises as killings and arrests continued after the speech. Human rights groups have said that at least 1,300 civilians have died since the uprising started, and thousands have been detained without charges.        

The European Union barred Mr. Assad and other top Syrian officials from traveling to Europe in May, and European officials said more names were expected to be added to the list.        
