
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; A special court set up at the behest of President Hamid Karzai ordered on Thursday the reinstatement of 62 candidates who had lost their seats or had been disqualified from last year&rsquo;s parliamentary elections, reviving the prospect of a constitutional crisis for the nation.        

The decision was the latest chapter in a heated dispute over allegations of fraud in last September&rsquo;s elections. Coming a day after President Obama&rsquo;s announcement of troop withdrawals from Afghanistan, it provided a stinging reminder of the potential for turbulence in the country&rsquo;s fledgling democracy.        

Mr. Karzai swore in the current Parliament in January under pressure from his international backers and angry threats from the winning candidates. But he did so only after setting up the special court to review complaints by scores of candidates &mdash; many of them Pashtuns from his political base in the south &mdash; who were disqualified by the country&rsquo;s election commissions.        

The disqualifications not only threatened to reduce Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s allies in Parliament, but also raised concerns that they would disenfranchise Pashtuns, the nation&rsquo;s largest ethnic group, in parts of the country where the insurgency was most intense.        

The creation of the special court, however, set off a bitter standoff between the country&rsquo;s election authorities, who declared the court illegal, and the nation&rsquo;s attorney general, Mohammed Ishaq Aloko, who had convened the court on the president&rsquo;s orders and who has brought a series of criminal charges against election officials, alleging corruption.        

Actions last year by the Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission had invalidated the votes cast for 413 candidates, overturning their victories or in some cases blocking them from running in the Sept. 18 elections. In all, 2,500 candidates ran for the Parliament&rsquo;s 249 seats.        

One result of the dispute has been that Mr. Karzai has in effect been governing without Parliament. His cabinet, mostly appointed a year ago, still has not been confirmed, and although lawmakers have rejected some of his ministers, they still sit on an acting basis.        

On Thursday, the five judges of the special court presided over a recount of the votes from disputed districts throughout the country, an event televised live. Armed intelligence agents stood behind the judges. The courtroom, packed with previously disqualified candidates, broke out in cheers at the decision.        

In announcing the results, the court&rsquo;s chief judge, Sediqullah Haqiq, said the next step was for the verdict to be carried out by the attorney general and the elections commission. Election officials immediately refused to do so, and members of the current Parliament promptly passed a no-confidence vote against the attorney general, Mr. Aloko, trying to force him from office.        

&ldquo;The Independent Election Commission has the authority of declaring the final results according to the election law and the Constitution, and no other institution can do this,&rdquo; said Tabish Farough, the commission&rsquo;s spokesman.        

The attorney general has brought criminal charges against at least four prominent members of the election commission, alleging corruption and abuse of office but offering no details.        

&ldquo;Until now, no charges based on evidence have been brought,&rdquo; Mr. Farough said. The charges are &ldquo;just for the pressure and intimidation of the commission.&rdquo; He said the commission was concerned about the long-term effect of the special court&rsquo;s efforts to overturn the election results.        

&ldquo;Any kind of interference will damage the electoral process and also damage democracy in the future,&rdquo; he said.        

It was unclear what process would be pursued to seat the 62 candidates declared winners by the special court. It would apparently require removing 62 members already in their seats, nearly a fourth of the Parliament. Mr. Aloko in the past has suggested that this could be done by bringing criminal vote-fraud charges against the sitting members. The court&rsquo;s ruling potentially gives him grounds to do so.        

Abdullah Abdullah, a former presidential candidate, also denounced the court&rsquo;s action as unconstitutional and said it raised questions about the independence of the Afghan judiciary. Mr. Abdullah lost the 2009 presidential elections to Mr. Karzai, a vote widely regarded as fraudulent. He said he believed the president was trying to rule without Parliament in the hopes of eventually changing the Constitution so he could stay in office when his second term ended in 2014.        

&ldquo;President Karzai does not believe in the rule of law; he thinks democracy doesn&rsquo;t work in his favor,&rdquo; Mr. Abdullah said. &ldquo;It all comes down to one thing: Karzai cannot be a candidate for the next elections.&rdquo;        
Sangar Rahimi contributed reporting.
