
DAKAR, Senegal &mdash; Stone-throwing youths took to the streets of this capital on Thursday to protest what they saw as a power grab in one of Africa&rsquo;s democratic bastions, forcing the president to back down.        

Tear-gas rounds fired by the police crackled through the streets, hundreds of people massed in front of the National Assembly and played cat-and-mouse with security forces, and chunks of concrete littered usually untroubled downtown thoroughfares. But the protesters let out a huge cheer late in the afternoon at the news that the president, Abdoulaye Wade, had scrapped a plan for a constitutional change that many in the crowd denounced as &ldquo;monarchic.&rdquo;        

The unrest on Thursday was all the more surprising for taking place in a West African country where power has never been seized in a coup, a rarity in the region. Senegal, a small coastal nation dependent on fishing, farming and foreign aid, remains one of the few countries where the presidency has been handed off peacefully to the opposition after elections considered legitimate, and its unusual stability has made it a magnet for international agencies and companies in West Africa.        

But the protesters &mdash; who included opposition party members and their leaders as well as youths from the impoverished suburbs and middle-class people furious over prolonged power cuts &mdash; said the country&rsquo;s record of democracy was threatened by Mr. Wade&rsquo;s plans to stay in power. The 85-year-old president is seeking a third term next year.        

In the end, the crowd forced a quick retreat, another reminder of the country&rsquo;s unusual status among neighbors where leaders have been far slower to heed the voices of protest.        

&ldquo;This proves once again that the mobilization of the people is a formidable source of democracy,&rdquo; said a protest leader, the former Prime Minister Moustapha Niasse, sitting with other leaders in the dense crowd.        

&ldquo;The African Spring will begin here in Senegal,&rdquo; said Ousmane Tanor Dieng, secretary general of the opposition Socialist Party.        

The crowd repeatedly yelled, &ldquo;Resign, resign.&rdquo;        

In particular, the protesters criticized Mr. Wade&rsquo;s proposal to lower the threshold for victory to just 25 percent of the vote in the first round. They argued that the change would virtually guarantee his re-election. They also opposed a proposal to create a vice presidency on the same ticket. That measure was a subterfuge, opposition leaders contended, to install Mr. Wade&rsquo;s son Karim, already a powerful government minister, in the presidency, since it would have allowed for a transfer of power to the vice president.        

As members of Mr. Wade&rsquo;s party in Parliament &mdash; he holds a majority in the Assembly &mdash; debated what to do Thursday afternoon, the protesters milled about in a central downtown square near the waterfront, denouncing what they saw as a threat.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re simply trying to stop the party in power from taking our Constitution hostage,&rdquo; said Rashid Dieme, a teacher. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s obviously trying to clear the path to his re-election.&rdquo;        

One of Mr. Wade&rsquo;s ministers, Bamba Ndiaye, minister-counselor in charge of religious affairs, said the president, in scrapping the plan, had listened to the street on Thursday.        

&ldquo;He has responded to the expectations of the people,&rdquo; Mr. Ndiaye said. &ldquo;Reacting to this demand from the people, the president of the republic has wisely decided to withdraw his proposal.&rdquo;        
