
BAGHDAD &mdash; Three explosions ripped through a public market on Thursday evening, killing at least 21 people and leaving a gruesome scene of scattered body parts and bloodied shoppers.        

The attack, in a largely Shiite neighborhood, was notable in that it struck at civilians in the heavily fortified capital and left a high death toll. Many of the large-scale attacks lately have been against government institutions, like the police, as well as local officials.        

Earlier in the day, an attack on an American convoy killed a civilian working for U.S.A.I.D. The victim, Dr. Stephen Everhart, was working with Baghdad University to develop a new business curriculum, according to a statement from the State Department.        

One witness to the market attack, a dentist who owns a clinic nearby, described what he saw in the street after he heard two blasts.        

&ldquo;Everyone was screaming and crying, and everyone was covered in blood,&rdquo; said the dentist, Mustafa Saoih.        

Mr. Saoih, a Sunni, added that he had endured the sectarian strife of 2006 and 2007 but until Thursday had &ldquo;never seen such things.&rdquo;        

He said that he feared a return of rampant violence, and that he would not go back to his clinic for at least two weeks.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s all about sectarian war,&rdquo; he said.        

A couple hours after the explosions, an official in the Interior Ministry put the casualty toll at 21 dead and more than 100 wounded. The official said that improvised explosive devices had been hidden among the groceries at the market. The Associated Press, citing police officials, reported that 34 people had been killed.        

The bombing was the latest in a particularly violent week for Iraq, and it came two days after two suicide bombers detonated vehicles packed with explosives near a provincial governor&rsquo;s house in the southern part of the country. That attack left at least 27 people dead.        

Just after the market explosions, a car bomb detonated in another southwest Baghdad district. The early report from the Interior Ministry was that two people had been killed and that five people had been wounded. In the northern city of Kirkuk on Thursday, at least five people were hurt when two police patrols were attacked with improvised explosive devices, according to a local official.        

The spurt of violence on Thursday occurred as Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki in a speech rebuked his ministries and promised to dismiss many incompetent officials. The speech came after the expiration of a 100-day deadline that Mr. Maliki had imposed on his ministries to improve their performance. The deadline, which passed weeks ago, was prompted by street protests this year by people demanding improved services.        
Zaid Thaker contributed reporting.
