
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; President Hamid Karzai ordered a month&rsquo;s delay in seating a new Parliament on Wednesday, heightening a constitutional crisis that threatens to fuel bitter infighting and potentially even violence among the country&rsquo;s rival factions.        

The move leaves Afghanistan without a Parliament five months after its September election, with the prospect of even further delays. It also puts Mr. Karzai squarely at odds with his international backers, who insist that the elections were valid after investing heavily in them as a way to promote Afghanistan&rsquo;s fledgling democracy.        

Mr. Karzai made his decision at the request of a special court he personally appointed to hear complaints from losing candidates, who say fraud and insecurity left large parts of the population excluded from the vote. Many are from the heavily Pashtun south, where the insurgency is most intense and Mr. Karzai maintains his main political base.        

Their reduced representation in the new Parliament, which was scheduled to be inaugurated Sunday, threatens to drive more Pashtun regions into the arms of the Taliban insurgency, some have warned. But Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s decision &mdash; which moved the country one step closer to undoing the election &mdash; contained real risks of its own and underscored the paucity of good options since the disputed vote.        

While the losing candidates say the skewed results could lead to a new dimension of violence in Afghanistan, the winning candidates are unlikely to accept any reworking of the results and threaten violent protests of their own if they are deprived of their seats.        

In addition, the Karzai administration&rsquo;s effort to redress the complaints has precipitated a crisis of its own and drawn charges that the president is trying to engineer a more favorable outcome for himself.        

A range of Afghan and international officials consider the special court that Mr. Karzai appointed to be unconstitutional, insisting that Afghanistan&rsquo;s election commission has final say over the election. The commission, which has certified the results as legitimate, has refused to cooperate with the court.        

The former Parliament adjourned before the balloting in September, and as the dispute lingers Mr. Karzai has ruled by decree, further worrying his international backers.        

On Wednesday, furious efforts were under way by Western diplomats to persuade Mr. Karzai to ignore the court&rsquo;s demands and inaugurate the Parliament as scheduled on Sunday, but the president rebuffed their pleas.        

&ldquo;We cannot afford a country without a Parliament,&rdquo; said a Western diplomat in Kabul, who spoke on condition of anonymity to avoid offending Afghan politicians.        

&ldquo;I see a twofold danger, a constitutional crisis and how it will affect stability in the country,&rdquo; the diplomat said. &ldquo;For Western taxpayers who are hungry for good news,  this looks awful.&rdquo;        

In a news conference on Wednesday attended by scores of losing candidates who have been pressing for new elections, Sediqullah Haqiq, the chief judge of the special court, said that the elections were tainted by &ldquo;huge fraud,&rdquo; and that he needed at least another month &mdash; possibly longer &mdash; to rule on the elections. He suggested that the court might have to order recounts in some provinces.        

While the losers were jubilant at Judge Haqiq&rsquo;s declaration, winning candidates, who expected to take their seats at Parliament&rsquo;s inauguration Sunday, were indignant.        

&ldquo;The instability and insecurity you see now will grow 10 times over, and it will not be like regular violence, it will be worse,&rdquo; said Qazi Nazir Ahmad, a newly re-elected member of Parliament from Herat Province.        

Western officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that delaying the inauguration of Parliament or, even worse, annulling the election, would unravel the country&rsquo;s nascent democracy. &ldquo;Is a delay the endgame, or is it no Parliament for another year that&rsquo;s the endgame, or is it a throw-out of the Parliament altogether?&rdquo; said a Western official in Kabul.        

Judge Haqiq complained that when his court wrote to Afghanistan&rsquo;s Independent Election Commission asking for information to help its inquiries, it was rebuffed. The commission&rsquo;s reply was short and to the point:  &ldquo;No other organization can question anything about the elections. If you or anyone else wants to know anything else about this, you can go to our Web site,  www.iec.org.af.com.&rdquo;        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting.
