
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; The president of Somalia&rsquo;s transitional government on Thursday appointed a Harvard-educated prime minister who said he would try to revive Somalia&rsquo;s war-wrecked economy and establish better security in a country that has been virtually lawless for 20 years.        

The president, Sheik Sharif Sheik Ahmed, seemed to be continuing with his preference for Western-educated technocrats by naming Abdiweli Mohamed Ali as prime minister. Mr. Ali&rsquo;s r&eacute;sum&eacute; reads like the itinerary on a tour of prominent American universities: it says he holds a master&rsquo;s degree in public administration from Harvard, a master&rsquo;s degree in economics from Vanderbilt and a Ph.D. in economics from George Mason University. In recent years, he has been teaching economics at Niagara University in upstate New York.        

He is Somali-American, and his profile is similar to that of Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed, the previous prime minister, who also is an American citizen. He was abruptly pushed out of Somalia&rsquo;s transitional government this month as part of a United Nations-backed deal to resolve an internal political dispute. Mr. Ali was a deputy prime minister and had been the acting prime minister since Mr. Mohamed resigned.        

At a news conference on Thursday in Mogadishu, Somalia&rsquo;s capital, Sheik Sharif praised Mr. Ali, whose academic focus has been international trade, public finance and public choice.        

&ldquo;He is a good man,&rdquo; the president said. &ldquo;I hope he will improve the situation of Somalia.&rdquo;        

Few would argue that Somalia needs it. The Transitional Federal Government has been paralyzed by infighting and accusations of corruption over the past several months, and it controls only a small patch of the capital. Much of the rest of the country, which is nearly the size of Texas, is ruled by clan militias and Islamist insurgents. Somalia&rsquo;s seas are plagued by pirates, whose ransoms keep going up, to about $10 million per hijacked ship.        

African Union peacekeepers have recently uprooted insurgents from several neighborhoods in Mogadishu, but without a functioning government most analysts predict the insurgents will be back.        

&ldquo;Somalia is in a difficult situation; there is an economic crisis and insecurity,&rdquo; Reuters quoted Mr. Ali as saying. &ldquo;I hope I will succeed in overcoming all these problems. I urge the entire government and Somalis to help me achieve this.&rdquo;        

The transitional government&rsquo;s Parliament, an often fickle and unpredictable group, must approve Mr. Ali&rsquo;s appointment. Sheik Sharif said he was urging the lawmakers to act fast, because the mandate for the transitional government expires in August 2012. Somalia has cycled through more than a dozen transitional governments since the central government collapsed in 1991.        
