
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Many in Kabul are welcoming the announcement of the United States troop withdrawal, but in southern Afghanistan, in the pomegranate orchards and deserts that are the war&rsquo;s front lines, the mood is far more sober: Local officials and tribal elders are questioning the ability of Afghan troops to defend them and say the Taliban are far from defeated.        

President Hamid Karzai, who spoke to reporters on Thursday in his heavily guarded palace in the capital, Kabul, set the tone for senior government figures with words that sounded almost heady with excitement. He described the announcement that American troops would depart as &ldquo;a moment of happiness for Afghanistan.&rdquo;        

In keeping with 5,000 years of Afghan history, he said, &ldquo;Afghans would take responsibility for the preservation of their soil, the security of their people and educating their children by the end of 2014.&rdquo;        

Fruit vendors in the city&rsquo;s relatively safe downtown and students at universities struck a similar tone and added a frequently heard argument: If the Americans leave, then the Taliban will no longer have an excuse to wage war.        

&ldquo;During the Taliban regime there were no suicide attacks, but since these people have shown up in our country, we have faced lots of adversity,&rdquo; said Nasrullah, a shopkeeper in Kabul&rsquo;s dilapidated downtown, who like many Afghans uses only one name. &ldquo;When they leave Afghanistan, the Taliban will stop fighting; it is only because of these foreigners they are fighting.&rdquo;        

The views were far less optimistic 300 miles to the south in Kandahar Province, the spiritual heartland of the Taliban, and to a lesser extent in neighboring Helmand, the country&rsquo;s largest producer of opium poppy and a place where the northern districts continue to have active fighting. Even though most of the 30,000 troops from the surge went into the south and southwest of Afghanistan, safety is not yet a given in many areas.        

Especially in some rural reaches of Kandahar Province where the Americans concentrated an increase in troop strength last year to root out the Taliban and maintain a tenuous peace, the situation seems hardly settled. In one district, Maiwand, which is thinly populated, the Taliban have barely retreated, local officials said. Some added that the news of the American withdrawal would give the Taliban heart to try anew to entrench themselves.        

Hajji Kala Khan, a tribal elder from Maiwand, said locals have begun to help the Taliban again and have allowed them to re-establish their courts to resolve problems rather than turning to the government.        

&ldquo;This drawdown will embolden the morale of the Taliban, and actually it has already emboldened them,&rdquo; the elder said. &ldquo;The Taliban are saying to the elders not to support Americans or you will be killed, and now they say, &lsquo;The Americans are leaving and your lives will not be spared.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

In neighboring Zhare district, where American forces have made numerous raids and established many small outposts, people feel more secure than last year but are still afraid. They say that the Taliban never went away.        

&ldquo;We have a problem in Zhare district; the enemy is still around,&rdquo; said Niaz Mohammed Sarhadi, the district governor. Once the Americans leave, he said, &ldquo;things will get worse.&rdquo;        

The district governor said he saw no improvement in the ability of Afghanistan&rsquo;s own military to replace the Americans, &ldquo;so this is not an appropriate time for withdrawal; this drawdown will send a negative message to civilians.&rdquo;        

The district governor of Arghandab, Hajji Shah Mohammed Ahmadi, described the Taliban as waiting on the district&rsquo;s outskirts like wolves outside a pen of sheep. &ldquo;The enemy is all around just waiting for a chance,&rdquo; he said.        
Alissa J. Rubin reported from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar, Afghanistan.
