
BERLIN &mdash; Just 20 years ago, German lawmakers hunkered down for a passionate 10-hour debate to make a decision that seemed as momentous as it was a no-brainer: Should the capital of the newly reunified country remain where it was &mdash; in Bonn on the Rhine &mdash; or move back to its historic, eastern location on the Spree, amid the monuments and mixed memories of Berlin?        

At the time, on June 20, 1991, many people believed the deputies would insist on the cozy little capital remaining exactly where it had been established as the &ldquo;provisional&rdquo; seat of the West German government in 1949 &mdash; in Bonn.        

The university city, after all, exemplified Gem&uuml;tlichkeit &mdash; it was comfortable with itself, rooted in the West, placid as the surface of the broad river running through it. Certainly it had had its cold war moments, the &ldquo;small town in Germany&rdquo; made famous by John le Carr&eacute;&rsquo;s eponymous novel as a nest of spies and intrigue.        

Even Chancellor Willy Brandt, the very emblem of East-West reconciliation, discovered in 1974 that his personal assistant, G&uuml;nter Guillaume, was an infiltrator working for Markus Wolf, the consummate East German spymaster.        

But in 1991, Bonn&rsquo;s provincialism seemed a plus, not a minus. Some Germans believed that a move back to Berlin &mdash; the old imperial capital, Hitler&rsquo;s capital &mdash; would coax forth the ghosts of Prussian militarism, of centralized rule after decades of federalism that had assuaged the fears of neighbors to the east and the west and of Germans themselves. Worse still, the argument went, the blossoming of Berlin as the capital of reunified Germany would spell stagnation for poor Bonn.        

So when the vote came down &mdash; 337 for Berlin and 320 for Bonn &mdash; it seemed surprisingly narrow and, most of all, counterintuitive. Yet, since then, virtually every other cataclysmic forecast has been just as wrong.        

&ldquo;There has been no new Wilhelm-ism,&rdquo; wrote columnist Eckhard Fuhr in Die Welt, referring to the last German emperor, Kaiser Wilhelm II, &ldquo;and the centralized castration of German federalism has not happened.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Yes, Germany is again fighting wars &mdash; that would have been unthinkable in 1991 &mdash; but society has rid itself zealously of everything to do with the military,&rdquo; he wrote, evoking the end of compulsory military service in Germany on July 1.        

Indeed, the statistics seem to suggest that, far from Bonn falling by the wayside, it is Berlin that is struggling. And as a flurry of newspaper articles, nostalgic interviews and television commentaries has shown in the past couple of days, the debate that started on June 20, 1991, is far from resolved.        

Fortified by federal aid worth almost $2 billion, and by decisions to locate the headquarters of Germany&rsquo;s privatized postal and telecommunications industries in Bonn, along with several United Nations agencies, Bonn has prospered. The population has risen from 310,000 in 1991 to 318,000; the number of jobs in the city and the surrounding region has increased by 14.4 percent to 285,000.        

The population of Berlin, by contrast, which sank to a low in 2000, has yet to equal its post-unification peak of 3.47 million in 1993 and stands at around 3.45 million. Unemployment, receding across Germany, remains stubbornly in excess of 13 percent &mdash; among the highest in the country.        

Part of Bonn&rsquo;s relative prosperity stems from a law in 1994 dividing the spoils of state. Even when the Parliament and Chancellery moved to Berlin in 1999, six ministries, including Defense, retained substantial operations in Bonn, along with many agencies. (An agricultural unit now fills the rambling corridors of what used to be the American Embassy at Mehlem, just outside the city.) Of the 18,000 officials employed in the federal bureaucracy, more than 8,000 are still in Bonn &mdash; fewer, in fact, than the 1994 legislation foresaw but a sizable number in a town seeking to escape from its reputation as a city turned gray as much by officialdom as by a curiously leaden climate.        

&ldquo;I often got annoyed by this boring bureaucrat city,&rdquo; said Bonn&rsquo;s mayor, J&uuml;rgen Nimptsch, &ldquo;It lacked pep and creativity. That has fundamentally changed. Bonn has become younger and fresher.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
But the idea of two cities 375 miles apart dividing the administrative energies of a modern unified state rankles some Germans, as if the country&rsquo;s very soul were split. Why, they ask, does Germany need to spend millions every year flying officials back and forth between Bonn and Berlin in a metronomic commute? Why ship 750 tons of files every year between the two cities?        

Well, the Bonners respond, the answer is that a complete move would cost billions &mdash; and would be in breach of the 1994 law. &ldquo;We will stand firm against a complete move,&rdquo; Mayor Nimptsch said.        

Yet, history may be against him.        

When conscription ends in a few days, the defense establishment will almost certainly shrink. Indeed, said Defense Minister Thomas de Maizi&egrave;re, the setup in Bonn &ldquo;cannot just stay as it is.&rdquo; Or, as Wolfgang Thierse, the deputy speaker of Parliament, put it, &ldquo;It makes sense to bring the functions of government together, step by step, in the coming years.&rdquo;        

The decision to move most of the government to Berlin 20 years ago, he was widely quoted as saying, was the right one. &ldquo;Today, Berlin plays in the same league as Paris or London.&rdquo;        

Up to a point.        

For all its glittery new buildings &mdash; the glass and steel of the Hauptbahnhof railroad station drawing the eye toward the pristine government quarter around the glass-domed Bundestag, or Parliament, and onto the high-rises of Potsdamer Platz &mdash; Berlin seems more like a work in progress, a city still striving for a heart, an identity to embrace past and present.        

&ldquo;Berlin is the capital of the temporary, the unfinished, the interim,&rdquo; Jan Oberl&auml;nderwrote in Berlin&rsquo;s Tagesspiegel newspaper. &ldquo;Put it up, perform, move on &mdash; that is the spirit of the city,&rdquo; he said.        

In tandem with its newness, Berlin has acknowledged the very worst of its history with structures such as the Holocaust memorial near the Brandenburg Gate. Yet it has airbrushed other parts of its past: the Berlin Wall is barely commemorated. And other memories, Mr. Fuhr wrote in Die Welt, seem ignored, particularly the clandestine struggle against communism before the wall fell in 1989.        

&ldquo;Why is this Berlin Republic incapable of sending out a positive signal of itself?&rdquo; he asked. &ldquo;Can the Germans find no way to articulate historical success?&rdquo;        
