
BEIJING &mdash; After 80 days held without charge, China&rsquo;s most voluble government critic, the artist Ai Weiwei, emerged from detention late on Wednesday night, thanked reporters for their concern and then did something almost unimaginable &mdash; he refused to say anything more.        

&ldquo;I can&rsquo;t talk about the case,&rdquo; he said Thursday afternoon, speaking outside his home, his generous girth visibly diminished by the months in custody. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t say anything.&rdquo; He then politely asked the nearly two dozen journalists to leave him in peace.        

Although Mr. Ai was released on a form of bail that imposes a yearlong restriction on his movement and prohibits him from interfering with what the authorities described as an investigation into tax evasion, Chinese law does not explicitly prevent him from speaking about his ordeal &mdash; or any other matter.        

But Mr. Ai, 54, who in recent years had become a persistent and freewheeling critic of Communist Party rule, has most certainly been instructed that his freedom depends in part on his ability to censor himself. Until April 3, when the police whisked him away from Beijing International Airport as he sought to board a plane for Hong Kong, Mr. Ai was an avid user of Twitter and a readily accessible source for foreign journalists seeking a barbed anti-establishment quote. His artwork, showcased in New York, London and Berlin, also provided searing critiques of government neglect and malfeasance.        

The question many of his friends and admirers were asking on Thursday was whether Mr. Ai&rsquo;s seemingly genetic predisposition to thumb his nose had been beaten into submission. &ldquo;He has a Damocles sword hanging over his head,&rdquo; said Nicholas Bequelin, a researcher at Human Rights Watch in Hong Kong. &ldquo;That means any time he opens his mouth, he puts himself in danger.&rdquo;        

The government, which reportedly gained a confession from him about his &ldquo;crimes,&rdquo; has not publicly acknowledged any restrictions on Mr. Ai&rsquo;s ability to express himself. Responding to questions from reporters on Thursday, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Hong Lei, said the conditions of his release applied only to his freedom of movement &mdash; he needs permission to leave Beijing &mdash; and any potential inference with the continuing investigation. &ldquo;China is a country under the rule of law,&rdquo; Mr. Hong said. Yet the contours of the Chinese legal system, as rights lawyers here know well, tend to be fuzzy. Petitioners are often thrown into extralegal holding cells known as black jails; dissidents are frequently cooped up in their homes for months on end; and domestic security agents have a variety of means to keep troublemakers in line.        

Gao Zhisheng , a self-taught legal rights defender, has been missing since April of last year, disappearing soon after he defied the authorities by telling a reporter about the torture he endured during an earlier detention. Liu Xia, the wife of the jailed Nobel peace laureate Liu Xiaobo, has been held incommunicado since October. And this month, a United States rights group released a letter by the wife of a lawyer, Chen Guangcheng, who is blind, that described the beatings the couple suffered during months of forced confinement in their rural village.        

For those who have grown accustomed to speaking their mind, the restrictions can be hard to swallow. Zhao Lianhai, a Beijing activist who sought greater compensation for the victims of a tainted milk scandal, gained early release from a two-and-a-half-year prison term after he reportedly pledged to stop his public protests. &ldquo;I support and thank the government, and I feel deeply sorry for the remarks I made against the government in the past,&rdquo; Mr. Zhao wrote in an online message to supporters after his parole last December.        

But three months later, prompted by the detention of Mr. Ai, he broke his silence with a torrent of Twitter comments that have become increasingly impassioned and frequent. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m ashamed of myself for not speaking up until now,&rdquo; he wrote in one of his first dispatches. &ldquo;I cannot stay silent anymore. I&rsquo;m ready to go back to prison. I would rather die than give in.&rdquo;        

Wu Lihong, a Jiangsu Province environmentalist who served three years in prison after exposing local officials whose machinations allowed a lake to become fouled with industrial pollution, was told he would be jailed again if he publicly revealed the details of his mistreatment in custody, which he says included whippings and cigarette burns.        

Speaking by telephone on Thursday, Mr. Wu described the web of other restrictions that he said were imposed by the police since his release last year: No Internet access and no interviews with the media &mdash; and under no circumstances was he to photograph the lake. Although he remains free, Mr. Wu, a machine salesman by trade, says he has paid a steep price for his intransigence. Each time he finds a job, he said, the police arrange for his prompt dismissal. In recent months, he has survived by growing vegetables on the small plot of land next to his house, he said.        

It is too soon to tell what kind of restrictions Mr. Ai may face on his ability to work, socialize or communicate with the outside world. Any impulse to speak out may be tempered by the knowledge that three of his associates remain in detention as part of a financial inquiry that his family says is groundless.        

Some human rights advocates, even as they celebrated his release on Thursday, said they feared the government might have successfully muzzled one of the nation&rsquo;s most renowned voices of conscience.        

&ldquo;A political power can easily silence an individual,&rdquo; said Pu Zhiqiang, a rights lawyer in Beijing. &ldquo;But in doing so, it also shows its fear and lack of confidence. And it also shows to the world the failings of China&rsquo;s legal system.&rdquo;        
Mia Li contributed research.
