
GUVECCI, Turkey &mdash; Syrian forces backed by snipers and tanks stormed into the border town of Khirbet al-Jouz on Thursday, sending hundreds of refugees fleeing to Turkey from the informal camp where they had sought shelter from a violent crackdown on protests in the country&rsquo;s rural northwest.        

Since violence erupted in northwestern Idlib Province this month, thousands had found shelter in shabby tent cities scattered throughout the rugged frontier. In recent weeks, many refugees had come to think of the densely forested valley around Khirbet al-Jouz as a safe zone beyond the reach of the Syrian state as security forces remained mysteriously absent.        

Those hopes were dashed at dawn on Thursday when refugees were awakened by the sound of gunfire and the rumble of distant army vehicles entering the town center, on the far side of a mountain from the campsite, refugees said.        

&ldquo;They surrounded us. They took the town and are on the mountains,&rdquo; said Jamil Saeb, an activist and refugee leader who fled to Khirbet al-Jouz from the town of Jisr al-Shoughour. He fled to Turkey after hearing rumors that a plainclothes killing squad had entered the camp and was searching for him through olive groves and apple orchards.        

&ldquo;Almost all of the refugees are going to Turkey,&rdquo; he said, adding that he planned to return to Syria as soon as possible to continue his activist work.        

Turkish Red Crescent officials, including its president, Tekin Kucukali, came to Guvecci on Thursday. &ldquo;There has been movement today on the Syrian side, and we are responding to it immediately,&rdquo; he told reporters. More than 10,000 Syrian refugees now live in a string of camps in Turkey administered by the organization.        

Refugees entering through the official crossing in Guvecci were ferried to a Red Crescent camp in a convoy of 23 buses seen speeding down an asphalt road that divides the two countries. A spokesman for the Turkish foreign ministry said 1,578 Syrians crossed into Turkey on Thursday and that at least 11,500 more remained in camps on the Syrian side of the border.        

Syrian forces took up a position in the village of Zeyniya on Wednesday night before advancing on Khirbet al-Jouz at dawn, according to refugee leaders. They entered with soldiers, tanks and armored vehicles, said a Khirbet al-Jouz resident named Fayez, who took video images of the army&rsquo;s entrance into the town as he fled. His video shows a tank idling in the street in front of a building and black-clad men going door to door. Fayez, like many others who spoke to reporters, asked that that only his first name be used because he feared for the safety of himself and his family.        

He said the army, made up of conscripts and seen as more prone to defection than other security forces, entered the town and were followed by forces from the intelligence agencies and members of a plainclothes paramilitary force called the shabiha &ldquo;shooting machine guns randomly.&rdquo;        

Muhammad, 27, said he awoke in his forest campsite at 6 a.m. to the &ldquo;echo of bullets&rdquo; and ran with his video camera to a watchtower that overlooks the valley. Last week, young men hoisted a Turkish flag from the tower and used it to keep a lookout for the army. But on Thursday, Syrian snipers took up positions on the tower, Muhammad said, and raised the Syrian flag once more.        

Muhammad said that activists in the camp had decided to leave when they saw the sniper nest on a hill and also when a rumor spread of a killing squad in the camp. One Khirbet al-Jouz resident, Muhammad Abdelwahab, 32, said he saw plainclothes intelligence officers moving down the hillside, using the forest as cover.        

Mr. Kucukali said that a similar pattern of troop movements and refugee flows was playing out elsewhere along the Turkey-Syria border. He would not be more specific, calling it &ldquo;a security matter.&rdquo;        

Ziyad Taher, 26, a refugee from Latakia who fled to Turkey on Thursday, said he saw &ldquo;another place on the border where the troops are much closer&rdquo; as he fled through the forest north of Khirbet al-Jouz with his friends.        

To the south, the tiny mountain village of Ain al-Baida, whose population tripled in recent weeks as refugees flooded in from the nearby town of Badama, was also surrounded by soldiers and tanks, said Ahmed Jumaa, 24, a resident reached by telephone.        

He said people were afraid they would not be let into Turkey because the town contains no official border crossing and is separated from its neighbor only by a jagged peak and a length of razor wire.        

&ldquo;People are very scared; the children are very scared,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;A lot of people want to go to Turkey but they won&rsquo;t unless the army gets closer.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Jumaa, a self-professed revolutionary in Ain al-Baida who said he had taught his young nieces and nephews antigovernment chants though there never had been any protests there, vowed to remain no matter what.        

&ldquo;I will stay here until they kill me or take me away,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There is no life without my house or my village. This is my place. I will not leave my house to be taken over by the House of Assad.&rdquo;        
