
COPENHAGEN &mdash; Ten years ago, as Denmark joined the European Union&rsquo;s visa-free open travel zone, the outraged Danish People&rsquo;s Party bought a decommissioned border guardhouse, vowing that one day it would be in use again.        

Back then, most Danes dismissed the move as a colorful publicity stunt by the newly formed right-wing party.        

But last month, the Danish People&rsquo;s Party was doing a victory dance, offering to donate its picturesque brick guardhouse at the German border to the government. The party had achieved its goal: Prime Minister Lars Lokke Rasmussen had agreed to restore 24-hour customs control in exchange for support on a difficult budget package.        

The deal set off an outcry in the European Union as tiny Denmark became the first member to seriously challenge the union&rsquo;s crowning achievement: the free movement of goods and services across borders.        

Italy and France, wrangling over a huge influx of immigrants from North Africa, have been pushing for a lesser step &mdash; the ability to temporarily close borders in an emergency. This got the official nod of approval during a meeting of European leaders on Friday.        

What will happen in Denmark remains less clear. The Danish Parliament has yet to ratify its border deal, and the union has issued a stern warning, saying Denmark&rsquo;s plans are probably incompatible with its &ldquo;obligations under European and international law.&rdquo;        

But experts say the situation in Denmark, where support for the far right has risen steadily over the past decade, is part of a worrying trend for the European Union. Small nationalist parties in many European countries, determinedly anti-immigrant and anti-European Union, are leveraging important changes in policies.        

&ldquo;It is something that we are seeing across the European Union,&rdquo; said Fredrik Erixon, the director of the European Center for International Political Economy in Brussels.        

Mr. Erixon and other experts say these populist parties have succeeded in producing a serious assault on the European Union&rsquo;s principal institutions: the euro zone and free trade across open borders.        

In Italy, for instance, legislation was passed recently to designate certain Italian companies as strategic and prevent their foreign takeover.        

In Finland, the populist True Finn Party won 19 percent of the vote in April when it campaigned on the promise to oppose any further contributions to bailing out euro zone countries.        

In the Netherlands, the far-right Freedom Party is credited with pulling that country away from its historically pro-Europe stance. In recent months, as euro zone officials have fought to steady markets in the face of a possible default by Greece, a Dutch government that relies on the openly anti-European Union party has fiercely opposed expanded powers for the union&rsquo;s bailout fund.        

&ldquo;For decades, the E.U. had been moving ever closer to an overarching cooperation,&rdquo; Mr. Erixon said. &ldquo;But what we are seeing now is a reversal in the overall trend. Some of the E.U.&rsquo;s crown jewels are under attack.&rdquo;        

In Denmark, political analysts say the Danish People&rsquo;s Party has not only drawn more and more voters since it was founded in 1998, getting 13 percent of the vote in 2007, but it has also pulled more mainstream parties to the right as they try to win those voters back, a phenomenon that experts say has occurred in many other countries.        

Prof. Marlene Wind, a political scientist at the University of Copenhagen, said that with new elections likely in the next few months, only one small party, the Social Liberal Party, initially spoke out against the border deal. &ldquo;Hardly anyone said anything because they think it might get them voters back from the D.P.P.,&rdquo; Professor Wind said.        

Much of the support for the far right in Denmark comes from the working class, which chafed the most at ultraliberal immigration policies that allowed thousands of immigrants &mdash; from Iran, Iraq and the Balkans &mdash; to enter the country in the 1970s, &rsquo;80 and &rsquo;90s.        

Denmark had few policies in place to deal with the immigrants&rsquo; needs, experts say. Blue-collar Danes resented that many newcomers in their neighborhoods never learned Danish and remained unemployed, clustered in the suburbs of Copenhagen.        

While mainstream parties avoided the subject as politically incorrect, the Danish People&rsquo;s Party, led by Pia Kjaersgaard, a home care attendant for the elderly before she entered politics, took it on. Ms. Kjaersgaard is widely credited with forcing an overhaul of the country&rsquo;s immigration policies, now among the most restrictive in Europe.        

Anna-Katarina Gravgaard contributed reporting.
