
MOSCOW &mdash; Scuffles broke out and at least one member of Parliament was doused with water as Yulia V. Tymoshenko, Ukraine&rsquo;s fiery former prime minister, went on trial in Kiev on Friday on charges of abuse of power.        

In a country where political discourse can at times descend into a maelstrom of eggs and smoke bombs, fisticuffs were to be expected at the trial, which has become a flash point in the rivalry between Ms. Tymoshenko and her longtime opponent, President Viktor F. Yanukovich.        

Ms. Tymoshenko, now Ukraine&rsquo;s leading opposition leader, is accused of working against the country&rsquo;s interests by signing a deal to buy Russian natural gas while in office in 2009 at prices that prosecutors say were inflated. She has called the charges absurd and accused Mr. Yanukovich of trying to prosecute his opponents into oblivion.        

&ldquo;They want to eliminate serious opposition through the courts,&rdquo; Ms. Tymoshenko said in remarks posted on her Web site. Mr. Yanukovich, she said, &ldquo;is not a politician. He is an inquisitor.&rdquo;        

Last week, Mr. Yanukovich expressed confidence that if Ms. Tymoshenko was innocent, she could prove it in court.        

The two have been sparring for years. Ms. Tymoshenko was a leader of a popular uprising that prevented Mr. Yanukovich from assuming power after he won a widely criticized presidential election in 2004. She became prime minister for a time, but public bitterness over Ukraine&rsquo;s economic travails and constant political squabbling undermined her bid for the presidency. She was defeated by Mr. Yanukovich in a presidential election last year.        

Ms. Tymoshenko is the most prominent, but by no means the only, opposition figure to face prosecution since Mr. Yanukovich came to power. Ukraine&rsquo;s former interior minister has been in prison since December, also on charges of abusing authority.        

Rights groups and Western officials have expressed growing alarm over what they say is an intensifying crackdown on the president&rsquo;s opponents. This month, the European Parliament passed a resolution calling on Ukraine to cease the &ldquo;selective prosecution of figures from the political opposition.&rdquo;        

If convicted, Ms. Tymoshenko could face up to 10 years in prison, an outcome likely to enrage her many passionate supporters.        

Television coverage on Friday from outside the courtroom in Kiev, the capital, showed crowds waving the white flags of Ms. Tymoshenko&rsquo;s party, Batkivshchyna, or Fatherland, and chanting &ldquo;Yulia, Yulia.&rdquo;        

With a pink rose and a Bible in hand, Ms. Tymoshenko took her place in the crowded, sweltering courtroom. Combative from the outset, she refused to rise when the judge entered, the Interfax news agency reported.        

&ldquo;I will stand for a judge,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Not for a farce.&rdquo;        
