
PARIS &mdash; A United Nations tribunal on Friday handed a former government minister and her son life imprisonment for their roles in Rwanda&rsquo;s 1994 genocide, finding them guilty of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, including multiple rapes. The former minister, who had been in charge of family and women&rsquo;s affairs, is the first woman to be convicted of genocide by an international tribunal.        

Four others at the joint trial were also convicted Friday by the court, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, which is based in Arusha, Tanzania.        

Although other women have been similarly sentenced by local courts in Rwanda, the conviction of the former minister, Pauline Nyiramasuhuko, 65, stands out because of her position. The court found that as family minister, she had used her political power to help abduct and kill uncounted Tutsi men, women and children alike in her home district of Butare in southern Rwanda.        

The court said that in her region, she had issued orders to the feared Interahamwe, the Hutu militia, whose mission it was to hunt and kill as many ethnic Tutsis as possible.        

The three-month killing frenzy across Rwanda in the summer of 1994 left more than 500,000 people dead, most of them ethnic Tutsi and moderate Hutu.        

Butare, which had a wide mix of Hutu and Tutsi people, was the scene of much brutality. In their summary, which was streamed by video from the court, the tribunal judges cited the example of a massacre at the Mugombwa Church, which was filled with people seeking refuge from the killings.        

Armed assailants attacked the church, bombarding it with grenades. &ldquo;As those taking shelter escaped into the courtyard of the church, they were slaughtered. This two-day attack resulted in the death of hundreds, if not thousands, of Tutsis,&rdquo; the summary said.        

The government minister&rsquo;s son, Ars&egrave;ne Shalom Ntahobali, who was in his early 20s and a student at the time, also was found guilty of helping to organize the massacres in Butare, where he had joined his mother and became a militia leader.        

The court found that Mr. Ntahobali, together with militia and soldiers, had been stationed at one particular roadblock, near Hotel Ihuliro, that was &ldquo;the site of numerous beatings, rapes and killings.&rdquo;        

Both mother and son have said they were not guilty of any charges.        

As the presiding judge read from a summary of the verdict, he described instances of Mrs. Nyiramasuhuko and her son acting in tandem. For example, he said the two, accompanied by militia and soldiers, made visits to the Butare government offices where many Tutsis had sought shelter.        

The two went there &ldquo;to abduct hundreds of Tutsis; many were physically assaulted, raped, abducted and taken away to various places in Butare, where they were killed,&rdquo; the judge said.        

&ldquo;Both Nyiramasuhuko and Ntahobali ordered killings,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They also ordered rapes. Ntahobali further committed rapes, and Nyiramasuhuko aided and abetted rapes and is responsible as a superior.&rdquo;        

In earlier verdicts, the Rwanda tribunal had found that rape was used as part of genocide, but in this case they charged the counts of rape as a crime against humanity and a war crime.        

Mrs. Nyiramasuhuko is the first woman to be found guilty by an international tribunal not only of genocide, but also of rape, because of her &ldquo;responsibility as a superior.&rdquo;        

At the tribunal trying those accused of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia, the only woman suspect, Biljana Plavsic, a Bosnian Serb leader and a former Bosnian president, was also charged with genocide. She had been a member of the collective presidency of Bosnia from 1990 to 1992.        

But the genocide charge was dropped after she pleaded guilty to persecutions of Bosnian Muslims. She was sentenced to 11 years in prison. The United Nations-backed courts dealing with crimes in Cambodia and in Sierra Leone has had one female suspect, Ieng Thirith, a former minister of social affairs under the Khmer Rouge regime, who has since gone on trial in the Cambodia court for her role in the genocide committed while the regime was in power from 1975 to 1979.        

The judgments on Friday concluded a trial that began 10 years ago, an uncommonly long time even by the standards of war crimes trials.        

The judges said the court had heard from 189 witnesses and dealt with 13,000 pages of evidence. They said they had written a final judgment of 1,500 pages.        

The court also handed a life sentence to Elie Ndayambaje, a former mayor of Muganza commune. Alphonse Nteziryayo, a former military police commander and prefect of Butare, received a 30-year term; Sylvain Nsabimana, another former prefect of Butare, got a term of 25 years; and Joseph Kanyabashi, a former mayor of Ngoma commune, was sentenced to 35 years.        
