
MOSCOW &mdash; The billionaire owner of the New Jersey Nets basketball team, Mikhail D. Prokhorov, was elected leader of a Russian political party on Saturday in the first foray of a big businessman into politics here in nearly a decade.        

Tall, lithe and an avid basketball player himself, Mr. Prokhorov had been publicity shy for years, mostly confining his appearances outside the boardroom to sports events. Recently, though, he has become a magnet for attention, and is poised to play a significant though still uncertain role in Russian politics.        

A head taller than most people at the party conference in a business center festooned with posters and political slogans, such as &ldquo;Freedom, Justice and Order,&rdquo; Mr. Prokhorov strode about shaking hands, cracking jokes and drawing glances.        

Intriguingly, Mr. Prokhorov, who is 46 and known as &ldquo;the bachelor billionaire&rdquo; for his penchant for attending parties at nightclubs with Russian models, did not rule out a possible run for president. But he said Saturday that any decision would come after parliamentary elections in December and would depend on how his party, Right Cause, performed in that voting.        

In a speech, he vowed to make ripples in Russia&rsquo;s mostly stagnant political system. The pivotal question of his new role in politics, though, seems to be how much leeway he will have to do so, so long as Russia&rsquo;s former president and current Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin remains the most powerful figure in the country.        

Right Cause was once openly anti-Kremlin, but more recently the party has been led by loyal personalities.        

In his speech on Saturday, Mr. Prokhorov clarified that he is opposed to the political party Mr. Putin founded, called United Russia, and that Right Cause will take on his party in the elections. But at a subsequent news conference, he suggested that he may not openly criticize Mr. Putin personally. He said Mr. Putin is not always in full agreement with United Russia.        

&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s ask an honest question: Do we have a multiparty system? Of course not,&rdquo; Mr. Prokhorov said, defining his goal as creating a party that could be part of such a system in Russia.        

&ldquo;We should have at least two parties,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Now, there is one. Any political monopoly, and any other monopoly, spiritual, natural or economic, is our main opponent. It is in every schoolbook &mdash; a monopoly is the enemy of all development.&rdquo;        

At the same time, Mr. Prokhorov, who has been an alluring figure for his wealth and love of sports at home and abroad, said he would not be joining the small and splintered group of opposition figures who stage street protests in Russia.        

&ldquo;I suggest we exclude the word opposition from our lexicon,&rdquo; Mr. Prokhorov said. &ldquo;For our citizens, the word opposition is associated with marginal players who lost their contact with reality.&rdquo;        

He sketched a platform of restoring political freedoms rolled back under Mr. Putin, like direct election of mayors and some members of Parliament, and improving conditions for business. He characterized his potential voters as small-business men, but also liberals elbowed off the stage of Russian politics in recent years.        

&ldquo;Our voters are young people who want to decide for themselves how they want to live, and we will give them that chance,&rdquo; he said.        

The event suggested the birth of a new political movement in Russia, and was spoken of in this way by participants, though the party&rsquo;s creation was apparently coordinated with Russian government officials some time ago in preparation for the parliamentary elections in fall. Still, it also had all the signs of a political maneuver used by Mr. Putin before, of co-opting opposition organizations by arranging to have nominally independent but in fact loyal figures take charge.        

Until 2003, a predecessor to the Right Cause party was supported by the tycoon Mikhail Khodorkovsky, who has been imprisoned on tax evasion and embezzlement charges since. On Saturday, Mr. Prokhorov said the Russian courts should release Mr. Khodorkovsky on parole.        

&ldquo;Even if the Kremlin is not opposed to this, or in fact had something to do with it, it cannot be worse than the past eight years without a liberal party,&rdquo; in Parliament, Konstantin Remchukov, the editor of the Nezavisimaya newspaper, said in an interview. &ldquo;In Russia, all good things happen from above, not below. Look at Khrushchev, Gorbachev, Yeltsin.&rdquo;        

Mr. Prokhorov made his fortune in metals and mining as co-owner of the world&rsquo;s largest nickel plant. With serendipitous timing, he sold his stake in 2008 at the peak of the market and entered the global recession mostly in cash. Forbes magazine has recently estimated his net worth at about $18 billion.        

Besides his recent steps in politics, Mr. Prokhorov has dabbled in investments. In 2009, he bought the Nets and a stake in the Atlantic Yards development in Brooklyn that is to include their new arena. He has said he will pour some of his personal fortune into the team and apply his business acumen to improving its performance.        
