
BEIJING &mdash; Hu Jia, one of China&rsquo;s most prominent social activists and a leading political dissident, was released from prison on Sunday after completing a 42-month sentence for state subversion,&nbsp; his wife, Zeng Jinyan, stated in a post on the American microblog Twitter.        

Mr. Hu, 37, was detained in December 2007, shortly after testifying on China&rsquo;s human-rights situation before a European Parliament committee, and was sentenced to prison in early 2008.&nbsp;        

The authorities had rejected repeated requests by Ms. Zeng that he be released early on medical grounds because a hepatitis-B infection left him with a serious case of cirrhosis. Ms. Zeng, who is also a political activist and blogger, was herself subjected to harassment during her husband&rsquo;s confinement, and said in an interview this month that the authorities were trying to force her and her 3-year-old daughter from their apartment in Shenzhen.        

Early Sunday, Ms Zeng wrote on Twitter that Mr. Hu had arrived home at 2:40 a.m. Beijing time.        

&ldquo;A sleepless night,&rdquo; she wrote. &ldquo;peace. happiness. he needs to rest for a while. thank you to everyone please forgive us if we have caused you any inconvenience.&rdquo;        

Efforts to reach Ms. Zeng by mobile telephone produced a message that her telephone had been turned off. but the Reuters news service reached Mr. Hu&rsquo;s mother Feng Juan, who was quoted as saying that Mr. Hu was in &ldquo;so-so&rdquo; health but in good spirits.        

His release comes just days after the Chinese authorities released another prominent dissident, the artist Ai Weiwei, from secret confinement. Mr. Ai, a critic of the Chinese system, had been seized on April 3 and held incommunicado. Officials said later that he would be charged with tax evasion.        

Mr. Hu&rsquo;s 2007 detention proved a harbinger of what has become an increasingly draconian response to social and political protest by China&rsquo;s Communist Party and its security establishment. The authorities began rounding up activists in advance of Beijing&rsquo;s August 2008 Olympic games, apparently to head off any negative publicity during the event, then stepped up&nbsp; their activities in December 2008, after scores of dissidents and intellectuals released a manifesto titled Charter 08 calling for democratic reforms.        

A principal author of that document, the writer Liu Xiaobo, was arrested then and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize last October.        

The crackdown has sharply intensified this year in the wake of democratic revolutions in the Middle East and Northern Africa, which sparked an anonymous call on the Internet for a so-called Jasmine Revolution in China.        

Activists and dissidents have increasingly been taken to secret detention facilities and held illegally, unreachable by family members or lawyers. others have been effectively locked in their homes. still others, like Mr Ai, appear to have been ordered not to speak publicly about their situations.        

Mr. Hu was said to have been ordered not to talk to the media and was to be denied political rights for one year. &nbsp;        

He was regarded as a potential Nobel winner and the nation&rsquo;s leading political activist when he was detained in 2007. He became known early on as an environmental crusader, advocate for sufferers of AIDS and vocal critic of state actions against the downtrodden. He was an early user of blogs to spread his message, a method of protest that has become both ubiquitous and difficult for Chinese authorities to control.        

The accusation that he had subverted state power was based in part on a caustic essay posted on his blog in which he detailed the torture of two people who protested the illegal seizure of their Beijing home. That essay broadly criticized the Communist Party&rsquo;s human rights record.        

&ldquo;Hu spread malicious rumors and committed libel in an attempt to subvert the state&rsquo;s political power and socialist system,&rdquo; stated the April 2008 court verdict against him, as quoted by the state-run Xinhua news service.        

The European Parliament awarded Mr. Hu the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought, Europe&rsquo;s highest honor for human rights work, in October 2008, on the eve of the arrival of a delegation of Beijing government leaders for a summit meeting.        
