
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Insurgents tricked an 8-year-old girl in a remote area of central Afghanistan into carrying a bomb wrapped in cloth that they detonated remotely when she was close to a police vehicle, the Afghan authorities said Sunday.        

Only the girl was killed in the blast, which occurred Sunday morning in the village of Uwshi in the Char Chino District, said Fazal Ahmad Shirzad, the police chief of Oruzgan Province.        

Mr. Shirzad said he believed the girl was unaware that the bag she had been given by Taliban insurgents held a bomb. Her body was &ldquo;taken to a nearby security check post, and the police called her relatives,&rdquo; he said.        

Meanwhile, in Logar Province in southeastern Afghanistan, the death toll rose to 37 after a bombing on Saturday at a small-town hospital, said Dr. Mohammad Zaref Nayebkhail, the director of public health for the province. He said that at least 53 people had been wounded.        

But, he said, the actual number of casualties was probably much higher. &ldquo;Local villagers rushed to the hospital right after the explosion and took the bodies of their relatives to their own villages,&rdquo; he said.        

In other parts of the country, four NATO soldiers were killed. Two of them were Spanish soldiers who died when an improvised explosive device detonated in Badghis Province in western Afghanistan, the Spanish Defense Ministry said. The other two soldiers died in separate episodes in southern and eastern Afghanistan, according to a NATO statement.        

Afghan radio stations also reported that rocket fire from Pakistan over the last week had led President Hamid Karzai to register a former complaint with the Pakistani president, Asif Ali Zardari, at a regional terrorism meeting in Iran on Saturday. Mr. Zardari promised to investigate, said Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s spokesman, Waheed Omar.        

The unexplained rocket fire will be a topic of discussion when senior government figures from the two countries meet this week, Mr. Omar said. The Afghan National Security Council discussed the matter on Sunday.        

According to Mr. Omar, President Zardari and the Pakistani Interior Ministry said the rockets, which hit Kunar and Nangarhar Provinces, were not fired by the Pakistani Army.        

Mr. Omar said 470 rockets had been fired, killing at least 18 people and wounding 17. Since Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal areas border eastern Afghanistan and are largely outside the Pakistani government&rsquo;s control, it is possible that insurgent groups are responsible. But some Pakistani insurgents have set up bases in Kunar and Nuristan Provinces in Afghanistan to carry out attacks in Pakistan, raising the possibility that the rockets may have been fired by the Pakistani security forces.        

&ldquo;We want this resolved peacefully,&rdquo; Mr. Omar said. He added that if the Pakistani government was not responsible, it should say so publicly and find and stop the attackers.        

General Mohammed Zahir Azimi said that Afghan military forces were &ldquo;ready to retaliate&rdquo; if instructed to do so. A NATO spokesman said coalition officials were not aware of the rocket fire because they did not have troops in the areas where it occurred.        
Ray Rivera contributed reporting from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar, Afghanistan.
