
BRUSSELS &mdash; The French authorities said Sunday that the latest outbreak of a deadly strain of E. coli in Europe appeared to be isolated, even as European Union officials discussed wider action to restrict sales of bean sprouts, the suspected cause of the outbreak.        

Seven patients remained hospitalized Sunday, said V&eacute;ronique Seguy, a spokeswoman for the regional health agency in Aquitaine, in southwestern France, where the outbreak occurred.        

Tests indicated that the patients were sickened by E. coli O104:H4, the same strain of bacteria that has killed 43 people in Germany and one in Sweden in recent weeks, Ms. Seguy said.        

Two patients in France were in intensive care, Ms. Seguy said. But no new cases have been reported in recent days, an indication that the outbreak was an isolated event.        

Most of the infections in France have been linked to a charity event at a children&rsquo;s play center in B&egrave;gles, a suburb of Bordeaux, on June 8. Most of the people who became ill recalled eating gazpacho garnished with sprouts. Sprouts were also identified as the source of a German outbreak.        

Britain and Ireland were among the European countries that warned consumers over the weekend against eating any raw bean sprouts or other sprouted seeds.        

So far the bloc has not issued any continentwide restrictions, but national experts were scheduled to speak by telephone later on Sunday to discuss whether the evidence gathered in the French and German cases was sufficient to restrict sales of sprouts.        

&ldquo;I expect the experts will be asking if it&rsquo;s entirely a coincidence that bean sprouts have come under suspicion twice in the space of just one month as responsible for such an unusual and dangerous and deadly strain of E. coli,&rdquo; said Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Vincent, a spokesman for the European health commissioner.        

Mr. Vincent said that some of the discussions would focus on whether the problem originated with the sprouts or with seeds used to grow the sprouts, and whether the seeds came from inside or outside the European Union. He said the European Commission had not ordered any suspect produce to be removed from the market because it was waiting for more evidence of the source of the latest outbreak.        

Another likely reason for caution is that the commission, the European Union&rsquo;s executive body, has come under intense pressure to coordinate hundreds of millions of dollars&rsquo; worth of compensation to farmers for losses incurred on produce they had to take off the market after Spanish cucumbers were wrongly identified as a likely source of the outbreak in Germany.        

Over the weekend a British seed company, Thompson & Morgan, rejected responsibility for the outbreak after a French official said that the sprouts used in the gazpacho were from seeds supplied by the company.        

&ldquo;We note that the French outbreak was localized to a specific event, which would indicate to us that something local in the Bordeaux area, or the way the product has been handled and grown, is responsible for the incident rather than our seeds,&rdquo; the statement said.        

The company said it was cooperating with the British health authorities.        

Richard Howitt, a British member of the European Parliament, warned the French authorities against blaming the company, which is in his constituency, without definitive proof. Mr. Howitt said seeds for the sprouts could have picked up bacteria in Italy, where the company had sourced them. He also said that the French should be held responsible for any damage to the vegetable and salad markets in Britain if the company was not to blame.        

In Britain, the Food Standards Agency said Saturday that no cases of food poisoning had been reported there that were linked to the outbreak in France. But it warned that sprouted seeds &mdash; including alfalfa, mung beans and fenugreek &mdash; &ldquo;should only be eaten if they have been cooked thoroughly until steaming-hot throughout.&rdquo;        

The Food Safety Authority of Ireland warned that &ldquo;consumers should not eat raw bean sprouts or other sprouted seeds, and caterers should not serve raw bean sprouts or other sprouted seeds.&rdquo; The Irish authority also warned of &ldquo;the possibility that contaminated seeds are on the market,&rdquo; and it said that if &ldquo;those seeds are still in circulation, other outbreaks could occur.&rdquo;        

The outbreak of E. coli is one of the deadliest to affect Europe in recent years, though it abated in Germany after the health authorities located its main source: sprouts grown on an organic farm in Lower Saxony in northern Germany.        

Some of the cases could have been caused by the bacteria&rsquo;s entering parts of the drinking water system, according to the health authorities in the German state of Hesse and the Robert Koch Institute, the German federal institution responsible for disease control.        

Helge Karch, the director of the Institute for Hygiene at the University Hospital in M&uuml;nster, Germany, writing in the latest issue of The Lancet, said the authorities had underestimated how the bacteria could have entered the drinking water.        

Still, a spokeswoman for the Hesse Ministry for Social Affairs, which deals with health and consumer affairs, said last week that so far there was no danger of a complete contamination of the water system.        
Reporting was contributed by Scott Sayare from Paris, Judy Dempsey from Berlin, William Neuman from New York and Ravi Somaiya from London.
