
RAMADI, Iraq &mdash; This palm-lined city along the Euphrates, once a deadly stronghold of the insurgency, has been hailed as one of Iraq&rsquo;s greatest turnaround stories, the first major urban area where militants were driven back and life slowly returned to shattered neighborhoods.        

But a rift has opened in recent weeks between local leaders of this Sunni-dominated area and Iraqi soldiers who serve here but answer to leaders in Baghdad&rsquo;s Shiite-led government. Residents have accused Iraqi Army units of shooting civilians, meddling in local politics, raiding homes with little justification and detaining residents indefinitely.        

The distrust, highlighted by public protests and calls for the army to withdraw, has challenged the durability of security gains in Ramadi and across the huge western reaches of Anbar, the main Sunni province and a crucial proving ground for Iraq&rsquo;s stability. The tensions also highlight the disputes that seem to be spreading across the country and seem likely to linger long after the last American soldiers leave: conflicts of local autonomy versus national control, sectarian power struggles and fierce debates over who, in the end, should be entrusted to keep Iraqis safe.        

In mid-June, hundreds of residents filled the streets of the predominantly Sunni holy city of Samarra, in Salahuddin Province in central Iraq, to demand that a unit of Iraqi troops leave.        

In Ramadi, resentments came to a boil this month after Iraqi soldiers shot and killed a local police captain who had fought alongside American Marines against Sunni insurgents fighting under the banner of Al Qaeda in Iraq. The Iraqi Army said he had been trying to flee an arrest warrant on terrorism charges, but tribal leaders and local politicians said the charges were trumped up and called him a hero whose death demonstrated the impunity of security forces in the area.        

The Iraqi soldiers who guard checkpoints and rumble through the streets in camouflaged Humvees say they are preserving a hard-fought and fragile peace in Anbar. The Iraqi Army is one of the country&rsquo;s most trusted institutions, but many local leaders have come to see the soldiers as heavy-handed occupiers with little concern for the community &mdash; a charge once lobbed at American troops.        

&ldquo;The army is interfering in schools and vegetable markets,&rdquo; said Sheik Faisal Hussein Essawi, one of several tribal leaders who have organized protests calling for the soldiers to withdraw. &ldquo;They are everywhere. The city is turning into a military camp.&rdquo;        

Officials with the Anbar Operations Command, an Iraqi force that oversees security in the province, defended the army&rsquo;s role. They said that corrupt and incompetent local police had failed to prevent bombings and pursue militants in cities like Ramadi and Falluja, forcing Iraqi soldiers to move in over the past eight months.        

Anbar&rsquo;s fate is critical both to Iraqis and the departing American forces. According to icasualties.org, some 1,335 American service members were killed here, as well as untold thousands of Iraqi civilians, soldiers and members of the American-backed Awakening militias that fought Al Qaeda in Iraq.        

At least 3,200 American troops remain, though they have largely pulled out of the cities and focus on training Iraqi security forces and helping local leaders and commanders address flaws in security.        

Violence edged higher as the latest tensions flared. This month, insurgents planted four explosives at a police commander&rsquo;s house outside of Falluja, killing four of his relatives. Days earlier, suicide bombers killed 15 people in an attack on security forces in Ramadi.        

Col. Louis J. Lartigue of the United States 4/3 Advise and Assist Brigade in Anbar said the increase appeared to fit a pattern of spikes and lulls in attacks. He said he was encouraged that local politicians and military leaders were at least sitting down to discuss their differences.        

&ldquo;When they do have these problems, they come forward to figure out what the best way ahead is,&rdquo; he said. Control of Iraq&rsquo;s cities is a central issue in a country where two-thirds of the people live in urban areas. As Iraq stabilizes, army units are supposed to withdraw and focus on weak points in national defense, like border security, and cede the cities to the national and local police.        
Two Iraqi employees of The New York Times contributed reporting from Anbar Province.
