
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; Jameson Timba, a senior aide to Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai of Zimbabwe, had just returned home on Friday from a conference in Barcelona on the rule of law when plainclothes policemen &mdash; answerable to President Robert Mugabe &mdash; arrested him in Harare, Zimbabwe&rsquo;s capital. Mr. Timba was accused of a common crime: insulting Mr. Mugabe.        

Over the next two days, said Mr. Timba, the shadow foreign minister in the Movement for Democratic Change, the longtime rival to Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s party, ZANU-PF, he was denied access to his lawyer, deprived of food and water, and held in a chilly cell with only a thin blanket to share with seven other detainees. He said they stretched it over their feet as they lay side by side on the concrete floor, trying to sleep.        

&ldquo;We have a Shona saying,&rdquo; Mr. Timba said Sunday evening after he was released. &ldquo;When you plant your maize in a burned field, you must never be afraid of getting your backside dirty,&rdquo; a reference to the dirty business of politics.        

Mr. Timba has joined the growing ranks of M.D.C. members of Parliament who have spent time inside Zimbabwe&rsquo;s dank, lice-infested jails since regional leaders pressured their party &mdash; whose supporters were beaten, tortured and even killed during the 2008 election campaign &mdash; to join Mr. Mugabe in a power-sharing government.        

But Mr. Mugabe was unwilling to share his powers over the police and the criminal justice system &mdash; and more than a quarter of the party&rsquo;s members of Parliament have been arrested since agreeing to join him.        

Mr. Timba outraged ZANU-PF officials a week ago by suggesting that their characterization of a June 12 meeting of regional leaders on Zimbabwe&rsquo;s long-running political crisis &mdash; as a vindication for Mr. Mugabe &mdash; was dishonest.        

The Sunday Times, a South African newspaper, reported on June 19 that Mr. Timba had called Mr. Mugabe a liar for that depiction of the meeting. A close reading of the story showed that Mr. Timba had pointed out what he said were distortions &ldquo;peddled by some in ZANU-PF&rdquo; but had not singled out the president.        

But within days, a ZANU-PF politburo member, Jonathan Moyo, was calling for the arrest of Mr. Timba and Mr. Tsvangirai for undermining the authority of Mr. Mugabe.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s totally unacceptable for Tsvangirai and Jameson Timba to call comrade Mugabe a liar,&rdquo; Mr. Moyo told ZBC, the television network that is a state monopoly, according to a report in Newsday, an independent newspaper in Zimbabwe.        

Mr. Mugabe and his loyalists have chafed since March 31, when President Jacob Zuma of South Africa, the region&rsquo;s mediator on Zimbabwe, persuaded several other heads of state in a regional alliance, the Southern African Development Community, or S.A.D.C., to agree to a communiqu&eacute; that, without naming Mr. Mugabe, was directed at him and his party.        

Issued in Livingstone, Zambia, it stated sternly that &ldquo;there must be an immediate end of violence, intimidation, hate speech, harassment and any other form of action that contradicts the letter and spirit&rdquo; of the global political agreement that governs the power-sharing deal.        

Mr. Mugabe, used to being treated deferentially as an elder statesman, lashed out at Mr. Zuma. And in the months that followed, he, his ministers and the men who run the newspapers he controls have coordinated their efforts to undo what has come to be known, simply, as Livingstone.        

Instead, when leaders from all 15 nations that belong to S.A.D.C. met here on June 12, they carried out the action plan put forth in Livingstone, assigning a team drawn from nations in the region to monitor Zimbabwe&rsquo;s progress toward safeguarding freedom of the press, human rights and free elections.        

The state-controlled news media in Harare reported that the regional alliance had rejected Livingstone &mdash; a contention Mr. Zuma&rsquo;s adviser, Lindiwe Zulu, contradicted. In fact, Mr. Timba said, in the closed-door meeting Mr. Zuma reiterated the relevance of Livingstone and read aloud the passage calling for an end to violence.        

After years of disappointment with the regional group&rsquo;s &ldquo;extraordinary summits&rdquo; on Zimbabwe, which have issued many ineffective communiqu&eacute;s, M.D.C. officials were giddy. Mr. Timba, wearing his black bowler hat, could hardly contain his glee.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re fantastically happy!&rdquo; he exclaimed.        

But the generals who coordinated the 2008 campaign of violence that forced Mr. Tsvangirai from the presidential runoff election were not happy. A senior general told the state-controlled newspaper The Herald last week that Mr. Tsvangirai was a national security threat &mdash; and that Mr. Mugabe must rule until he died or decided to step down.        

At the World Justice Forum in Barcelona last week, Mr. Tsvangirai &ldquo;said the rule of law was in intensive care in Zimbabwe,&rdquo; Mr. Timba recalled. &ldquo;No sooner had I landed than I proved his point.&rdquo;        

When Mr. Timba was produced in court on Sunday, the judge, Joseph Musakwa, ruled that Mr. Timba&rsquo;s detention was unlawful and ordered his release.        

Mr. Timba said that after his release he picked up a liquid that kills lice, poured it in his bath and took a long soak. An optimist like many in his party, he said he found reason to hope that his arrest was another sign of the desperation of men on the wrong side of history.        

&ldquo;What I see is the beginning of the end of ZANU-PF,&rdquo; he said.        
