
PERUGIA, Italy &mdash; An appeal by Amanda Knox, an American convicted two years ago in the 2007 murder of a British exchange student, opened Monday with an Ivorian man, also convicted in the killing, testifying that Ms. Knox and her ex-boyfriend had committed the crime.        

&ldquo;It is absolutely true,&rdquo; the Ivorian, Rudy Hermann Guede, said before a packed courtroom here while a pale Ms. Knox and her co-defendant, Raffaele Sollecito, an Italian, looked on from a few feet away. &ldquo;It is not up to me to decide who killed Meredith, but I have always said who was there in that house that cursed night.&rdquo;        

Shortly after Mr. Guede, 24, was led out, Ms. Knox told the judges and jury, in a shaky voice, that she was &ldquo;shocked and anguished&rdquo; by the testimony. &ldquo;He knows we weren&rsquo;t there and had nothing to do with it,&rdquo; she said.        

The trial and retrial of Ms. Knox, a 24-year-old from Seattle, has attracted international attention because of its lurid details and the differing portraits of the defendant, who was alternately described as a hard-working college student caught up in an arcane foreign justice system and a marijuana-smoking criminal.        

Mr. Guede, who was born in Ivory Coast, took the stand as a witness in the appeal trial of Ms. Knox and Mr. Sollecito, who were sentenced in 2009 to 26 and 25 years, respectively, for the murder of the exchange student, Meredith Kercher, during what prosecutors described as a sex game gone wrong.        

Ms. Kercher, 21, was found stabbed and bloody in her room on Nov. 2, 2007. Ms. Knox and Mr. Sollecito were arrested a few days later. Both deny any wrongdoing.        

The police later arrested Mr. Guede, who had fled to Germany. He was sentenced to 16 years.        

On Monday, Mr. Guede was called to the stand to rebut the testimony of a convicted child killer, Mario Alessi, who told the court this month that Mr. Guede &mdash; who had been housed in the same jail block as him &mdash; had confided that Ms. Knox and Mr. Sollecito, 26, were innocent.        

After Mr. Alessi&rsquo;s claims were reported by the news media in March 2010, Mr. Guede wrote a letter to his lawyers denying the jailhouse exchange.        

Instead, the letter accused Ms. Knox and Mr. Sollecito of &ldquo;the horrible murder of the splendid marvelous woman that was Meredith,&rdquo; accusations Mr. Guede repeated in court on Monday.        

Mr. Guede admits to having been at the scene of the crime &mdash; his DNA and bloody fingerprints were found in Ms. Kercher&rsquo;s bedroom &mdash; but has denied any involvement in the killing.        

By law, Ms. Knox was not permitted to address Mr. Guede while he was on the stand. &ldquo;I know she wanted to tell him that it was his chance to tell the truth, that he could do something positive, but she wasn&rsquo;t able to,&rdquo; said Edda Mellas, Ms. Knox&rsquo;s mother, who flew in from Seattle for the hearing.        

Even so, Ms. Mellas remained optimistic about her daughter&rsquo;s chances at winning the appeal.        

Defense lawyers have asked that the DNA evidence used to convict Ms. Knox and Mr. Sollecito be re-examined, and the findings by the independent experts were expected to be turned in this month. The appeal is &ldquo;going great,&rdquo; Ms. Mellas said, &ldquo;but when the DNA reports come in it will be even better.&rdquo;        
