
ATHENS &mdash; Parliamentary debate began here on Monday evening before one of the most important votes in recent Greek history: whether to approve a set of deeply unpopular austerity measures that are the price of an urgent infusion of international aid.        

As recently as last week, it appeared as if the Socialist prime minister, George A. Papandreou, would manage to push the measures through Parliament, where he has a narrow five-vote majority. That was true even after the center-right New Democracy opposition party announced that it would vote against them, saying they involved too much austerity and not enough stimulus spending.        

But in recent days, a series of dissenters within Mr. Papandreou&rsquo;s Socialist Party &mdash; and a growing feeling that this government may be short-lived &mdash; have complicated the picture for the votes scheduled for Wednesday and Thursday.        

On Monday, Greece&rsquo;s future, and even the stability of the euro, were hanging on the decisions of a few wavering Greek politicians in a tense climate of political maneuvering. The pressure on them will only increase as recalcitrant labor unions and angry voters begin a two-day general strike on Tuesday.        

A growing number of economists have criticized the measures for forcing Greece to cut spending amid a deep recession, but most analysts still contend that the proposals will pass, if only because the alternatives are at least as dire. &ldquo;Anything can happen, but I think it will be a yes,&rdquo; said Babis Papadimitriou, a political analyst for Skai television and Kathimerini, a daily newspaper.        

If Parliament does not approve the measures, including wage cuts, tax increases and the privatization of 50 billion euros, or about $71 billion, in state assets, the European Union, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund have said they will not release $17 billion that Greece needs to pay its expenses through the summer.        

Without the payment, the country will default, undermining the European common currency and potentially creating market turmoil over the exposure of banks that hold the debt of Greece and other troubled economies in the region.        

Opening a parliamentary debate on the changes on Monday evening, Mr. Papandreou urged politicians to place &ldquo;the good of the nation above narrow party interest&rdquo; and approve the measures, which he said were the only way to save Greece from default and set it on the road to economic recovery.        

By approving them, &ldquo;we guarantee the stability of our country in the medium term so that we can pay salaries and pensions,&rdquo; the prime minister said, adding that their approval &ldquo;will bring to an end a chapter of uncertainty and open the door to a new, healthy beginning.&rdquo;        

On Monday, Greece&rsquo;s new finance minister, Evangelos Venizelos, said it was important that Greece negotiate a new agreement with its foreign lenders to avoid the painful negotiations ahead of each installment of foreign aid.        

&ldquo;Between now and the end of the summer at the latest, we must seriously negotiate the new program with our partner and guarantee viability of the national debt with the participation of private investors internationally,&rdquo; Mr. Venizelos told Parliament.        

But the austerity program has met with resistance from within the ranks of Mr. Papandreou&rsquo;s own party, especially over the privatization of state companies whose workers have traditionally been at the heart of the Socialists&rsquo; constituency.        

As many as four Socialists in Parliament have said they will consider opposing the measures, including one who opposes the planned privatization of the water utility of Thessaloniki, in her district.        

Another Socialist, Alexandros Athanasiadis, said he would vote against the plan to reduce the state&rsquo;s stake in the Public Power Company to 34 percent from 51 percent. Some of the company&rsquo;s coal-burning plants are in his district in northeastern Greece.        

On Monday, Mr. Venizelos, a Socialist veteran known for his ability to rally his troops, told lawmakers that the measures might be &ldquo;tough and even unfair&rdquo; but that they were unavoidable. &ldquo;We have to finally come to our senses and get serious,&rdquo; he said.        

There are other variables. Dora Bakoyannis, a former conservative foreign minister who leads a center-right party called Democratic Alliance, said she had not determined what position her party&rsquo;s five members would take in the austerity vote.        
Niki Kitsantonis contributed reporting from Athens, and Stephen Castle from Brussels.
