
TUNIS &mdash; Tunisia&rsquo;s interim leaders scrambled Wednesday to distance themselves further from the government of the ousted leader  as opposition officials weighed whether to mount an effort to push out most of the cabinet members from the old ruling party.        

Both sides of the unity government &mdash; the new minority from the ranks of Tunisia&rsquo;s tiny legal opposition parties and the leaders from the old ruling party &mdash; appeared to be responding to popular anger that so many of the same faces remained in influential posts in the government even after President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali had fled.        

In a televised address, the interim president, Fouad Mebazaa, the speaker of Parliament and a longtime stalwart of the ruling party, hailed the &ldquo;revolution&rdquo; and declared, &ldquo;We want a clean break with the past.&rdquo;        

State television reported the arrest for &ldquo;crimes against Tunisia&rdquo; of 33 members of Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s family, many of whom grew rich from their connections.        

The government also said its prosecutors had opened an investigation into the family&rsquo;s overseas assets, while the Swiss government moved to freeze their assets in Swiss banks. The prime minister declared that 1,800 political prisoners had been released from jail, and said that others with sentences of less than six months would also be freed.        

Opposition leaders, meanwhile, portrayed the new government as walking a tightrope, balancing the public&rsquo;s demand for a purge of the old ruling party against their fears of a government collapse that could invite a military takeover. &ldquo;We are walking on eggs,&rdquo; said Ahmed Bouazzi, a member of the executive committee of the Progressive Democratic Party, the largest and most credible legal opposition group.        

And all concerned feel the eyes of the region on them: in the shabby and disordered headquarters of the Progressive Democrats, young men were debating whether Egypt would soon rise up like Tunisia, if its fledgling  revolution survived.        

At a meeting in Sharm el Sheik, Amr Moussa, the Egyptian head of the Arab League and a popular figure in his home country often considered a potential challenger to its authoritarian president, Hosni Mubarak, warned, &ldquo;The Arab citizen has entered a stage of anger that is unprecedented.&rdquo;        

More people in North African autocracies tried to burn themselves like the vegetable seller whose self-immolation kicked off the Tunisian revolt, bringing the total as of Wednesday to 11 &mdash; 8 in Algeria, 2 in Egypt and 1 in Mauritania. At least one, an Egyptian who set himself on fire in Alexandria, has died.        

Mr. Bouazzi of the Progressive Democratic Party, which has only about a thousand members, said that after decades under Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s one-party rule the opposition had miscalculated in settling for only relatively minor positions in the unity government.        

&ldquo;We &mdash; I personally &mdash; did not realize the balance of forces, that the ruling party was so weak as a party&rdquo; when the prime minister called about forming a unity government. &ldquo;If it was now, we would say, &lsquo;No, you should fire this one and this one and this one, and give us that one,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; he said before an internal party meeting to prepare demands for the first cabinet session on Thursday.        

For now, the government owes its tenuous grip on stability to Gen. Rashid Ammar, who is believed to have prompted the end of Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s rule by refusing an order to fire at demonstrators. &ldquo;He is controlling the country, the heavy weapons,&rdquo; Mr. Bouazzi said.        

Asked if the party had contact with General Ammar, Mr. Bouazzi said he wished party officials could speak with him, to communicate directly about the future of the country and &ldquo;to give him warranties&rdquo; that the opposition parties would preserve stability.        

At the headquarters of the Progressive Democratic Party, meanwhile, Mr. Bouazzi said party officials were seeking the removal of two ruling party members still in the cabinet. One was the interior minister. Initially thought to have clean hands because Mr. Ben Ali appointed him to the post just days before his own exit, the minister in fact presided over the security forces during two days when eight protesters were killed by police snipers, Mr. Bouazzi said. &ldquo;So he has blood on his hands,&rdquo; he said.        

The second one, he said, the defense minister, was previously in charge of public lands. He is believed to have presided over the free transfer of properties to the relatives of Mr. Ben Ali, including a notorious case of property used for a private school in Carthage owned by Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s wife. She later received more than $1 million in public money to help build the school. Then she sold it for a personal profit.        

In a telephone call later, after a meeting of his party, Mr. Bouazzi cast some doubt about whether the opposition would succeed in pushing out the two officials.        

There were signs on Wednesday that the new government was beginning to achieve a measure of stability. The capital&rsquo;s main Avenue Bourguiba was clear of tear gas for the first day in more than a week. No gunshots rang out. Cafes reopened. The government pushed the curfew back from 6 p.m. to 8 p.m.        

Hundreds of protesters once again poured into the streets by 11 a.m., demanding the elimination of any ties to the old ruling party. &ldquo;We want to eradicate all of the people who participated in the hierarchical pyramids of this tyrannical regime,&rdquo; said Ahmed Khalil Rais, a graduate student. &ldquo;They have to resign &mdash; all the people with blood on their hands.&rdquo;        

Others in the crowd debated the return of the banned Islamic political party. Several said they welcomed or even cheered its revival, but all insisted that any Islamist political movement must be distinctively Tunisian, predicated on democracy, pluralism and women&rsquo;s rights.        
Nick Cumming-Bruce contributed reporting from Geneva, and J. David Goodman from New York.
