
The overwhelming vote in the House on Friday against approving American participation in the NATO action in Libya raised a question in Washington: Why did President Obama not press harder for a vote authorizing the operation months ago when the intervention was more popular?        

Some in the White House say the answer is simple: Like many previous presidents overseeing interventions in countries including Lebanon and Somalia, he did not believe he needed permission. The administration told Congress that it would &ldquo;welcome&rdquo; a resolution of support, a carefully worded statement that made no concession that Congressional approval might be legally necessary.        

Others in the administration offer a more geopolitical answer: That while Mr. Obama and his national security team wanted to stop a slaughter in Benghazi, they wanted the United States to keep a low profile and were wary of how it would look across the Middle East if Congress essentially declared the United States to be at war in yet another Muslim country.        

And still other officials say the idea of pressing for an authorization was never a priority because few at first thought the NATO-led air war would last long enough to trigger a 60-day deadline for unauthorized deployments into hostilities under the War Powers Resolution. At the same time, they said, a host of other issues were competing for attention, including the killing of Osama bin Laden and the need to strike a budget deal to avert a government shutdown.        

The mission, however, is now in its fourth month. And on Tuesday, the State Department&rsquo;s legal adviser, Harold H. Koh, is scheduled to come before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to testify about why the administration believes that Mr. Obama has all the authority he needs to continue the mission without Congressional authorization, notwithstanding the War Powers Resolution.        

Mr. Koh is expected to assert that the American role does not constitute &ldquo;hostilities&rdquo; for legal purposes. And he is likely to reprise and expand on the arguments the administration has been making for the past several weeks: that the United States&rsquo; role is largely one of supporting allies; while it is firing some missiles, the amount of munitions involved is a small fraction of previous engagements like the one in Kosovo; there are no ground forces and little chance of American casualties; despite some NATO allies&rsquo; open goal of driving Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi from power, the military mission is constrained from escalating beyond protecting civilians under a United Nations Security Council resolution.        

On Tuesday, the administration&rsquo;s position is likely to come under attack yet again in the Senate hearing. A seven-page analysis prepared by Republican Senate lawyers calls the argument &ldquo;ill founded,&rdquo; just as House Speaker John A. Boehner has called it &ldquo;not credible.&rdquo; Top lawyers in the Justice Department and the Pentagon disagreed with that theory before Mr. Obama decided to adopt it as the official administration position.        

A senior administration official involved in the discussions defended Mr. Obama&rsquo;s approach on Monday, pushing back at the charge that the administration was twisting words to portray a mission that often involves sending American pilots and remote-operated drones on bombing runs as falling short of hostilities. Mr. Obama, he said, has been acting consistently with the requirements of the War Powers Resolution and had consulted regularly with Congress.        

It also looked for a period like Congress would act on its own. After visiting Libya in late April, Senator John McCain of Arizona, the 2008 Republican presidential nominee, floated the idea of jointly sponsoring a resolution, with Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the 2004 Democratic presidential nominee, to approve the intervention. But their negotiations dragged on as the apparent 60-day deadline came and went on May 20, and they offered the measure only last week.        

Administration officials were reluctant to describe particular advice they got from lawmakers during that period &mdash; particularly that of Mr. Boehner. But Mr. Boehner has questioned the constitutionality of the War Powers Resolution in the past, and on June 1, Mr. Boehner said publicly that the administration had met the requirements of the law. Soon after, he maneuvered to ensure that the House would not approve a resolution directing Mr. Obama to end the mission.        

More recently, Mr. Boehner has become more vocal in questioning the legality of the mission under the War Powers law. In March, the White House was concerned about Republican attacks that Mr. Obama was acting too reluctantly, at a moment when those in favor of action saw the best chance in years for Colonel Qaddafi, an adversary of the United States for decades, to be overthrown by a domestic opposition he could no longer control.        

Now it is increasingly members of Congress who want out &mdash; at the very moment Mr. Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton are arguing that Colonel Qaddafi is finally on the ropes, losing money and support, and as Mr. Koh heads to the Senate to defend the lawfulness of that policy.        
