
MOSCOW &mdash; A Moscow court sentenced a former Russian intelligence officer in absentia to 25 years in prison on Monday for leaking information that led to the exposure last summer of a Russian spy ring in the United States.        

The Moscow District Military Court convicted the officer, Aleksandr Poteyev, of treason, ruling that he had direct knowledge of the activities and whereabouts of a group of Russian sleeper agents in metropolitan Boston and New York and the suburbs of northern Virginia &mdash; including Anna Chapman, who has become a major celebrity here since being exposed.        

&ldquo;Poteyev betrayed to the United States government a group of agents from the Foreign Intelligence Agency,&rdquo; the judge, who remained unnamed, said, according to the Ria Novosti news agency. &ldquo;He also deserted.&rdquo;        

The exposure of the spy network set off a scandal that threatened to upset recently mended relations between the United States and Russia. Little is known about Mr. Poteyev, a former colonel in Russia&rsquo;s Foreign Intelligence Service, including his motives and his current whereabouts.        

He was officially charged in absentia in May. His trial was closed to the news media, and the testimony delivered at hearings was classified. But Russian journalists on Monday were permitted in the courtroom when the judge read the verdict, which included new details about the case.        

Citing the verdict, Russian news agencies reported that Mr. Poteyev began leaking classified information to the United States in 1999, suggesting that American law enforcement had been tracking many of the agents arrested last year for the duration of their service.        

The court said this explained why, though greeted as national heroes upon their return to Russia, the agents appeared to have collected little valuable intelligence. They were not even charged with espionage in the United States.        

&ldquo;For a long period, the C.I.A. was able to control the Russian agents, not thwarting their activities, but limiting their ability to meet their goals,&rdquo; the verdict said, according to Ria Novosti. &ldquo;As a result, their work yielded few results.&rdquo;        

The Russian authorities believe that Mr. Poteyev fled to the United States shortly before the F.B.I. moved in to arrest the spies, 10 of whom were later deported after pleading guilty to conspiring to act as unregistered foreign agents. An 11th agent was arrested in Cyprus, but later escaped.        

According to the verdict, Mr. Poteyev was able to leave Russia through neighboring Belarus using a fake Russian passport with a false name given to him by the American Embassy in Moscow. The name on the passport, Dudochkin, was the name of a real Russian citizen who had once applied at the embassy for a visa to the United States, the verdict said.        

A spokeswoman for the American Embassy in Moscow declined to comment.        

As he headed for the United States, the judge said, Mr. Poteyev sent a quick text message to his wife, who remains in Russia and testified at his trial.        

&ldquo;Mary, try to take this news calmly,&rdquo; the judge said Mr. Poteyev wrote. &ldquo;I am not leaving on a business trip, but forever. I did not want it this way, but this is how things turned out.&rdquo;        
