
BRUSSELS &mdash; Moving day had arrived. On a recent Friday evening, the color-coded crates were ready, some 2,500 of them stacked outside virtually every office door along the vast halls of the European Parliament complex here.        

Work crews would be packing for hours to come before heading for the French city of Strasbourg, 220 miles away, aiming to have everything in place for 736 Parliament members by Monday morning.        

This was no one-time logistical feat. It is repeated every month here &mdash; a mind numbing and costly trek that is increasingly drawing fire as an extravagant waste at a time when the European Union is demanding that Greece, as well as Ireland and Portugal, radically slash their own spending to avoid default on their debt.        

Experts say that eliminating the Parliament&rsquo;s monthly commute could save $285 million each year. &ldquo;We have a traveling circus that costs a lot and produces huge amounts of carbon dioxide,&rdquo; said Ashley Fox, a British Conservative and member of the European Parliament who is campaigning to stop the practice. &ldquo;We cannot keep this up.&rdquo;        

The Strasbourg shuffle is a prime example of the expensive diplomatic contortions that were necessary to appease Europe&rsquo;s many constituencies &mdash; and seemed more affordable when times were flush. Much of the 27-nation bloc&rsquo;s $182 billion budget for this year is doled out as agricultural aid or subsidies to poorer regions, and member states have wide discretion over how they use that aid. Right-leaning politicians from Finland to Italy have made the bloc&rsquo;s spendthrift ways a populist campaign issue.        

Last year, Italy was told to repay $1 million in European Union funds spent on holding an Elton John concert in Naples. This month, Britain&rsquo;s prime minister, David Cameron, complained that leaders of the bloc had decided to spend $344 million on a new administrative building for themselves in Brussels, and urged them to reconsider.        

&ldquo;You do wonder whether these institutions actually get what every country, what every member of the public is having to go through as we cut budgets and try to make our finances add up,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron told reporters.        

The Strasbourg commute was promoted mainly by the French, who maneuvered in 1992 to enshrine the monthly plenary sessions in Strasbourg in European Union treaties.        

So thousands of officials and lobbyists pour into Strasbourg each month, filling its hotels and restaurants to bursting. When the Parliament is in town for the weeklong meetings, the price of a Strasbourg hotel rivals Venice in the summer.        

But such extravagances are coming under fresh scrutiny. A recent request for a 5 percent increase in the European Union budget, at a time when the Continent is still stuck in a historic economic slump, was greeted by many as an extreme example of tone deafness.        

In May, Mr. Fox, the British member of the European Parliament, suggested the number of trips to Strasbourg could at least be reduced to 11 next year, by holding two plenary sessions in one week. And then he managed to get a secret vote on the matter.        

With their identities shielded, the measure passed by more than a 100-vote margin.        

But critics are not giving up. Another British member of the European Parliament, Edward McMillan-Scott, a Liberal Democrat, recently released a study providing a small mountain of evidence that Europe might spend its money more wisely.        

The report suggested not only that the trip to Strasbourg produced an extra 19,000 tons of carbon dioxide and spawned 300 unnecessary jobs, but that it was a disaster for the image of the Parliament and for the lifestyles of its deputies who were condemned to hours of extra travel.        

With the shortage of rooms hoteliers routinely profiteer; the Parliament even had to hire a tourist boat in 2010 to accommodate its staff, the report said.        

Mr. McMillan-Scott&rsquo;s report also found a &ldquo;code of silence&rdquo; on the issue. But when questioned privately, many deputies conceded the trips were an inefficient use of time and physically wearing.        

To be sure, there are worse places to be forced to spend a week than Strasbourg, a charming medieval city on the Rhine. But for many deputies and their assistants just getting to Strasbourg is an ordeal. Only six European capitals have direct flights there.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;When you look around Europe and the financial problems in Greece, the U.K., Ireland, Portugal, I cannot understand an organization that would pay $285 million for something so counterproductive,&rdquo; Mr. McMillan-Scott said. &ldquo;It opens us up to ridicule.&rdquo;        

Even some French politicians and journalists are beginning to agree, including Karima Delli, a young deputy who represents the Green Party. &ldquo;At a time of serious austerity, the Parliament must make an example,&rdquo; she said.        

But the French government is not likely to surrender quickly &mdash; and changes in the treaty need unanimous approval. Already it has shown a willingness to fight. The French have filed a suit in the European Court of Justice, trying to restore a 12th week in Strasbourg next year.        

The mayor of Strasbourg, Roland Ries, sounds a tad menacing when he suggests that if the Strasbourg seat is up for review, then other similar arrangements should be examined as well.        

&ldquo;Why are we focused just on the Strasbourg piece of this?&rdquo; Mr. Ries said. &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s discuss all of the seats of E.U. institutions. Why is the European Central Bank in Frankfurt?&rdquo;        

But it could be that a negotiation is coming. Some of those who favor the one seat arrangement believe that France might go along if it were offered the right sort of compensation &mdash; say, a new European University in Strasbourg.        

Mr. Ries rejects such talk. &ldquo;They are offering us crumbs,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They are disrespecting us.&rdquo;        

European institutions and agencies are spread across the Continent, a product of history, horse-trading and sometimes the logic of the moment. The Parliament ended up in Strasbourg because many people saw the symbolism in it.        

Strasbourg was the site of the Franco-German reconciliation at the heart of the European project, which helped its bid to serve as a parliamentary venue.        

Another key institution, the Parliament&rsquo;s administrative center, is based in Luxembourg, adding another location to the mix.        

Cries of waste have been a constant refrain. In 2002, the Parliament had already calculated that having three places of work was costing $240 million a year. In 2006, when the European Union embarked on plans to make itself more accountable to voters by promising to consider ideas supported by one million signatures, the cost of the moving back and forth became an immediate target.        

Anders Ekberg, a former political adviser in the Parliament who helped organize the collection of signatures to stop the commute, said he was surprised how easy it was to get them. They were gathered in a few months.        

But the effort fell flat. The European Commission, the bloc&rsquo;s executive, ruled that the petition did not qualify to be considered because only national leaders can change the status of Strasbourg.        
