
CAIRO &mdash; An Egyptian court on Tuesday ordered the dissolution of municipal councils nationwide, taking a major step toward dismantling one of the last political institutions of the former president, Hosni Mubarak.        

The decision, if implemented, would satisfy another demand of the democracy demonstrators whose protests forced Mr. Mubarak from power and ultimately led to his arrest. The military council now ruling the nation can appeal the decision, though it has indicated support for the order, Egyptian news media reported.        

Hossam el-Hamalawy, a blogger, called the councils &ldquo;the arteries of the corruption machine that ran the country.&rdquo; He said they allowed Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s party to control &ldquo;the daily affairs of the Egyptian people: decisions on water, electricity, garbage collection &mdash; the minute details of the Egyptian lives.&rdquo;        

The councils, which oversee administration of local governments, were elected in 2008 in a vote that was widely seen as rigged in favor of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s National Democratic Party. Of 52,000 open seats, 99.13 percent went to Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s allies, including 43,600 that were uncontested because of administrative or security decisions. Only 8,400 seats were contested, and of those 6,900 with to Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s party, 400 to independents and 1,100 from registered opposition parties.        

Judge Kamal el-Lamei of the Supreme Administrative Court issued the decision in response to lawsuits that claimed the councils were corrupt and only served the interests of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s party. (The party was dissolved by court order in April.)        

Hamdi el-Fakharani, who filed the successful lawsuit, warned that the councils could provide a platform for members of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s party to plot a comeback.        

Local councils only be dissolved only by judicial order, and elections must take place within 60 days. Egypt&rsquo;s interim government was scheduled to meet on Wednesday to discuss the ruling. Until new council election dates are set, Egypt&rsquo;s municipalities will be managed by unelected local executives and provincial officials.        

The military council has final say on all matters.        
