
GUVECCI, Turkey &mdash; From a rooftop in this dusty border town, Bilal looked out across the rugged valley to an abandoned refugee camp where he had fled advancing Syrian forces, fearing for his life, only to discover something quite unexpected: the feeling of freedom.        

President Bashar al-Assad sent the Syrian military and police to the north to crush an uprising, prompting thousands to flee their homes, with as many as 11,000 seeking sanctuary in Turkey.        

But there were many, like Bilal, who did not want to leave Syria and instead set up camps along the border. If President Assad&rsquo;s goal was to employ fear to silence the popular revolt, Bilal said the refugee experience may have had an opposite effect.        

&ldquo;Being in Khirbet al-Jouz made us discover many things that were strange to us,&rdquo; said Bilal, 30, who gave only one name for fear of government retribution. &ldquo;We were able to walk around in freedom and talk to each other about our rights as human beings, without fear.&rdquo;        

He added, &ldquo;It was an experience we never had before, not in my life and not in my father&rsquo;s life.&rdquo;        

Bilal and hundreds of others found shelter in a makeshift camp in Khirbet al-Jouz, a village on a sliver of land that appeared to have fallen beyond the state&rsquo;s control. At the camp of shabby tents scattered in scrubby orchard and thick forest, conditions were hard, food and medicine were insufficient and the water was dirty. Nevertheless, Bilal and others said they were inspired by the feeling of liberation on Syrian soil.        

On Fridays, refugees held long and loud antigovernment protests next to the barbed-wire border, reveling in the absence of the security forces that violently dispersed protests elsewhere in Syria. Young men, some armed with handguns, formed poorly organized citizens&rsquo; committees to stand lookout for any sign of the army. A group of refugee activists set up a media center to upload videos to the Internet. Later, they and others announced the formation of a National Guidance Council for the Syrian Revolution, an ersatz umbrella group that failed to take off and seems to have faded.        

&ldquo;There was no army, no police, nothing,&rdquo; Bilal said, marveling at the impact of what he experienced. &ldquo;We live our whole lives under very, very, very strong repression. The army and security always say that they know what happens between a man and his wife.&rdquo;        

But that was not to last.        

On Thursday tanks and soldiers returned, reasserting the state&rsquo;s ability to use force. In the end, almost everyone fled to Turkey once Syrian forces moved in, said refugee leaders and aid officials. Most from Khirbet al-Jouz went to Reyhanli, where the Red Crescent administers a camp and where Turkey forbids refugees to speak to journalists. Turkish officials say the official camps now house more than 11,000 Syrian &ldquo;guests&rdquo; &mdash; Turkey avoids the term &ldquo;refugee&rdquo; &mdash; while the Red Crescent estimated last week that 17,000 additional people were waiting to cross to the Turkish side.        

For the last month, refugees have fled to the border zone from across the rural northwestern province of Idlib, where security forces burned fields and assaulted communities to try to tame a string of towns that hosted larger and larger antigovernment protests each week. The government effort to crush the months-long popular uprising has left more than 1,400 people dead, activists said, and at least 10,000 detained.        

After the trauma of fleeing their homes many people said they were hesitant to leave their country and cross to Turkey for fear of leaving behind valuable belongings like livestock or cars. Others refused to cross, out of defiance or fearful that they might never be able to return.        

Noufa al-Ali, 48, did not want to go to Turkey because she wanted to return to her home village, Ashtouria, &ldquo;but only after the regime falls.&rdquo; An elderly man named Ahmed, smoking a cigarette next to the car he slept in, said he would stay in the camp &ldquo;until death&rdquo; rather than be driven out by &ldquo;that murderer Bashar.&rdquo;        

Wissam Tarif, executive director of Insan, a human rights group, said he encountered &ldquo;an amazing transition in mindset&rdquo; in telephone conversations with people in the border zone. &ldquo;They were thinking about approaches to a political transition in Syria and how to make it happen,&rdquo; said Mr. Tarif, a luxury unavailable to people living through a military crackdown.        

But life in the border zone pointed to some of the shortcomings of the Syrian uprising, as well. Misinformation was rampant. Many said they felt safe because the border was &ldquo;under the protection of Turkey,&rdquo; and pointed as proof to a treaty widely believed to prohibit Syrian security forces from operating within five kilometers of the border &mdash; a document Turkey&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry said does not exist.        

Events in Libya were also on the minds of many refugees. Libya&rsquo;s uprising became a shooting war as some military units defected to the rebels, and the international community stepped in, using NATO air power to protect Libyan civilians from state violence.        

None of this has happened in Syria. International support has not been forthcoming, and while there have been defections in the security forces, they have so far been too sporadic and few to pose a serious challenge to the state.        

Refugee activists swore their commitment to peaceful protest as they reveled in their newfound freedom, but they were unable to defend it. One young man expressed frustration that they were all &ldquo;surrounded&rdquo; by states and powers unwilling to provide Syrian protesters with the means to defend themselves.        

When the security forces came, their only choice was to run.        

&ldquo;This was like Benghazi, but the difference was that one had weapons and one did not,&rdquo; said Bilal, staring down the hillside as the small dark silhouettes of security officers poked through the ragged tents. &ldquo;If we had weapons we could have fought them, but we have no source of weapons. Our only defense was to run to Turkey.&rdquo;        
