
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Afghanistan&rsquo;s political crisis worsened on Thursday, as the winning candidates in September&rsquo;s elections vowed to take their seats in the new Parliament on Sunday in defiance of a delay announced by President Hamid Karzai.        

The declaration set up a potentially volatile showdown with the president, who announced on Wednesday that he would postpone the Parliament&rsquo;s inauguration while a special court he appointed investigated allegations of fraud by losing candidates. Many of them are from Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s political base in the heavily Pashtun south.        

The winning candidates and several Afghan and international officials say the court has no jurisdiction, and Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s opponents charge that the president is trying to engineer a more favorable outcome for himself.        

There are growing concerns among diplomats, Afghan officials and candidates on all sides that the standoff could lead to violent protests and even open war between Afghanistan&rsquo;s rival ethnic groups.        

At a meeting at the Intercontinental Hotel here, more than 200 newly elected members of Parliament agreed in a public display of unity to open the new session on Sunday, with or without the president&rsquo;s approval. If the government stopped them from entering the Parliament headquarters, they said, they would meet in the street or in a mosque.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t care about President Karzai&rsquo;s decree about delaying the new Parliament, because this is totally against our national Constitution and against the election laws,&rdquo; said the interim speaker of the new Parliament, Hajji Mohammad Sarwar Osmani, who is from Farah Province.        

&ldquo;Even if the government forces oppose us from going to the Parliament building,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;those soldiers are also our sons, and we won&rsquo;t arm wrestle with them. We will go to one of the big mosques in Kabul City or come to this hotel if the owner of the hotel lets us and start work of our new Parliament here.&rdquo;        

Naheed Farid, of Herat Province, the interim secretary of the body, said, &ldquo;Maybe we&rsquo;ll start in the street if we have to.&rdquo;        

The show of defiance by the incoming legislators not only heightened the prospect of a constitutional crisis, but also showed signs of ethnic fractures within the Parliament. Although 213 of the 249 elected members were at the meeting, it was not clear the extent to which the Pashtuns in the group would support the move. Some interviewed afterward said they would not attend the opening Sunday.        

The members had already gathered at the hotel for a weeklong training session in preparation for what had been the expected inauguration on Sunday.        

Mr. Osmani, who was named interim speaker by the members until a new speaker could be chosen after Parliament opened, said all of the attending members agreed. And throughout the two-and-a-half hour meeting, the only strong signal of dissent came when one member walked out near the end, later telling a reporter that he was too disturbed to talk.        

Another member, Hajji Obaidullah, a new Pashtun member of Parliament from Oruzgan Province, said in an interview after the meeting that the winning candidates should wait for the special court to finish its work.        

&ldquo;Me, personally, I will not go to the Parliament on Sunday,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I will wait for the court&rsquo;s decision.&rdquo;        

He said he thought 60 to 70 members, mainly Pashtuns, also believed that they should wait for Mr. Karzai to open the session.        

&ldquo;The reason why most of them said yes was because they were kind of under pressure or didn&rsquo;t want to make any of their friends mad,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But the facts are something else, and you&rsquo;ll see something different in one or two days.&rdquo;        

The uncertainty about what may happen on Sunday &mdash; whether the candidates&rsquo; efforts prompt riots or worse &mdash; is causing concern. One losing candidate who hopes for a new election predicted violence if the Parliament did not defer to Mr. Karzai.        

&ldquo;Warlordism will start again in this country,&rdquo; said the former candidate, Abdul Hadi Safi, 49, a former Parliament member from Kapisa Province who lost his seat in September. &ldquo;Because if these people do not believe in the president, in the courts and in Islam, then it&rsquo;s better to start jihad against them.&rdquo;        
Alissa J. Rubin and Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting.
Alissa J. Rubin and Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting.
