
JUBA, Sudan &mdash; Sudan&rsquo;s government and southern-allied opposition forces in northern Sudan signed a framework agreement on Tuesday that called for the two sides to govern contested border states together and for opposition fighters to be absorbed into Sudan&rsquo;s national army.        

The agreement stopped short of declaring a cease-fire in the Nuba Mountains along the border, the scene of heavy fighting over the past few weeks.        

But the framework agreement, a seven-page document, outlined a plan to bring peace to two difficult areas along Sudan&rsquo;s north-south border, the states of Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan, which are technically part of northern Sudan though many people in these states sided with the south during the country&rsquo;s civil war.        

&ldquo;Are we satisfied? Well, let&rsquo;s just say we can live with it,&rdquo; said Malik Agar, governor of Blue Nile, who signed the agreement on behalf of the Sudan People&rsquo;s Liberation Movement&rsquo;s northern branch.        

Northern officials could not be reached for comment on Tuesday night.        

Southern Sudan, which is led by the liberation movement, the political wing of a former rebel army, will be formally declaring independence next week after a decades-long struggle that cost more than two million lives. Complicating matters is a host of unresolved, combustible issues, including what to do with the tens of thousands of southern-allied fighters who do not want to live in southern Sudan but at the same time do not trust the northern government to treat them fairly.        

In late May, the Sudanese government demanded that all the southern-allied fighters still in the north disarm. When they refused, heavy fighting broke out in the Nuba Mountains, an area within Southern Kordofan State that was an important rebel stronghold during the later years of the north-south civil war. Aid workers and witnesses have said that hundreds of people have been killed in clashes and bombings this month and that some of the killings seemed ethnically driven, with northern forces hunting down Nuban civilians.        

The agreement signed on Tuesday says that the southern-allied fighters &ldquo;shall be integrated, over a time period and with modalities to be agreed, into the Sudan Armed Forces&rdquo; and that &ldquo;any disarmament shall be done in accordance with agreed-upon plans and without resorting to force.&rdquo;        

The agreement also calls for the &ldquo;establishment of political partnership and governance arrangements for Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan&rdquo; and reiterates the commitment of both sides to the peace accords that ended the civil war. Under those accords, Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan were supposed to hold vaguely defined &ldquo;popular consultations&rdquo; to determine their political future.        

The agreement says the two sides should begin working on a cease-fire and allow humanitarian access into Southern Kordofan.        

Some Western diplomats were skeptical, pointing out the numerous peace treaties and cease-fires that have been signed over recent years, but that did little to halt the fighting.        
