
ATHENS &mdash; Parliament appeared close to approving and carrying out a set of unpopular austerity measures after a day of intense political maneuvering on Tuesday that seemed to bring wavering members of the ruling Socialist Party into line.        

While the lawmakers debated, riot police clashed with protesters outside the Parliament building. Parliament must pass the measures &mdash; which include wage cuts, tax increases and privatizations in a recession-starved country &mdash; before Greece&rsquo;s foreign lenders unlock the next installment of aid that the country needs to avoid default.        

Prime Minister George A. Papandreou has a five-vote parliamentary majority as he tries to push through the austerity plan, which strikes at the heart of his Socialist Party base. The center-right New Democracy opposition party has struck a populist tone and opposes the measures, saying they offer too much austerity and not enough stimulus.        

In the tense countdown ahead of the vote to approve the austerity package, which is scheduled for Wednesday, at least one member of Parliament from the Socialist Party who had opposed the bill changed his mind.        

The lawmaker, Thomas Robopoulos, told state television on Tuesday that he would&nbsp;support the&nbsp;measures, &ldquo;putting the national&nbsp;interest above&nbsp;everything else.&rdquo; Earlier, Mr.&nbsp;Robopoulos&nbsp;had said he would decide &ldquo;at the very last moment, after I have listened to all the speakers,&rdquo; referring to the debate in Parliament.        

&ldquo;This is a crucial moment; if the memorandum does not pass we shall go bankrupt,&rdquo; Mr. Robopoulos added.        

He spoke after talks with the new finance minister, Evangelos Venizelos, a longtime Socialist who is regarded as being able to rally the party behind the measures, however unpopular.        

The nation&rsquo;s unions complicated matters on Tuesday when they began a 48-hour general strike &mdash; the first time they had walked out for more than 24 hours since democracy was restored to Greece in 1974 after a seven-year military dictatorship.        

The protests in Syntagma Square in front of Parliament began peacefully but turned violent as groups of youths on the fringes began throwing rocks, firebombs and firecrackers.        

The European Union, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund have said they will release $17 billion that Greece needs to pay its expenses through the summer if Parliament passes the measures.        

&ldquo;The only way to avoid immediate default is for Parliament to endorse the revised economic program,&rdquo; said Olli Rehn, the European Union&rsquo;s top economic and monetary affairs official. &ldquo;Let me say this clearly: There is no Plan B to avoid default.&rdquo;        

In Brussels, European Union officials said they were working on contingency plans, including an effort to persuade the Greek opposition leader Antonis Samaras of the New Democracy Party to support the measures.        

After the vote on the austerity measures, Parliament is scheduled on Thursday to consider a bill on how each of the measures will be carried out. Last year, Greece&rsquo;s foreign lenders imposed austerity measures after they provided a first round of aid.        

Since then, Greece has cut the wages of its 800,000 public workers &mdash; a quarter of the work force &mdash; by more than 10 percent.        

The demonstration on Tuesday was one of the first in which labor unions joined with the younger demonstrators who have gathered in downtown Athens every night for the past month. Security forces fired tear gas to thin out the crowd, sending the demonstrators fleeing into side streets.        

A police official said that 23 people were detained, with five later arrested, and that 21 officers were injured, none seriously.        

Near Syntagma Square, a 40-year-old woman who gave her name only as Eirini, said she had been a secretary in a construction firm but had been out of work for more than five months.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m here because we have nothing to lose,&rdquo; she said, pushing down the surgical mask she used to filter out the tear gas. &ldquo;We know very well that in six months, when they run out of money in the banks, we will be even more broke and hungry.&rdquo;        

She added, &ldquo;I think that in one year, we are going to go to Syntagma, take out all the grass and plant tomatoes.&rdquo;        
Stephen Castle contributed reporting from Brussels.
