
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Nazir Amini, an Afghan visiting from his home in Germany, had just returned from the buffet with a bowl of ice cream when two men with an AK-47 rifle and a machine gun started shooting guests around the pool at the Intercontinental Hotel, one of the capital&rsquo;s most fortified buildings.        

Women and children screamed. Chairs tipped backward. Food slid onto the lawn as people started to run. Mr. Amini said he saw police officers running, too, tightly gripping their own AK-47s as they raced away from the gunmen.        

&ldquo;I said, &lsquo;Why don&rsquo;t you shoot? Shoot!&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; he recalled. &ldquo;But they just said, &lsquo;Get away from them.&rsquo; And we all ran together.&rdquo;        

Six hours later, at least 21 people were dead, including the nine suicide bombers who managed to penetrate several rings of security on Tuesday night to carry out the attack. The assault has shaken public confidence in the ability of Afghan forces, especially the police, to assume responsibility for security, even here in the capital.        

The scene painted by Mr. Amini and several other guests at the hotel vividly demonstrated the challenges facing the Afghan government as it prepares to defend its country without NATO troops after 2014. Last week, President Obama announced that the American military had inflicted enough damage on the insurgency to allow him to begin withdrawing some troops. This week is supposed to be the beginning of the transition to Afghan control, with Kabul, one of the country&rsquo;s safest cities, scheduled to be among the first places to carry out the transfer.        

&ldquo;We talk about the transition to Afghan security, but the Afghan forces are not ready to take over their security and their country,&rdquo; said Maulavi Mohammadullah Rusgi, chairman of the Takhar provincial council in northern Afghanistan, who was having dinner at the hotel with friends when the attack commenced. Three of his friends were killed.        

&ldquo;The security forces cannot even protect a few people inside the hotel,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;How can they protect the whole country?&rdquo;        

The assault ended only after NATO helicopters joined the battle, killing three of the insurgents on the hotel&rsquo;s roof. Still, NATO officials took a more sanguine view of the performance of the Afghan police, saying that they had fought well, once they had their forces arrayed at the scene. &ldquo;They acquitted themselves pretty well &mdash; it could have been a whole lot worse,&rdquo; said a Western official.        

But for the hotel guests, many of whom jumped over the perimeter walls, plunged into irrigation ditches or cowered in closets to escape the attackers, the police response was not only slow, but also cowardly. Several witnesses said police officers ran away or refused to shoot.        

Guests milling outside the hotel on Wednesday morning said that without the assistance of the NATO forces, the mayhem would have gone on much longer.        

&ldquo;The main question in Kabul, and on the cusp of transition, is, Are they ready?&rdquo; said another Western official here, referring to the police. &ldquo;The Intercontinental attack introduces doubt, and if the transition is supposed to be based on the security conditions, then the conditions haven&rsquo;t been met.&rdquo;        

Sowing doubt was clearly the intent of the Taliban, who claimed responsibility for the attack. The difficulty the Afghan security forces faced in fending off the assault and in putting out the fire that destroyed half the roof of the building &mdash; the blaze took more than an hour to tame &mdash; gave the insurgents a propaganda victory, even if the death toll was relatively low compared with other spectacular attacks of recent years. The dead included a Spanish pilot and at least two Afghan police officers.        

Mr. Rusgi, the provincial council official from Takhar, said that even after the shooting stopped at 5 a.m., the police were reluctant to enter the hotel, defying the orders of their commander, the police chief, Mohammed Ayoub Salangi.        

&ldquo;The police chief, Salangi, kept telling his people to march &mdash; to go, to go ahead into the hotel &mdash; but they didn&rsquo;t go,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Rusgi and 11 friends were at dinner when the attack erupted.        

&ldquo;When the gunmen started shooting,&rdquo; he recounted, &ldquo;me and my friend Judge Abdul Hanan jumped into a ditch, and I silenced my cellphone to make sure the phone did not make noise so that the gunmen would not shoot us.        
Sharifullah Sahak and Sangar Rahimi contributed reporting.
