
ROME &mdash; A report by forensic experts filed with an appeals court on Wednesday casts doubt on the DNA evidence used to convict Amanda Knox and her Italian ex-boyfriend for the 2007 murder of a British student. Lawyers for the defendants said the development significantly improved their chances of winning their appeal.        

In a 145-page report filed to a tribunal in Perugia &mdash; and immediately leaked to the news media &mdash; two court-appointed independent experts said that the collection and testing of DNA traces in key exhibits were below international standards and that the evidence might have been contaminated.        

Ms. Knox, 23, from Seattle, and her co-defendant Raffaele Sollecito, an Italian, were convicted in 2009 and sentenced to 26 and 25 years in prison, respectively, for the murder of Meredith Kercher, 21, a British exchange student at the University of Perugia who shared a home with Ms. Knox. Both have denied wrongdoing and their appeal trial started last November. An Ivorian man, Rudy Guede, was also convicted of the crime and sentenced to 16 years.        

After Ms. Kercher&rsquo;s half-naked body was found in her bedroom, her throat slit, on the morning on Nov. 2, 2007, prosecutors said she had been killed in a sexual escapade that spiraled out of control.        

The forensic experts &mdash; Stefano Conti and Carla Vecchiotti from Rome&rsquo;s Sapienza University &mdash; were appointed by the court after the defense requested an independent review of DNA traces found on two central pieces of evidence: a knife that prosecutors claim was used to kill Ms. Kercher and a bra clasp that belonged to the victim found on the floor at the scene 46 days after her murder.        

During the first trial, experts for the prosecution determined that a small sample of Ms. Kercher&rsquo;s DNA was on the blade of the knife &mdash; which had been found in a drawer in Mr. Sollecito&rsquo;s kitchen &mdash; while Ms. Knox&rsquo;s DNA was found on the handle. And the bra clasp, the first trial experts said, showed traces of Mr. Sollecito&rsquo;s DNA.        

In the report filed on Wednesday, the court-appointed experts concluded that while Ms. Knox&rsquo;s DNA was in fact on the handle of the knife, the tests on the blade were &ldquo;not reliable&rdquo; because the correct international protocol for tests on small samples, called low copy number DNA analysis, had not been followed. The results were therefore inconclusive.        

&ldquo;The genetic profile, as obtained, appears unreliable because not supported by scientifically valid analytical procedures,&rdquo; and so cannot be positively identified as belonging to Ms. Kercher, the report said.        

The experts also said that both the knife and the bra clasp had been collected and handled without following international procedures, and that &ldquo;it cannot be ruled out&rdquo; that the evidence had been contaminated and that the conclusions were untrustworthy.        

Defense lawyers on Wednesday said the report was further proof of their client&rsquo;s innocence.        

&ldquo;Two key pieces of evidence have been destroyed,&rdquo; said Carlo Della Vedova, one of Ms. Knox&rsquo;s lawyers, who said that prosecutors would now be hard pressed to put his client and Mr. Sollecito, 26, in the bedroom. The report, he said, shows that &ldquo;Raffaele was never in the room and that the knife is not the murder knife,&rdquo; thus undermining the prosecution&rsquo;s case.        

Giulia Bongiorno, one of Mr. Sollecito&rsquo;s defense lawyers, said that the defense had insisted from the start that there had been &ldquo;errors and contamination&rdquo; in the forensic procedures, and that the report and its indictment of the methods used to collect and test evidence was vindication of their suspicions. &ldquo;There were no motives, no witness,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;There was only the DNA, and now that has no scientific value.&rdquo;        

But others played down the report&rsquo;s findings.        

The lawyer for the Kercher family, Francesco Maresca, countered that the word of the independent experts would not be the last word, and said he would raise his objections during the last week in July, when the report will be formally discussed during a week of hearings.        

He said that the scientific police and the consultants who carried out the original tests had far more experience than the independent experts appointed by the court. &ldquo;I was surprised that these experts were so certain, and gave such strong, drastic opinions, given that they don&rsquo;t have the same number of years of experience under their belt,&rdquo; Mr. Maresca said.        

Other accusers of Ms. Knox and Mr. Sollecito said that the DNA was just one piece of evidence in the case that they built against them, based on various testimonies, their lack of an alibi and what prosecutors say is other damaging physical evidence, which has not been reviewed. During one interrogation, Ms. Knox allowed that she was in the house when Ms. Kercher was murdered, an admission she later retracted, saying she had spoken under duress.        

&ldquo;The first jury decided looking at a wide range of evidence, the DNA was only part of it,&rdquo; said one prosecutor, who was not authorized to speak publicly about the case. &ldquo;Everything else still stands.&rdquo;        
