
CHONGQING, China &mdash; The kindergarten musical climaxed in a whirlwind of violence: A teacher playing a Japanese soldier sliced down a peasant girl with a curved sword, just as two tykes in Red Army outfits took aim at him with plastic pistols.        

Dozens of girls in cerise silk outfits broke into song and dance in the schoolyard, and a teacher at the microphone delivered the lesson: &ldquo;If you don&rsquo;t put up your defenses, you&rsquo;ll lose your life.&rdquo;        

The Maoist musical was the brainchild of the Red Song Association, founded by Zhang Shusen, a well-connected corporate lawyer and local politician. The group is on the front lines of a government-driven &ldquo;red culture&rdquo; revival now in full flower ahead of an elaborate celebration of the 90th anniversary of the founding of the Chinese Communist Party on July 1.        

In recent months, the campaign has spread quickly across the country from its roots in the booming western metropolis of Chongqing, surprising many Chinese and leading to unusually loud criticism from moderates and liberals alarmed by its retro-red ideology.        

&ldquo;When I sing it, I feel immense respect for &lsquo;Wang Erxiao,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Zhang, 59, said of the classic ode to a martyred peasant child. &ldquo;And for the attackers, I feel a hatred. The people of China must not forget the past. We must take this spirit and use it to construct our new socialism.&rdquo;        

China has boomed during three decades of economic reform, and has in many respects tried to distance itself from the Mao era, when tens of millions died from deprivation and state-directed violence. But Communist Party leaders still promote the myths and icons of that time to instill patriotism and loyalty in the population.        

The latest iteration, started by the ambitious party chief of Chongqing, Bo Xilai, is centered on singing Communist classics, and has been copied by central leaders for a nationwide mobilization to celebrate the 90th anniversary.        

Party officials have told schools, state-owned companies and neighborhood committees to organize choirs to sing red songs and stage musical numbers, celebrating Maoist classics like &ldquo;The East is Red&rdquo; and &ldquo;Without the Communist Party There Would be No New China.&rdquo; In Chongqing, even prisons are holding singalongs, and one psychiatric hospital has prescribed it for patients.        

The revival has moved well beyond just red songs in this municipal area of 31 million, whose urban core is built on foggy hills overlooking the Yangtze and Jialing Rivers. In initiatives reminiscent of the Mao era, the government has ordered each cadre to live with a family in the countryside for a month, transmitted Maoist slogans to residents via text message, and told Chongqing Satellite Television to fill prime-time hours with educational red programming and cut all commercial advertising.        

The campaign has become a flashpoint for liberal elites wary of any return to Maoist ideology. Some are boldly criticizing the red revival, which they argue is an attempt to portray Communist propaganda as indigenous culture. What they see as true, traditional Chinese culture, eviscerated during Mao&rsquo;s rule, gets far less official support.        

A major irony, the critics say, is that red culture is now used to promote social stability rather than stoke rebellion, as Mao had intended.        

&ldquo;In this absurd time, they encourage you to sing revolutionary songs, but they do not encourage you to wage a revolution,&rdquo; He Bing, the vice dean of the law school at the China University of Political Science & Law, said at a recent graduation. Surprisingly, the audience of aspiring lawyers, judges and police officers applauded wildly.        

Zhang Ming, a political scientist at Renmin University and a party member, said in an interview, &ldquo;The songs they&rsquo;re singing now are pink songs, not red songs.&rdquo; The party never encourages the singing of &ldquo;The Internationale&rdquo; or &ldquo;It Is Right to Rebel,&rdquo; a Cultural Revolution classic, he added.        

&ldquo;Red songs are mostly about revolution and the violence,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Now they only use red songs to praise the party and the party members, so it&rsquo;s pointless.&rdquo;        
Xiyun Yang contributed reporting from Chongqing. Jonathan Kaiman and Shi Da contributed research from Beijing.
