
MOSCOW &mdash; Russia&rsquo;s irritation with its neighbor Belarus became more apparent on Wednesday when a state-controlled television station here broadcast a documentary damning the Belarussian president for mismanaging the economy, after which a Russian utility cut off about an eighth of that country&rsquo;s electricity, claiming it had not been paid.        

A Belarussian utility was able to compensate for the loss with other sources of electricity, and no blackouts were reported.        

Russia, an off-again-on-again ally of its former Soviet confederate, has picked economic fights with Belarus and its iron-fisted president, Aleksandr G. Lukashenko, before, including shutting out its dairy products from the Russian market in what is known as the milk war. But relations have been worsening, with recent disputes over loans and Russian pressure on Belarus to privatize its state-owned industries.        

The Russian documentary was broadcast on NTV, a station owned by the government-controlled energy monolith Gazprom. Beamed onto Belarussian airwaves, the documentary opened with sympathetically portrayed scenes of the silent gatherings in public squares in Belarus that pass for protests now. Mr. Lukashenko, a mustachioed man sometimes known as the last dictator in Europe, has ruled since 1994. But unrest has grown as the economy has plunged into crisis. Many opposition leaders have been jailed. The silent protests, organized anonymously on social networking sites, abstain even from political chants to avert an immediate police crackdown.        

The documentary seemed to encourage such protests.        

&ldquo;They are coming out because they have no way to live,&rdquo; the announcer said dolefully over images of a gathering, describing the participants as average Belarussians fed up with their economic hardship.        

The documentary deprecated Mr. Lukashenko, showing him making absurd statements on economic policy and including video clips that seemed to highlight his megalomaniacal personality, all in a way NTV would never dare in a program about Russia&rsquo;s own strong-handed leaders.        

&ldquo;If we don&rsquo;t have shoes we will work 30 hours a day&rdquo; to make them, Mr. Lukashenko proclaimed in one clip. &ldquo;If we don&rsquo;t have clothes we will work 50 hours a day,&rdquo; he said, his fist pounding a lectern.        

While being shown on Russian state-controlled television, the documentary mocked the Belarussian counterpart, using one of its clips of Mr. Lukashenko and his young son posing in the gold vault of the Belarussian central bank, a scene apparently intended to tamp down panic selling of the national currency.        

The documentary wrapped up with footage of Mr. Lukashenko saying he expected to find oil and in this way resolve his country&rsquo;s economic woes. Belarus has no known oil fields to speak of.        

The Russian show then cited an expert saying that Belarus should abandon its currency and use the Russian ruble instead.        

The show ended around 11 p.m. Tuesday in Minsk, the Belarussian capital. An hour later, the Russian utility Inter RAO switched off all electricity exports to Belarus.        

The poor relations between Russia and Belarus come as the two countries struggle over major business deals, and as Mr. Lukashenko&rsquo;s long-practiced approach to foreign policy &mdash; an endless series of feints playing Russia off the West &mdash; has faltered. In December, when the police beat and arrested opposition presidential candidates after a rigged election, Western countries imposed sanctions. With another turn to the West now less likely, Mr. Lukashenko was left vulnerable to being toyed with by Russia.        

The Russian government imposed steep tariffs on crude oil exports, undermining profitable refining businesses in Belarus that sold gasoline to Western Europe and creating a trade deficit that weakened the currency. Russia also provided a partial solution, in the form of a $3 billion bailout loan through a former Soviet fund for struggling economies. But the authorities in Moscow demanded in exchange that Mr. Lukashenko privatize $2.5 billion in state property annually.        

Gazprom is negotiating to buy the 50 percent of Belarus&rsquo;s national gas transportation system it does not already own.        

Also bogged down are talks to merge Russian and Belarussian mineral fertilizer companies to create the world&rsquo;s largest producer of potash, a crucial ingredient in modern agriculture that is used to raise grain crop yields, particularly in warmer climates.        

The fertilizer merger that is behind the scenes of the political conflict would form a single agricultural supply giant controlling about 42 percent of the global potash market, likely to be a vastly profitable arrangement at a time when concern is mounting about tight global food supplies.        

Mr. Lukashenko, though, has demanded a valuation for the wholly state-owned Belaruskali that is higher than Uralkali&rsquo;s current market price on the Russian stock exchange, adjusted for the two companies&rsquo; relative outputs of potash. Analysts say the Russians are unlikely to accept this price, so talks are continuing.        
