
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Islamic militants linked to Al Qaeda gained ground on Wednesday in fierce fighting with security forces just outside the southern port city of Zinjibar.        

At least 47 people were killed in the clashes, including 5 civilians, according to local military and government officials. The insurgents took over a sports stadium about five miles east of Zinjibar, which is the capital of Abyan Province, and the fighting continued into the night.        

The militants took control of Zinjibar on May 29, after having seized the nearby city of Jaar in late March. They call themselves Ansar al Sharia, meaning supporters of Shariah, Islamic religious law; the name was identified by Qaeda leaders this year as an alternate name for their own organization in Yemen.        

The stadium they seized has significant strategic value, because it is next to a military base commanded by Gen. Muhammad al-Somli, who has been leading the effort to combat the militants. The stadium had been used to store food and other provisions for about 2,000 soldiers under his command.        

A military official in Aden, Yemen, said that 25 soldiers and 11 militants had been killed in the battle for the stadium. There were about 300 militants, said a reporter who was just outside Zinjibar, Ziad Mohammed, and they used machine guns, Katyusha-type rockets and rocket-propelled grenades.        

The inability of 2,000 soldiers to hold the stadium against an attack by a few hundred militants appeared to reflect the security forces&rsquo; struggle to subdue the militants, who are taking advantage of the security vacuum in the country.        

Zinjibar residents reached by telephone said that General Somli had largely been trapped at his base and had been battling over the past few weeks from the outskirts of Zinjibar.        

In other fighting in the Zinjibar area, six militants were killed in an airstrike conducted by the Air Defense Forces within the city, said the military official in Aden, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the news media.        

Another airstrike during the battle for the stadium accidentally hit a bus full of civilians, killing 5 people and injuring 20, said Ghassan al-Sheikh Faraj, leader of the local government council in Zinjibar. Mr. Faraj has fled to Aden.        

Thousands of civilians have also left Zinjibar for Aden, which is about 35 miles away, and many are living in schools there.        

The militants&rsquo; activity is a serious concern for the United States, which has been pressing the Yemeni president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, once an important ally in the fight against terrorism, to leave office after months of antigovernment protests.        

In another development, Vice President Abdu Rabu Mansoor Hadi said in an interview with CNN that Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s injuries from an attack on June 3 were sufficiently severe that &ldquo;it could be months&rdquo; before he can return to Yemen from receiving medical treatment in Saudi Arabia. &ldquo;This is a decision up to the doctors,&rdquo; Mr. Hadi said, CNN reported.        
Yasser Alarami contributed reporting.
