
ATHENS &mdash; With the propeller shafts of two ships mysteriously damaged, the Greek authorities holding other vessels in port on government orders and an American boat turned back by the Greek coast guard on Friday just 20 minutes off the coast, the international flotilla to Gaza has stalled.        

Organizers say they see the long arm of Israel behind their improbable woes, and while Israeli officials have dismissed such accusations as so much conspiracy mongering, they have declined to deny them outright.        

One year after Israeli commandos killed nine Turkish activists aboard the Mavi Marmara during another flotilla, organizers had hoped once again to challenge the naval blockade of the Gaza Strip off its coast. It appears increasingly unlikely, however, that the eight boats now preparing to sail will ever be able or allowed to leave port.        

Echoing a majority view among participants here, Johnny Leo Johansen, a ponytailed Norwegian photographer and activist, put it this way: &ldquo;It&rsquo;s like they&rsquo;ve moved the blockade from Gaza to Greece.&rdquo; On Friday the coast guard stopped the American boat in the flotilla, The Audacity of Hope, about one mile out to sea, quashing the initial excitement of the passengers, who were surprised to have been allowed to leave the harbor at all.        

&ldquo;We could see the handwriting on the wall, that they were going to try to shut down all the ports across the Mediterranean,&rdquo; said Ann Wright, the lead organizer of the American boat.        

After a complaint about improper documentation filed by an Israeli advocacy group, the boat had been held in port outside Athens on police orders. Inspectors visited it a week ago Friday, but the results of their inspection had yet to be provided. Without them, the ship could not legally set sail.        

The Greek Ministry of Citizen Protection decreed Friday that all vessels in Greek ports were prohibited from sailing toward &ldquo;the maritime area of Gaza.&rdquo; No explanation was given, and ministry officials could not be reached for further comment.        

The Americans decided to leave just the same. After chasing them down, a smiling, youthful coast guard captain leaned out his window and requested the ship&rsquo;s inspection papers. Passengers leaned over the upper-deck railing of the American boat, chanting, &ldquo;Let us sail to Gaza!&rdquo; Others held a cardboard sign asking, &ldquo;Is it Poseidon or Netanyahu?&rdquo; (That is, a passenger explained, &ldquo;Who is the king of the Aegean?&rdquo;)        

&ldquo;The probability that the Greek government has already made a decision to not let us out of the port is probably quite high, I would think,&rdquo; Ms. Wright said earlier this week. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not surprising, in a way, that the Greek government has succumbed to the pressure.&rdquo;        

[On Saturday, The Associated Press reported that Greek authorities had arrested the captain of the Audacity of Hope. The captain was being held at Piraeus police headquarters and would remain there until a court hearing Tuesday, The A.P. reported. Greece's coast guard said the captain faced charges of trying to leave port without permission and of endangering the lives of the boat's passengers. The latter charge is a felony.]        

The Israeli government, she noted, has held cabinet meetings on the subject of the flotilla, and several rounds of military exercises have been conducted in preparation for a confrontation. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m shocked that they would be spending so much time, money, energy,&rdquo; Ms. Wright added, but in some ways, she has been pleased by the Israeli attention. &ldquo;We couldn&rsquo;t have dreamed for a better thing. Usually, governments don&rsquo;t cooperate with us this way!&rdquo;        

On Thursday, Irish organizers announced that they had pulled their Turkish-docked ship from the flotilla after the crew discovered damage to the propeller shaft, the result of what they assume to have been sabotage by divers. Organizers said that the damage was discovered on a trial run, but that otherwise the vessel might have sunk at sea.        

Activists discovered nearly identical damage to a Greek-Swedish-Norwegian passenger boat this week. That boat is now grounded for repairs.        

Three boats with passengers principally from Canada, Spain and the Netherlands were awaiting clearance to sail Friday. All of the ships have ostensibly met the requirements of the Greek authorities, according to Adam Shapiro, a flotilla organizer and spokesman. But on Thursday, harbor officials barred a French boat from refueling, he said, an indication that Greek officials might find justifications for retaining the other ships in port.        
Ethan Bronner contributed reporting from Jerusalem.
