
CAIRO &mdash; Thousands of protesters returned to Tahrir Square here on Friday to voice frustration with what they called the slow pace of change five months after the revolution. The demonstration occurred just days after renewed clashes between protesters and the police left hundreds injured and underscored the lingering distrust between Egyptians and a police force long seen as a pillar of the former government.        

Young men built roadblocks and protesters set up a small tent city as demonstrators demanded the prosecution of former government officials accused of ordering the use of deadly force during Egypt&rsquo;s 18-day revolution.        

Throughout the afternoon, protesters spilled from Tahrir Square to nearby landmarks, including Parliament, the Interior Ministry and the headquarters of the country&rsquo;s state-run television network.        

&ldquo;The people demand the execution of Habib,&rdquo; they chanted, referring to the former interior minister Habib el-Adly, playing on a popular antigovernment slogan from the days of the revolution. &ldquo;There is still a revolution in Tahrir!&rdquo;        

Despite the pounding summer sun, protesters turned out to demand justice for those killed during the revolution, who are seen as martyrs for democracy. Few issues crystallize the lack of trust between rulers and the ruled here more than the prosecution of former officials, including police officers, accused of the violence that claimed more than 850 lives during the uprising that overthrew President Hosni Mubarak in February.        

In May, Mr. Adly was convicted of corruption and money laundering and sentenced to 12 years in prison. But a separate trial on charges of killing protesters was postponed last week for a month, setting off clashes outside the courthouse between the police and relatives of those who were killed. Mr. Mubarak has so far avoided prosecution, deemed too ill to stand trial.        

On Thursday, a court in the port city of Alexandria postponed until September a verdict in the case of Khaled Said, a 28-year-old man who witnesses said was beaten to death by two plainclothes police officers on a sidewalk near his home. In death, he became a focal point of antigovernment anger.        

Protesters in Alexandria also took to the streets on Friday, rallying outside the Qaed Ibrahim mosque and blocking traffic on the Corniche, a seaside boulevard that runs the length of the city.        

Legal proceedings have begun against former officials like Mr. Adly, said Heba Morayef, a researcher for Human Rights Watch in Cairo, but victims&rsquo; families and their lawyers are often barred from court sessions. Cases have also been repeatedly adjourned and postponed for a month or more. All this contributes to a sense that the ruling military council&rsquo;s commitment to justice is superficial and that the families of those killed during the revolution are not getting a fair deal.        

&ldquo;We cannot rebuild trust between the people and the police through cosmetic measures,&rdquo; Ms. Morayef said. &ldquo;It can only happen through a genuine and comprehensive prosecution that will inspire confidence in the justice system and punish police for their abuses.&rdquo;        

No one has yet been convicted of ordering or participating in the deaths of protesters, and this week&rsquo;s clashes were believed to have been set off when the police turned away families of those killed from an event at a theater in Giza to commemorate them. A belief that is gaining currency among Egyptians is that while Mr. Mubarak may be gone, the Interior Ministry, which oversees the police force, remains above the law.        

&ldquo;Until this day, we have not seen justice served,&rdquo; said the father of one man killed in the uprising, addressing the crowd in Tahrir Square from a stage set up on the sidewalk. He identified himself only as the father of Mahmoud Khaled. &ldquo;Our sons have died, and if they were the sons of officers, we would have seen the men who did it arrested within a week.&rdquo;        

Several thousand protesters marched to Parliament and the adjacent office of the prime minister, singing the national anthem and chanting, &ldquo;The Interior Ministry are thugs!&rdquo;        

Nabila Mohamed Khattab, 53, said she went to Friday&rsquo;s protest because &ldquo;nothing has changed.&rdquo;        

Many in the square expressed anger at the ruling military council for not doing more.        

One demonstrator, Shady Maher, 26, said: &ldquo;The military council have been doing the bare minimum to satisfy the people. Yes, they have arrested symbols of the previous regime and they say Mubarak will be put on trial, but people are still being treated with the same disregard as before the revolution.        

&ldquo;The families of the martyrs have been waiting for months for justice, and we have seen nothing yet,&rdquo; he continued. &ldquo;It is just not right. This isn&rsquo;t justice.&rdquo;        

As sunset approached, protesters began to settle into a camp of a dozen white tents, spreading their blankets and vowing to remain in Tahrir Square until their demands for justice were met. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll stay here all night because the people who died, died for us,&rdquo; said a protester named Ramadan. &ldquo;We need to give them their rights.&rdquo;        
Lara El Gibaly contributed reporting.
