
TLALNEPANTLA, Mexico &mdash; The most important candidate in Sunday&rsquo;s election for governor here is the one who is not on the ballot.        

Opinion polls for the race in Mexico State, which surrounds Mexico City, show that the candidate from the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, will win resoundingly.        

But the bigger winner may be the state&rsquo;s departing governor, Enrique Pe&ntilde;a Nieto, the youthful, photogenic early front-runner in the 2012 presidential election campaign.        

Analysts say that in passing the job on to a candidate from his party, Mr. Pe&ntilde;a Nieto is gathering momentum for his national ambitions. Politicians from Mexico&rsquo;s two other main political parties, beginning with President Felipe Calder&oacute;n, view that prospect with trepidation, warning that the PRI&rsquo;s unchecked spending, its advertising blitz and its handouts this year are merely a warm-up for 2012.        

With 12 months to go before the presidential election, Mr. Pe&ntilde;a Nieto holds a commanding lead in the early opinion polls. If that lead holds, he could return the PRI to power a dozen years after voters swept it out of office and ended 71 years of single-party rule sustained by patronage and corruption.        

Mr. Pe&ntilde;a Nieto, 44, makes an attractive candidate for an old party trying to persuade voters that it has changed. The other parties argue, though, that he is just a new face on the PRI&rsquo;s authoritarian past.        

&ldquo;We are operating in the face of political machinery of the old school, but with a lot of money and a lot of technology,&rdquo; said Manuel Camacho Sol&iacute;s, a leading member of the leftist Party of the Democratic Revolution, or PRD. Mr. Camacho accused Mr. Pe&ntilde;a Nieto&rsquo;s state government of aiding the PRI&rsquo;s election campaign.        

&ldquo;What we are seeing is the return of the worst of the PRI,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Calder&oacute;n, a member of the National Action Party, or PAN, who cannot run for a second term, put it more obliquely in a television interview last week. In a democratic election, he said, there should be a level playing field, well-monitored campaign spending and transparency in voting, &ldquo;in short, well, everything that we have yearned for in Mexico and that apparently we had reached, and suddenly we will have to review again.&rdquo;        

The state of Mexico, where most of the population is concentrated in the vast middle- and working-class suburbs north and east of the capital, is a PRI bastion in local elections. While a loss in the governor&rsquo;s race here would be a severe blow to Mr. Pe&ntilde;a Nieto, a victory would build on a perception of strength but offer no guarantee of national success. Even here, the state&rsquo;s almost 11 million voters can be fickle in national races, suggesting a more independent streak than the PRD and the PAN seem willing to grant them.        

Opinion polls show Mr. Pe&ntilde;a Nieto with more than 40 percent of the vote against possible contenders from the two other parties.        

&ldquo;We have a public opinion phenomenon in which the PRI is more attractive, more charming, more hopeful, in contrast with public policies that haven&rsquo;t produced results,&rdquo; said Lauro Mercado, a pollster with the independent Mercaie research company.        

Although the election is still far off and neither the PAN nor the PRD has chosen their candidates yet, the parties will have to work hard to dent Mr. Pe&ntilde;a Nieto&rsquo;s popularity. None of the PAN&rsquo;s potential candidates have generated much enthusiasm. The violence set off by Mr. Calder&oacute;n&rsquo;s war on drug cartels as well as a deep recession and an economic recovery that has yet to create many jobs have hurt the party&rsquo;s standing. The PRD, meanwhile, is riven by internal feuding.        

Since those parties first began to win local elections 20 years ago, &ldquo;they have not shown that they are superior, or efficient or that they govern for the people,&rdquo; said Alfonso Z&aacute;rate, a political analyst. &ldquo;It is the same PRI as always; it hasn&rsquo;t transformed, but people still like them as they are.&rdquo;        

By focusing on the PRI&rsquo;s past, the other parties may be making a mistake in their strategy, pollsters say.        
Antonio Betancourt contributed reporting from Ecatepec, Mexico.
