
MALABO, Equatorial Guinea (AP) &mdash; The African Union has called on its member states to disregard the arrest warrant issued by the International Criminal Court against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya, a move that could weaken the court&rsquo;s ability to hold him accountable for any crimes committed against his people.        

The motion, adopted late Friday, says that the warrant against Colonel Qaddafi &ldquo;seriously complicates&rdquo; efforts by the African Union to find a political solution to the crisis in Libya.        

The African Union&rsquo;s chairman, Jean Ping, told reporters that the court was &ldquo;discriminatory&rdquo; and focused on crimes committed in Africa but ignored those committed by Western powers, including in Afghanistan, Iraq and Pakistan.        

&ldquo;With this in mind, we recommend that the member states do not cooperate with the execution of this arrest warrant,&rdquo; the motion said.        

If the bloc&rsquo;s 53 member states abide by the decision, it will open the possibility that Colonel Qaddafi could avoid prosecution by taking refuge in a neighboring nation. That was the path taken by the former dictator of Chad, Hiss&egrave;ne Habr&eacute;, who was given asylum in Senegal over 20 years ago and who has yet to face trial over accusations that he tortured hundreds of opponents.        

Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s chief of staff, Bashir Saleh, who was present at the African Union summit meeting, applauded the group&rsquo;s decision, holding a copy of it in his hand on Friday evening as the heads of state emerged for their declaration after a day of closed-door deliberations regarding Libya&rsquo;s future.        

Diplomats said that the African bloc was divided between those who believe that Colonel Qaddafi should step down immediately and those who want to find a dignified exit for a longtime peer.        

&ldquo;This is a Libyan affair, and it needs to stay a Libyan affair,&rdquo; Mr. Saleh said. &ldquo;How can you ask someone to leave his own house?&rdquo;        

Also on Friday, the bloc adopted a policy saying that Senegal must assume its responsibility to try Mr. Habr&eacute;, the former Chadian leader, or allow him to be extradited to Belgium, which has offered to try him.        

&ldquo;It is incumbent on Senegal in accordance with its international obligations to take steps to bring Hiss&egrave;ne Habr&eacute; to trial, or extradite him,&rdquo; the statement said.        
