
PARIS &mdash; A 78-year-old French woman died Saturday in Bordeaux from complications related to E. coli, a spokeswoman for a regional health authority said. Officials said there were no apparent links to the devastating E. coli outbreak in Germany that has killed dozens of people and sickened thousands more, despite that strain being implicated in another case in Bordeaux.        

The woman who died was one of eight people in the city who were hospitalized with the bacterial infection. She had been undergoing intensive care for a week, said the health authority spokeswoman, Sevrine Huguet of the Aquitaine Regional Health Service.        

The E. coli outbreak in Germany, which began in early May, has killed at least 48 people and sickened more than 4,000 others, according to the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control. The bacteria causes acute diarrhea and, in severe cases, kidney failure.        

A relatively rare strain of E. coli, O104:H4, has been implicated in the German case.        

On Wednesday, the European Food Safety Authority said that sprouts grown from fenugreek seeds imported from Egypt in 2009 and 2010 appeared to be linked to both the German case and an outbreak in Bordeaux, though it cautioned that the connection had not been definitively proved. The Bordeaux health authorities recommended that people eat only cooked sprouts.        

The death in Bordeaux was the first in France attributed to E. coli since an outbreak of infections &mdash; linked to contaminated ground beef &mdash; in the northern city of Lille began in June. Six young people remain hospitalized in that case, which the French authorities say is unrelated to the German outbreak.        

More recently, at least 15 people in Bordeaux, in southwestern France, appear to have been infected with the strain found in Germany. Most of them have been linked to a day care center in B&egrave;gles, a suburb, where the victims apparently ate gazpacho garnished with sprouts.        

Six of the people hospitalized in Bordeaux have been identified as having the O104:H4 strain, Ms. Huguet said, but the woman who died &ldquo;appears to have been a case apart,&rdquo; she said.        

&ldquo;It seems to be unrelated to the others,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re still talking to her friends and relatives, trying to discover how she got the infection.&rdquo;        

The authorities have not yet determined the strain that sickened another person in an intensive care unit, Ms. Huguet said.        

Frederic Vincent, the European Commission&rsquo;s spokesman on health and consumer policy, said the death in Bordeaux &ldquo;doesn&rsquo;t change the situation for us, as it&rsquo;s not the same strain as in the German case. You have E. coli around all the time. Right now we&rsquo;re focused on the O104:H4.&rdquo;        
