
RUJBAN, Libya &mdash; The leader of Libya&rsquo;s opposition movement said Sunday that rebel leaders had offered Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi the option to leave power and remain in his country, but he said that the offer, which seemed to represent a considerable softening of the rebel position, had not elicited a reply.        

However, the opposition leader, Mustapha Abdul-Jalil, the chairman of the rebel Transitional National Council, released a statement on Monday claiming his hypothetical remarks in an interview with the Reuters news agency had been misconstrued as a current policy position.        

&ldquo;I would like to confirm that there is absolutely no current or future possibility for Qaddafi to remain in Libya,&rdquo; the statement read. &ldquo;The N.T.C. has at all times been committed to achieving peace and stability for Libya and its people. As part of this commitment, we have been obliged to consider all kinds of scenarios, and I provided one such former example in today&rsquo;s interview that was discussed by the N.T.C. some time ago.        

&ldquo;There is no escape clause for Qaddafi &mdash; he must be removed from power and face justice. This is a fact further highlighted by the arrest warrant issued by the Internation Criminal Court for the crimes that Qaddafi has committed against our civilians.&rdquo;        

Reuters did not issue any immediate clarification.        

In the article on Sunday, Reuters reported that Mr. Jalil had said the rebels had made an offer to Colonel Qaddafi &ldquo;that he can resign and order his soldiers to withdraw their barracks and positions, and then he can decide either to stay in Libya or abroad.&rdquo;        

The offer, which Mr. Abdul-Jalil said was made about a month ago through a United Nations envoy, appeared to be a tacit recognition &mdash; despite bluster on both sides &mdash; that neither Colonel Qaddafi nor his opponents seem likely to prevail militarily. The proposal highlighted the risks to the self-appointed opposition leaders, as some of their constituents reacted with outrage.        

&ldquo;Either he leaves the country, or he goes to prison,&rdquo; said Salah Ibrahim Eissa, who is from a town in the Nafusah Mountains region that has been attacked by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces in recent months. Another rebel leader, in Benghazi, Abdul Hafidh Ghoga, reacted quickly to the discontent by contradicting Mr. Abdul-Jalil, saying the proposal was &ldquo;not part of any discussions on our part in negotiations,&rdquo; according to The Associated Press.        

News of the proposal coincided with a visit to Benghazi by the Turkish foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, who recognized the rebel council as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people and promised the rebels $200 million in aid, The A.P. reported. France, Italy, Qatar and a handful of other countries have recognized the rebel leadership. Last week, France said that it had provided arms to rebels fighting in the Nafusah Mountains region.        

Despite a growing list of foreign allies, the rebels have made little progress in recent months toward their goal of driving Colonel Qaddafi from power. The two sides have been deadlocked for weeks on battlefields near the eastern oil city of Brega, and in the west, outside Misurata.        

The rebels have managed to drive Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces back from a number of cities in the Nafusah Mountains, and on Sunday, rebel commanders, citing intercepted radio communications, said they had killed a senior general outside the city of Kiklah.        

In the town of Rujban, Radi Ramadan, 34, said that Mr. Abdul-Jalil&rsquo;s proposal &ldquo;was the perfect move to save Libyan blood.&rdquo; But for many other people in the mountain cities, the offer was a painful reminder of the siege by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces.        

Outside a small, white house in Rujban, a group of refugees from some of those cities, including several neighbors from one street in the town of Gila&rsquo;a, to the east of Rujban, said that to allow Colonel Qaddafi to stay would be to forgive his crimes: the destruction of their homes and the killing of friends and relatives.        

&ldquo;For months, we&rsquo;ve been out of Gila&rsquo;a,&rdquo; said Salah Mohamed Suleiman, who sat with a cane. &ldquo;He cannot stay.&rdquo;        
