
CAIRO &mdash; Chaos erupted in Cairo&rsquo;s Tahrir Square on Sunday night, as a dispute between protesters and tea vendors set off clashes among groups of young men armed with rocks, clubs and knives, and a tent city occupied by protesters was burned to the ground.        

The clashes appeared to pit civilian against civilian, a departure from violence that flared in the square last Tuesday between protesters and the police, and pointed to lingering tensions in Egypt as the country negotiates a political transition under a provisional military government that has come under increasing criticism from the protesters.        

Tahrir Square was the focal point of the 18-day uprising that toppled President Hosni Mubarak in February. Since then, protesters have reoccupied the square every few weeks to press the military council to follow through on revolutionary demands. Each reoccupation of Tahrir has ended in clashes &mdash; between protesters and security forces, or protesters and other civilians. As was the case Sunday night, it is not always clear which is which.        

The clashes began around sunset and continued as darkness settled on downtown Cairo.        

Some of the protesters said the trouble began when they tried to move their tent city away from the tea vendors, whom they accused of being &ldquo;thugs&rdquo; in the employ of security forces. Tea vendors brandishing knives then set fire to the tent city, said an activist, Karim el-Agamy, and pelted protesters with rocks and kerosene gas canisters. Another activist, Islam Ismail, said protesters identified two undercover police officers in the crowd and turned them over to the army.        

It was not possible to verify these claims.        

By 8 p.m., the protesters&rsquo; tent city lay in smoldering ruins.        

Over 1,000 young men, many armed with metal pipes and jagged wooden clubs, raced back and forth across the square in pursuit of enemies who seemed to rarely materialize. Despite the scuffles, traffic continued through the square, directed by civilians and swerving around protesters, some of whom threw the metal pots and pans of tea vendors into the street and under the wheels of passing cars.        

Passers-by watched as young men scuffled in the square, dusty and scattered with bits of broken rock, running from one end to the next waving crude weapons and shouting &ldquo;Thugs! Thugs!&rdquo;        

&ldquo;If I had a weapon I would beat these boys myself,&rdquo; said Khaled Lotfy, a bystander who was passing through the square on his way back from the gym, carrying a tennis racket. &ldquo;Egypt woke up, so enough already. Why do they keep doing this?&rdquo;        

Neither police officers nor armed forces were present, which contributed to an atmosphere of tension and chaos.        

A line of ambulances treated the wounded, mainly young men with thick, bloody bandages wrapped around their heads. Egypt&rsquo;s Ministry of Health said that 47 were wounded, including 20 critically. Ambulances wailed across the square throughout the night.        

The protesters have been camped in Tahrir Square since a protest on Friday that called for swifter prosecution of former government officials, including police officers, accused of using deadly force against protesters during the February uprising. More than 850 peaceful protesters were killed. So far, no one has been convicted of a single death, although the former president and his interior minister have been charged.        

Mr. Mubarak has been deemed too ill to stand trial.        
Dina Salah Amer contributed reporting.
