
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; Three Kenyan police officers were suspended and placed under investigation on Thursday after a newspaper published photographs that it said showed undercover officers murdering three men who had surrendered in the middle of a busy Nairobi highway.        

Kenya&rsquo;s leading newspaper, The Daily Nation, published photographs on Thursday that it said were taken by a driver at the scene on Nairobi&rsquo;s Lang&rsquo;ata Road where the episode unfolded about 9 a.m. Wednesday. In one photograph, a man described by the newspaper as an undercover officer points a gun at two men lying on the ground in the middle of the road. Another photograph shows the bodies of two men after they were shot dead.        

Kenya&rsquo;s minister for internal security, George Saitoti, confirmed that three people had been killed in the episode, and that three police officers were being investigated. Officials said the three victims were suspected of carjacking.        

The shooting has set off a wave of condemnations and renewed calls for a sweeping reform of the Kenyan police. In 2009, a United Nations investigator accused the police of widespread extrajudicial killings and called for the removal of the country&rsquo;s police commissioner at the time and its attorney general.        

Justus Nyang&rsquo;aya, director of Amnesty International Kenya, issued a statement on Thursday saying the Kenyan authorities had &ldquo;repeatedly promised investigations into police shootings in the past, but they rarely materialize.&rdquo; He added that &ldquo;this has bred a culture of unlawful killings by police who are never held accountable.&rdquo;        

The Daily Nation, in an editorial, called for an investigation by an impartial outside agency, saying, &ldquo;This is an instance where the police cannot be entrusted with the task of investigating themselves.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The police cannot fight crime by becoming criminals themselves,&rdquo; the editorial read. &ldquo;Over and above catching and prosecuting the individual officers who committed the terrible deed, the inquiry must be expanded to examine afresh the whole culture of extrajudicial killings and other criminal activities within the police services.&rdquo;        

The Daily Nation said that reporters who arrived at the scene on Wednesday morning found &ldquo;the bodies of the three men, their clothes soaked in blood.&rdquo; The newspaper said that Augustine Kimantiri, a police commander who arrived after the shooting, told reporters that a shootout had taken place after officers ordered a gang of six suspicious men to stop. &ldquo;Instead, they drew arms and fired at the officers,&rdquo; the paper quoted him as saying.        

But witnesses told The Daily Nation that they disputed that account. The newspaper quoted one witness, who took out a camera to document the event, as saying that three men, thought to be undercover officers, approached a nearby car with guns drawn. Three other men emerged from the car, raising their hands in surrender and lying on the road as ordered by the police. Then they were shot.        

Esther Wairimu, 35, a sister of one of the victims, said in a telephone interview that she was &ldquo;shocked&rdquo; to see a photograph of her younger brother &ldquo;being executed point-blank.&rdquo; She said, &ldquo;At least it would have been fair if the policemen arrested them instead of killing them point-blank.&rdquo;        
Reuben Kyama reported from Nairobi, and Elissa Gootman from New York.
