
HONG KONG &mdash; Szeto Wah, a Hong Kong union leader and critic of British colonial rule who became an implacable critic of the Chinese Communist Party after the Tiananmen Square killings in 1989, died on Sunday after a long struggle with lung cancer. He was 79.        

A spokeswoman for the Prince of Wales Hospital here confirmed his death by phone and said that it was from complications from lung cancer.        

As a prominent leftist who had organized strikes against the British, Mr. Szeto had seemed assured of a prominent role after the British returned Hong Kong to Chinese rule in 1997. Before the Chinese military used armored vehicles and guns against peaceful demonstrators in Tiananmen Square, he was even part of the Beijing-backed committee that was drafting the Basic Law, which was to be Hong Kong&rsquo;s Constitution under Chinese rule.        

But unlike some leftists in Hong Kong, Mr. Szeto broke all ties to Beijing after the military crackdown. He became chairman of the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements of China, a position he held until his death. The alliance organizes annual candlelight vigils in downtown Hong Kong on June 4 to commemorate the deaths in Tiananmen Square and to call for an end to one-party rule in mainland China.        

The vigil continues to draw tens of thousands of protesters every year, and the turnout is one barometer of attitudes in Hong Kong toward the mainland. Many young people who barely remember the original crackdown attend, and parents take their children. Some brave mainland Chinese also come to join the vigil, although they are more often found prudently watching.        

The 20th anniversary vigil drew 150,000 people according to the organizers and 62,800 according to the police, the largest vigil since the first in 1990.        

In 1990, Mr. Szeto (pronounced SEE-toe) co-founded a political grouping that evolved into the Democratic Party, one of the largest political parties in Hong Kong. Beijing officials barred him and other party leaders from even entering mainland China after that.        

Mr. Szeto became one of the 60 members of the Legislative Council &mdash; half of which is selected by mainly pro-Beijing interest groups &mdash; and a consistent critic of the Beijing-backed government after 1997.        

He supported a compromise with the government last year that calls for an expansion of the legislature, with 10 additional seats to be elected by the  general public, although only candidates from the city&rsquo;s district councils could run for five of these seats. Some democracy advocates opposed the measure as too small a step toward the principle of one person, one vote.        

Donald Tsang, Hong Kong&rsquo;s chief executive, said in a memorial statement that &ldquo;passionate about China and Hong Kong, Mr. Szeto Wah was devoted in promoting democracy.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Tsang, who is indirectly elected by Hong Kong&rsquo;s elite but then appointed by Beijing, did not mention Tiananmen Square. Beijing authorities ban any mention on the mainland of the Tiananmen Square killings.        
