
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Nine years after the American reporter Daniel Pearl was captured and killed by operatives of Al Qaeda in Pakistan, more than a dozen of the militants involved in his murder remain at large, a testament to the lack of will by Pakistani authorities to prosecute the cases, according to a report released Thursday.        

Some of the 14 men who are known to have played a role in the death of Mr. Pearl, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, committed other terrorist acts in Pakistan, including an attack on a hotel in Karachi in which 11 French engineers were killed, and the attempted assassination of the former president, Pervez Musharraf, the report says.        

A senior Pakistani law enforcement official who was closely involved in the Pearl case and worked with American investigators confirmed in an interview on Thursday that the 14 men had not been prosecuted.        

The Pakistani official, who declined to be named because he said he had received death threats from the militants, said there was &ldquo;sufficient evidence to link them to Pearl&rsquo;s case.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This is a $1 million question as to where their people are and why they weren&rsquo;t arrested or tried in this case,&rdquo; the law enforcement official said. All of the 14 men had committed &ldquo;major acts of terrorism&rdquo; in the four or five years after the Pearl killing, the official said.        

The murder of Mr. Pearl has been extensively documented and discussed as an emblem of the post-9/11 era. A movie, &ldquo;A Mighty Heart,&rdquo; with Angelina Jolie, popularized the case.        

But unanswered questions persisted, gaps that the new report, based on investigative work by students and faculty at the journalism program of Georgetown University and the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, a project of the Center for Public Integrity, tries to fill.        

Mr. Pearl was kidnapped in Karachi on Jan. 23, 2002, as he was pursuing a story about Islamic extremism. He was beheaded in early February.        

A British Pakistani, Ahmed Omar Sheikh, and three others were convicted and sentenced to death by a Pakistani court in July 2002. The four men remain in prison in Pakistan.        

They were involved in the plot to abduct Mr. Pearl but were not responsible for his actual murder in a compound deep in the slums of Karachi, the report says.        

In 2007, the Qaeda operative Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, who is awaiting trial in connection with the 9/11 attacks, confessed to killing Mr. Pearl, according to a transcript of a hearing released by American officials. Mr. Mohammed has not been indicted for the murder, the report says.        

A comparison of a photograph of the veins in the hand that beheaded Mr. Pearl shown in a video of his death and a photograph of the veins in Mr. Mohammed&rsquo;s hand taken at the Guant&aacute;namo Bay, Cuba, prison showed that Mr. Mohammed had indeed killed Mr. Pearl, the report concluded.        

The killing of Mr. Pearl melded operatives of Al Qaeda with technically proficient Pakistani militant groups, a combination that turned out to be the beginning of a lethal alliance that grew stronger and has tormented Pakistan ever since, the report says.        

&ldquo;The murder was the first known operation in which Pakistani militants collaborated with Al Qaeda,&rdquo; it says.        

One of the groups involved in Mr. Pearl&rsquo;s murder, Lashkar-e-Janghvi, became a crucial player in the Punjabi Taliban, a  confederation of  groups now holed up with Al Qaeda in the  tribal area of North Waziristan. Those groups are now major targets of attacks by American drone aircraft.        

Lashkar-e-Janghvi masterminded the  assault on the Pakistan Army headquarters in  2009 that deeply embarrassed the Pakistani military. The attack was run by a wing of Lashkar-e-Janghvi named after Amjad Farooqi, who was identified by Pakistani authorities as one of Mr. Pearl&rsquo;s kidnappers. Mr. Farooqi was killed in a shootout in southern Pakistan in 2004.        

Among the 14 men who remain free, the report names Abdul Hayee. In 2003, Mr. Hayee was arrested for killing six Shiites, members of the minority Islam sect in Pakistan. He was acquitted and lives in Punjab Province, according to a Pakistani police official interviewed for the report.        

Another militant, Mohammad Sohail, who worked with Mr. Farooqi on the Pearl abduction, was sentenced to death in 2003 for his role in the 2002 bombing  in Karachi that killed the French engineers, the report says. He was acquitted on appeal in 2009, and is now free, it says.        

Another militant, Malik Tassadaq Hussain, who the report says took photos of Mr. Pearl that were distributed in an e-mail during his captivity, was arrested in 2004 but never charged. He was later charged for an attack on a police van and acquitted in 2007, the report says.        

A Pakistani lawyer, Ahmer Bilal Soofi, who has studied Pakistan&rsquo;s anti-terrorism laws, said that the laws were deeply flawed and that many cases were thrown out of court for lack of evidence. Police officers were rarely given enough time or resources to carry out proper investigations,  he said.        

&ldquo;An investigating officer just throws whatever evidence he has in court,&rdquo; Mr. Soofi said. &ldquo;His superior lauds him and says we&rsquo;ve taken the case to court. But in the process they have compromised the case.&rdquo;        
Huma Imtiaz contributed reporting.
