
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Fired up with zeal, activists say they have set up dozens of checkpoints in the Syrian city of Hama, alerting neighborhood groups with cries of &ldquo;God is great&rdquo; to the approach of feared security forces and throwing up barricades of burning tires and trash bins to block their path.        

Hama, the scene of the largest protests yet and haunted by the memories of a ferocious crackdown a generation ago, has emerged as a potent challenge to President Bashar al-Assad. In just days, the protests and the government&rsquo;s uncertain response have underlined the potential scale of dissent in Syria, the government&rsquo;s lack of a strategy in ending it, and the difficulty Mr. Assad faces in dismissing the demonstrations as religiously inspired unrest with foreign support.        

Hama is still a far cry from the liberated territory that the most fervent there have declared, with perhaps more hope than evidence. But a government decision last month to withdraw its forces has ceded the streets to protesters, who have tried to create an alternative model to the heavy-handed repression that serves as a trademark of Baathist rule. Residents interviewed by telephone said they had begun working collectively in acts as small as cleaning a downtown square and as large as organizing the defense of some neighborhoods.        

More critically, the scenes of enormous, peaceful rallies there Friday, with their echoes of dissent in Egypt and Tunisia earlier this year, have served as a persuasive critique of the government&rsquo;s version of events, which had won over large segments of Syrian society. Throughout the nearly four-month uprising, the government has pointed to the deaths of hundreds of its forces, in particular in the still murky events in Jisr al-Shoughour in the north, to argue that the unrest is the product of violent Islamist radicals with support from abroad.        

Hama was peaceful for weeks, but Monday, security forces returned to its outskirts, carrying out arrests. Those forces killed at least 11 on Tuesday in yet more raids, activists said. Each foray has run up against opposition wielding what one activist called a medieval arsenal: stones, sand berms and, in his unconfirmed account, bows and arrows.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s no easy solution to Hama,&rdquo; Peter Harling, a Damascus-based analyst with the International Crisis Group, said in an interview.        

&ldquo;The regime made significant progress in terms of convincing people in Syria and abroad that there was an armed component to this protest movement and that its security forces were very much focused on that component,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;Hardly two weeks later, the regime gets embroiled in the exact opposite, once again undermining its own case.&rdquo;        

Since the uprising erupted in mid-March, the government has wavered between harsh crackdown and tentative reform. Hama has emerged as a microcosm of this shifting strategy, which has befuddled even some of the government&rsquo;s supporters.        

After protests in Hama on June 3, when security forces killed as many as 73 people and arrested hundreds, residents, diplomats and officials say a deal was struck in which protests were permitted as long as property was not damaged. In the ensuing weeks, the protests gathered momentum, culminating with Friday&rsquo;s scenes that suggested that at least in Hama, opposition to the government was far from marginal.        

Since then, the government&rsquo;s strategy has shifted again. The governor responsible for Hama, Ahmad Khaled Abdulaziz, was fired Saturday. His rumored replacement is Walid Abaza, a former head of political security believed to have a role in the events of February 1982, when a struggle between the government and an armed Islamic opposition culminated in Hama. Over four weeks, the government retook the central Syrian city, killing at least 10,000 people and flattening parts of the old city. Hundreds of soldiers were also killed.        

Though security forces occasionally entered the city last month, they returned in force for the first time Monday, carrying out dozens of arrests. Their intent, however, is unclear. Instead of repeating what happened in Dara&rsquo;a, the southern Syrian town where the uprising began, the military has remained on the outskirts of Hama. After a reported buildup over the weekend, some activists said dozens of tanks had even withdrawn, in another confusing sign.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.
