
UNITED NATIONS &mdash; Spurred by the recent upheaval in the Arab world, diplomats from Israel and Turkey were in talks on Wednesday aimed at mending relations that were badly fractured by the deadly Israeli raid on a Turkish flotilla to Gaza last year, diplomats said.        

The diplomatic effort came as officials were anticipating the release of a contentious United Nations report on the raid, in which Israeli commandos killed nine Turks, one of whom was also an American citizen, aboard a Turkish-sponsored flotilla seeking to break Israel&rsquo;s embargo of Gaza in May 2010. The commandos boarded the largest of the ships, the Mavi Marmara, in international waters, and, facing violent resistance from dozens of activists, used force to take control of the vessel.        

The seizure of the flotilla soured already strained relations between Israel and Turkey, which was once Israel&rsquo;s closest Muslim ally. Turkey recalled its ambassador from Israel and demanded an apology, a step Israel has refused to take. The friction also heightened alarm in the United States and Europe that Turkey, a major NATO member, was shifting its allegiance from the West toward the Arab world.        

But diplomats from both sides said Wednesday that the shifting relations in the Middle East had altered the geopolitical calculations of both countries and had prompted them to try to find a way out of the impasse. Israel&rsquo;s relations with Egypt have cooled, as have Turkey&rsquo;s with Libya and Syria, leaving both countries in search of more reliable allies. Turkey&rsquo;s ability to play a mediating role in the region has been undermined by the tensions.        

The diplomats said Turkey and Israel were eager to find a compromise over the wording of the report by a United Nations committee that is led by former Prime Minister Geoffrey Palmer of New Zealand and has Turkish and Israeli representatives. Diplomats said the committee&rsquo;s findings &mdash; made following heated deliberations that lasted nearly a year &mdash; would be likely to leave both countries uncomfortable.        

According to United Nations diplomats, the latest draft of the report asserts that Israel&rsquo;s blockade of Gaza was legal, but that in some cases its commandos had used excessive force in seizing the ship. Turkey, the diplomats said, is taken to task for having made an insufficient effort to prevent the ship from sailing. In addition, the motives of the I.H.H., the charity that organized the flotilla, are called into question.        

The report&rsquo;s release has been delayed amid squabbling over its wording, although it could be made public as soon as Thursday.        

In a sign of the political delicacies surrounding the seizure of the flotilla and the importance the two countries attach to the committee&rsquo;s findings, each sent political veterans to represent them. Israel is represented by Joseph Ciechanover, the former director general of the Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Turkey is represented by Ozdem Sanberk, the former under secretary of the Turkish Foreign Ministry.        

Mr. Sanberk said in an interview on Wednesday that the events of the Arab Spring had heightened the need to solve the conflict between Israel and Turkey, two anchors of stability in a tumultuous region. He said both countries had a &ldquo;strong political will&rdquo; to reconcile and he noted that Turkey and Israel were both democracies and had never been at war with each other.        

But he also said that Turkey stood by its demands for an apology and compensation for the victims of the Israeli raid.        

&ldquo;It is as natural as breathing air that a country would apologize and offer compensation to victims&rsquo; relatives if it barges into an unarmed ship sailing in high waters and causes the death of nine people,&rdquo; Mr. Sanberk said. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s the precondition for the normalization of bilateral relations that Turkey expects.&rdquo;        

Israel has insisted that it will not apologize, but it has said it was willing to express regret. Offering a full apology, Israeli officials have said, would mean it was accepting full responsibility.        

Nonetheless, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel said Wednesday that Turkey and Israel were intent on forging closer ties. &ldquo;We are seeking ways of improving our current relations,&rdquo; he said in Bucharest, Romania, at the start of a visit there.        

Defense Minster Ehud Barak said Monday during a meeting at the Knesset that Israel had a keen interest in reaching out to Turkey.        

&ldquo;Turkey is a very important nation, one of four key nations in the region, besides Israel, of course,&rdquo; Mr. Barak said. &ldquo;As our ties with the Saudis are strained, in fact we have no ties, our relationship with Iran is hostile; we have peaceful ties with Egypt but it is undergoing difficult changes &mdash; it is our priority to iron out the difficulties with Turkey.&rdquo;        

Israel&rsquo;s foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman, asserted Wednesday that Israel should not apologize, warning that an apology would &ldquo;harm Israel&rsquo;s national dignity&rdquo; and humiliate its soldiers, the Turkish newspaper Zaman reported.        

Diplomats said Wednesday that the two sides had been searching for a word that would sound like an apology in Turkish, but not in Hebrew.        
Sebnem Arsu contributed reporting from Istanbul.
