
LONDON &mdash; Prime Minister David Cameron set a modest target for early British troop withdrawals from Afghanistan on Wednesday, deferring to British military commanders who had cautioned publicly against an accelerated schedule more closely paralleled on the American withdrawals announced two weeks ago by President Obama.        

As part of what he called a "hard-headed" approach to the war, Mr. Cameron told the House of Commons that the British pullout would be limited to 500 troops in 2012, on top of 460 being withdrawn this year. The 2012 number is about half of what Mr. Cameron and his Downing Street security team were previously considering. Moreover, none of the 500 soldiers to be pulled out next year will be combat troops.        

The British plan will leave a force of 9,000, still the second-largest foreign troop presence in Afghanistan, after the United States. By announcing the cautious scale of the 2012 pullout, Mr. Cameron balanced popular unrest about the war against the advice of British military commanders. They had cautioned against a larger 2012 withdrawal, saying it would deny them the combat troops they needed for two more full "fighting seasons" &mdash; this year and next &mdash; to consolidate recent gains against the Taliban.        

Similar arguments were made unsuccessfully by American military officials, including Gen. David H. Petraeus, the United States commander in Afghanistan, when President Obama was reviewing his own plan earlier this summer. In his announcement on June 22, Mr. Obama said American troop levels would be cut by 10,000 this year and 23,000 by September 2012, effectively reversing the surge ordered by Mr. Obama in 2009 that has been credited with blunting the momentum of the Taliban.        

Mr. Obama&rsquo;s decision prompted critics on both sides of the Atlantic to say that he was putting the recent war gains at risk, particularly in Helmand Province, the most active center of the Taliban insurgency, where the bulk of the American surge troops have been fighting alongside British units. While General Petraeus and other American commanders have limited their public demurrals to saying the American cuts were more "aggressive" than they would have liked, some critics in Britain, including the recently retired top military officer, Air Chief Marshal Jock Stirrup, have suggested that Mr. Obama&rsquo;s schedule was set less by military realities than with an eye to next year&rsquo;s presidential election.        

In the Commons, Mr. Cameron, comparing the British withdrawal plan to Mr. Obama&rsquo;s, cited the American leader&rsquo;s avowal that the mission in Afghanistan was changing "from combat to support," as Afghan&rsquo;s forces ready themselves to take the lead in the war. But the prime minister cautioned against direct comparisons, noting the large disproportion in the two countries&rsquo; troop commitments. American withdrawals over the next 14 months will leave about 70,000 American troops in Afghanistan, still more than half the total force deployed by the 48 nations that make up the international force.        

Still, Mr. Obama&rsquo;s decision to reduce the American deployment by a third, with combat troops accounting for most of that figure, gave fresh momentum to the long-running and increasingly fractious debate across Europe about the prospects for military success in Afghanistan. That has been especially true in those countries that contribute the bulk of the non-American forces deployed there.        

In Britain, as elsewhere in Europe, public opinion has been running strongly against the war, fueled in large part by the 375 British troops that have been killed there, a number that, proportional to the number of troops deployed, is higher than the 1,651 American troops who have lost their lives. The costs, too, have been heavy, with British officials saying the expense since 2001 has now exceeded 14 billion pounds, equivalent to more than $22 billion.        

Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s preparation for Wednesday&rsquo;s withdrawal announcement, centering on a trip to Helmand earlier this week, was jarred when a 20-year-old British soldier from a Scottish regiment was found dead 14 hours after he left his remote Helmand base alone after a stint of sentry duty at the base&rsquo;s gates. His body was found three miles away, with a shot to the back of his head. The Taliban, who displayed the body publicly before dumping it in the canal, acknowledged killing him.        

Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s announcement means that British combat withdrawals will now be concentrated in 2013 and 2014, ahead of the December 2014 deadline he has set for an end to British combat operations. Mr. Obama has left the date for an end to all American combat operations vague, saying the "process of transition" to Afghan troops and police will come at the end of 2014.        

Mr. Cameron signaled that a significant British force, estimated by commanders at about 2,000, would remain past 2015 for noncombat duties, including running a new officer&rsquo;s training academy that Britain has agreed to establish &mdash; called "Sandhurst in the sand" by officers, after the military academy in Britain. But Mr. Cameron, who faces a general election in 2015, told questioners in the Commons that the deadline for an end to British combat operations would not be altered, even if progress in the war with the Taliban falters.        

He said, "The country needs to know that there is an end point.&rdquo;        
