
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Taliban fighters attacked and overran several Afghan border police posts on Wednesday, killing nearly two dozen police officers in a remote area of northeastern Afghanistan, according to the provincial governor.        

&ldquo;Twenty-three Afghan border police officers were martyred and seven others were wounded,&rdquo; said Jamaluddin Badar, governor of Nuristan Province, where the attack took place.        

The posts in the Gordish Valley in Kamdesh District were burned and several civilians were killed, including three women and two children; several houses also were set on fire, he said.        

The Interior Ministry said 12 police officers were killed. However, since the area is remote and there is little phone coverage, numbers are hard to verify.        

Taliban and foreign fighters including Pakistanis mounted the attacks, Mr. Badar said. His account was supported by the former governor, Tamim Nuristani, who was in touch with people in Kamdesh District on Wednesday.        

President Hamid Karzai condemned the attack and accused Pakistani Taliban of carrying it out.        

Western officials and Mr. Nuristani said that while there are Pakistani fighters who have come over the border as well as Arabs and Uzbeks, the main dynamic in the area is a longtime rivalry between Taliban forces that control the rural areas and Hizb-e-Islami fighters who control the district centers and tend to be more allied with the government.        

At stake in Nuristan are illegal gem and timber smuggling routes, though the province is so remote that the United States hardly has any military presence there.        

&ldquo;There is intense fighting going on between the Afghan National Security Forces and opposition since early yesterday,&rdquo; said Mullah Mohammed Ismail, the district governor of nearby Barg-e-Matal.        

He warned that if the insurgents and the Pakistani Taliban, who are fighting with them, managed to occupy the area, &ldquo;it would be impossible to uproot them.&rdquo;        

Also in eastern Afghanistan, there were reports of civilian casualties after a NATO attack on insurgents in a remote area of Khost District. According to the provincial police chief, Sardar Mohammed Zazai, eight children and two women were killed when NATO forces dropped a bomb on a house where the Taliban took shelter as they were being pursued by a joint American-Afghan force.        

A NATO spokesman said he was familiar with the attack but did not have details. He also said there may have been civilians present where the Taliban took shelter.        

In Parwan Province, just northwest of the capital, a cargo plane traveling from Azerbaijan to one of the largest NATO bases here crashed late Tuesday in the mountains less than 30 miles from its destination, killing everyone on board, according to Afghan and American officials.        

The plane, which was being used by a private contractor at Bagram Air Base, was carrying four pallets and a piece of heavy equipment during a resupply mission, said Maj. James Lowe of the United States Transportation Command at Scott Air Force Base.        

The head of Kabul International Airport, Mohammad Yaqub Rasuli, said he received word at midnight Tuesday that the plane had disappeared from the radar when it was about 25 miles northwest of Kabul. Nine people were aboard, he said.        
Sangar Rahimi and Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul, and a New York Times employee from Jalalabad, Afghanistan.
