
PARIS &mdash; Most countries still do not explicitly criminalize rape within marriage, according to a sweeping United Nations report of global women&rsquo;s rights published Wednesday.        

The report also found that more than half of working women lack basic legal protections on the job.        

Gender equality is increasingly enshrined in laws, but many millions of women still have no access to justice, said Michelle Bachelet, the former president of Chile who was appointed as executive director of U.N. Women, the global body&rsquo;s first agency for gender equality and female empowerment, which published the report.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve come a long way, but we still have a long way to go,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;And even where the laws exist, the implementation and enforcement of those laws can be poor &mdash; even in the most progressive countries.&rdquo;        

The rate at which rape and sexual violence cases are reported remains low, she said. In 57 countries, the report showed, one in 10 women say they have been victims of sexual aggression, but only 11 percent of those women go to the police.        

&ldquo;Women are three times more likely to report a robbery than sexual assault,&rdquo; said Laura Turquet, chief author of the report. &ldquo;In many countries the victim still feels more stigmatized than the perpetrator.&rdquo;        

Rape as a weapon of war &mdash; in some cases with the aim not just to terrorize and displace whole populations but to spread disease &mdash; has become part of modern conflict, she said.        

Among countries that have still not formally outlawed domestic violence are two members of the European Union &mdash; Hungary and Lithuania &mdash; and among those still not explicitly criminalizing marital rape are a dozen more, including pioneers of gender equality like Norway and Britain.        

&ldquo;This is always very surprising for all of us who work on women&rsquo;s rights issues,&rdquo; Ms. Turquet said. &ldquo;Many of the problems women face, for example with violence, are the same in rich and poor countries.&rdquo;        

The report offered several recommendations, including enactment of legislation to provide equal-pay rights and paid maternity leave, and making legal complaints filed by victims of violence and discrimination easier and more affordable.        

In Cambodia, for example, bringing a rape charge involves a medical test that costs the equivalent of two weeks&rsquo; wages. In Kenya, inheritance claims cost as much as $800 and involve navigating 17 administrative steps.        
