
WASHINGTON &mdash; In interrogating a Somali man for months aboard a Navy ship before taking him to New York this week for a civilian trial on terrorism charges, the Obama administration is trying out a new approach for dealing with foreign terrorism suspects.        

The administration, which was seeking to avoid sending a new prisoner to Guant&aacute;namo Bay, Cuba, drew praise and criticism on Wednesday for its decisions involving the Somali suspect, Ahmed Abdulkadir Warsame, accused of aiding Al Qaeda&rsquo;s branch in Yemen and the Shabab, the Somali militant group.        

Kenneth L. Wainstein, who led the Justice Department&rsquo;s national security division during the Bush administration, praised the Obama administration&rsquo;s handling of the Warsame case, saying it showed the value of allowing the executive branch flexibility between using the military and criminal justice systems.        

&ldquo;From the government&rsquo;s perspective, it&rsquo;s better to maintain options for custody and prosecution and in each case to select that option that best fits the needs of a particular case,&rdquo; Mr. Wainstein said.        

But Republican lawmakers in Congress denounced the move, contending that it made more sense to bring such detainees to Guant&aacute;namo for prosecution before a military commission.        

&ldquo;The administration&rsquo;s actions are inexplicable, create unnecessary risks here at home, and do nothing to increase the security of the United States,&rdquo; said Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Senate Republican leader.        

Meanwhile, new details emerged about Mr. Warsame&rsquo;s detention on a Navy ship after his capture in April aboard a fishing skiff between Yemen and Somalia, and about internal administration deliberations on legal policy questions that could have implications for the evolving conflict against Al Qaeda and its affiliates.        

A senior counterterrorism official said Wednesday that Mr. Warsame had recently met with Anwar al-Awlaki, the American-born radical cleric now hiding in Yemen. After his capture, he was taken to the Boxer, an amphibious assault ship that was steaming in the region and has a brig, a senior military official said.        

While Mr. Warsame is accused of being a member of the Shabab, which is focused on a parochial insurgency in Somalia, the administration decided he could be lawfully detained as a wartime prisoner under Congress&rsquo;s authorization to use military force against the perpetrators of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, according to several officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss security matters.        

But the administration does not consider the United States to be at war with every member of the Shabab, officials said. Rather, the government decided that Mr. Warsame and a handful of other individual Shabab leaders could be made targets or detained because they were integrated with Al Qaeda or its Yemen branch and were said to be looking beyond the internal Somali conflict.        

&ldquo;Certain elements of Al Shabab, including its senior leaders, adhere to Al Qaeda&rsquo;s ideology and could conduct attacks outside of Somalia in East Africa, as it did in Uganda in 2010, or even outside the region to further Al Qaeda&rsquo;s agenda,&rdquo; said a senior administration official. &ldquo;For its leadership and those other Al Qaeda-aligned elements of Al Shabab, our approach is quite clear: They are not beyond the reach of our counterterrorism tools.&rdquo;        

The administration notified the International Committee of the Red Cross of his capture, and a Red Cross representative flew out to the ship and met with him. That visit came about two months after his capture, during a four-day break between his interrogation for intelligence purposes and separate questioning for law-enforcement purposes.        

Mr. Warsame was given a Miranda warning &mdash; that he had a right to remain silent and to have a lawyer &mdash; at the beginning of the second interrogation so that prosecutors would have a better chance of being allowed to use his statements as evidence.        

The Obama legal team decided to time the Red Cross visit during the break in order to further emphasize that the second set of interrogators comprised different officials questioning him for a different purpose. That was intended to be able to make the case later to a judge that any subsequent confession was voluntary. (Mr. Warsame waived his rights and continued talking.)        

Finally, the administration settled on the civilian trial option because officials did not want to add a new inmate to the Guant&aacute;namo prison &mdash; which President Obama wants to close &mdash; and because a military trial was problematic.        

For example, the charges against Mr. Warsame, conspiracy and providing material support to terrorists, are standard criminal charges, but their validity as war crimes is under a cloud.        

Moreover, the tribunals&rsquo; jurisdiction is limited to people who are part of Al Qaeda or who engaged in or supported hostilities against the West. To make the case that Mr. Warsame qualified, officials said, they would have had to disclose classified information to the tribunal.        

Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, said in an interview that he would offer amendments to a pending bill that would expand tribunal jurisdiction and declare that the Shabab are covered by the authorization to use military force against Al Qaeda.        

Mr. Graham also said he had no quarrel with eventually prosecuting Mr. Warsame in a civilian court. But he contended that the administration had rushed the man&rsquo;s initial interrogation because it had no good place to detain him for a longer period, showing the need for a prison like Guant&aacute;namo for other current and future detainees.        

But Tommy Vietor, a spokesman for the White House&rsquo;s National Security Council, said the two-month interrogation of Mr. Warsame for intelligence purposes had been &ldquo;comprehensive&rdquo; and &ldquo;handled to the full satisfaction&rdquo; of interrogators and intelligence agencies &mdash; only after which, he said, &ldquo;did top national security officials unanimously decide to transition to a law-enforcement interrogation, which did not end the flow of intelligence from Warsame.&rdquo;        
Eric Schmitt contributed reporting.
