
LONDON &mdash; When David Cameron became prime minister in May 2010, one of his first visitors at 10 Downing Street &mdash; within 24 hours, and entering by a back door, according to accounts in British newspapers &mdash; was Rupert Murdoch.        

Fourteen months later, with Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s media empire in Britain reeling, Mr. Cameron may feel that his close relationship with Mr. Murdoch, which included a range of social contacts with members of the Murdoch family and the tycoon&rsquo;s senior executives, has been a costly overreach.        

Those concerns were intensified by the arrest on Friday of Andy Coulson, the former editor of The News of the World and, until he resigned in January this year, Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s media chief at Downing Street.        

Mr. Cameron hired Mr. Coulson in 2007 after scandals had rocked the newspaper. And he repeatedly defended him even as signs accumulated that Mr. Coulson had greater awareness of the newspaper&rsquo;s phone-hacking practices than he had acknowledged.        

Some of Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s political opponents have cast the embrace of Mr. Murdoch as a mistake that could combine with other recent miscues by the Cameron government to seriously weaken the prime minister&rsquo;s party, the Conservatives. But those critics, including the leader of the opposition Labour Party, Ed Miliband, have to cope with the awkward fact that the Labour Party was just as closely linked with Mr. Murdoch, if not more so, during the 13 years that Britain was led by Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s predecessors as prime minister, Tony Blair and Gordon Brown.        

Since he began building his media empire in Britain 40 years ago, Mr. Murdoch, who was born in Australia, has been a figure of towering political importance, credited by many British politicians with the power to make and unmake governments as well as influence government policies that affect the fortunes of his newspaper and television interests.        

Mr. Murdoch has used his clout to try to curb the powers of media regulatory bodies and expand his control of the dominant pay-television network British Sky Broadcasting, which the British government is still weighing. But he has also voiced strong opinions on matters of wider significance, like British politicians&rsquo; flirtation with the idea of abandoning the pound for the euro, an idea Mr. Murdoch vehemently opposed.        

His decision to switch his British newspapers&rsquo; support to Mr. Cameron and the Conservatives last year after backing Labour in three elections, many political analysts say, made a crucial difference in returning the Conservatives to power.        

Similarly, when he dumped the Conservatives in favor of Labour in 1997, many say, he helped create the wave that kept Mr. Blair in office for the next decade.        

That influence, unmatched by any other figure outside of politics, has been damaged by the phone-hacking scandal that erupted over The News of the World, the hugely profitable, free-spending tabloid that has the largest circulation, reported earlier this year to be 2.7 million, of any of Britain&rsquo;s Sunday newspapers.        

For now, though, Mr. Murdoch and the executives of News International, the Murdoch subsidiary that controls his newspaper and television holdings in Britain, may be less concerned about the impact that the scandal may have on their political influence than on the more immediate legal challenges they face.        

The company&rsquo;s decision to close The News of the World will not end the scrutiny of the newspaper&rsquo;s practices by the police, courts and Parliament and by a public panel of inquiry that Mr. Cameron has promised to appoint. Together, these investigations seem likely to make for an inquisition that could run for years, causing further erosion in the credibility of the Murdoch brand and costing News International millions of dollars in potential legal settlements.        

The lawsuits alone are a daunting enough prospect, with Scotland Yard having said that the names and telephone numbers of as many as 4,000 people have shown up as potential hacking targets in the notes seized from the private investigator who was hired to hack the phones by The News of the World.        

Besides the criminal investigation into the phone hacking, a team of Scotland Yard investigators is examining the records turned over by News International that are said to show that the newspaper paid about $160,000 to a handful of unnamed junior officers during Mr. Coulson&rsquo;s editorship, a pattern that could lead to charges of bribery. The Independent Police Complaints Commission has announced that it will begin an inquiry into the matter, yet another initiative that will keep The News of the World in the news long after it shuts its doors.        
(Page 2 of 2)
In addition, the judge presiding over the host of civil lawsuits has ordered News International to turn over documents that may shed light on whether the management team knew about hacking and made a deliberate calculation to turn a blind eye to it because the profit gleaned from the sensational stories outweighed potential damages. If proved, this could entitle victims to punitive damages.        

The records regarding police payments do not cover the period when Rebekah Brooks, the chief executive of News International, edited the paper. Ms. Brooks acknowledged in testimony before Parliament in 2003 that the newspaper paid police officers for information, a practice that Mr. Coulson described as being &ldquo;within the law.&rdquo; But Ms. Brooks later backtracked and said she did not know of any specific incidents.        

Leading members of Parliament, including Mr. Miliband, the Labour leader, have called for the resignation of Ms. Brooks in the wake of revelations that tabloid reporters she oversaw as editor hacked into the voice mail of an abducted teenager, Milly Dowler, who was later found murdered.        

Mr. Murdoch has strongly backed Ms. Brooks, with his executives saying she was on vacation at the time of Ms. Dowler&rsquo;s disappearance, and he has said that she will continue to lead News International&rsquo;s inquiry of the phone-hacking scandal.        

Even so, the outrage that it has caused, in Parliament and with the public, has left her in a precarious position, and she now faces the likelihood of more questions about whether police payments occurred on her watch.        

&ldquo;Titles don&rsquo;t hack phones, people do,&rdquo; said Mark Lewis, the lawyer representing Ms. Dowler&rsquo;s parents.        

But for all the questions about how Mr. Cameron will weather the scandal, Mr. Murdoch has been much the larger target. Simon Hoggart, a columnist for The Guardian, described the relief among British politicians at seeing the Murdoch empire brought low.        

For years, members of Parliament &ldquo;have been terrified of the Murdoch press &mdash; terrified they might lose support, terrified, in some cases, that their private lives might be exposed,&rdquo; he wrote. &ldquo;But that has gone. News International has crossed a line and M.P.&rsquo;s feel, like political prisoners after a tyrant has been condemned to death by a people&rsquo;s tribunal, that they are at last free.&rdquo;        
