
TBILISI, Georgia &mdash; Police officers working on a counterespionage campaign arrested a group of photographers on Thursday that included the president&rsquo;s personal photographer and two working for Western news services, The Associated Press and the European Pressphoto Agency.        

The A.P. photographer, a Georgian citizen, was released early Thursday and not charged. Still, the detentions underscored the atmosphere of tension in Georgia around allegations of spying.        

The authorities did not disclose how they had come to suspect that the photographers had committed espionage offenses or for whom, but Georgian accusations of spying have typically been aimed at Russia. Relations between Russia and Georgia have remained tense since the countries fought a war in 2008.        

The arrests are regarded as significant because Georgia, unlike other former Soviet-era states, has a largely free news media and is a base for a small community of foreign journalists working in the region. After the arrests, a dozen journalists protested outside a police station in Tbilisi, the capital.        

The Human Rights Center, a Georgian advocacy group, issued a statement calling the roundup a &ldquo;violation of the freedom of expression.&rdquo;        

The others arrested were President Mikheil Saakashvili&rsquo;s personal photographer, Irakli Gedenidze, along with his wife, Natia Gedenidze, and a freelance photographer who had taken assignments with the Foreign Ministry, Giorgi Abdaladze.        

The police arrested the photographers in the predawn hours of Thursday. The Interior Ministry issued a brief statement saying only that the &ldquo;detainees are accused of supplying an organization, operating under the cover of a foreign country&rsquo;s special service, with various types of information.&rdquo;        

Just this week, a Georgian court sentenced three Russian citizens to 11 to 14 years in prison on charges of spying for Russia. On Wednesday, the day of the sentencing, the interior minister, Vano Merabishvili, told the Russian radio station Echo of Moscow that the Georgian police had captured most of the spies they had been hunting.        

&ldquo;Georgia has cut 90 percent of the channels that Russian special services had,&rdquo; Mr. Merabishvili said.        

The A.P. photojournalist, Shakh Aivazov, declined to comment and said he had no information about the other detainees. Zurab Kurtsikidze, the photographer with the European Pressphoto Agency, remained in custody on Thursday.        

Lawyers for Mr. Abdaladze and Mr. Kurtsikidze said their clients were innocent, while the lawyer for Irakli and Natia Gedenidze said her clients had not been informed of the accusations against them.        

In Moscow, Russia&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry spokesman, Aleksandr K. Lukashevich, dismissed the allegations of spying, as Russian officials have before, as a sign of paranoia in Georgia. Mr. Lukashevich said the detentions &ldquo;point to the level of democracy in Georgia.&rdquo;        
Andrew E. Kramer contributed reporting from Moscow.
