
FRANKFURT &mdash; A 21-year-old man who opened fire on a busload of United States airmen at the Frankfurt Airport in March, killing two, acted after viewing a jihadist propaganda video but was apparently not part of a terrorist organization, German prosecutors said Thursday.        

Prosecutors formally charged the suspect, Arid Uka, with murder and said he carried out the attack only a day after viewing a propaganda video on the Internet that purported to show foreign soldiers raping Muslim women.        

But they said they had no evidence that Mr. Uka, a Kosovar who grew up in Frankfurt, had accomplices or that he was part of a terrorist group.        

Mr. Uka, who had a temporary job sorting mail in the airport complex, went there armed with a pistol and two knives on the afternoon of March 2, prosecutors said, as they provided additional detail on the attack.        

Authorities said that Mr. Uka spotted two airmen emerging from a baggage claim area in Terminal 2 of the airport, and followed them to an exit where a United States Air Force bus was waiting. Mr. Uka watched as 16 American military service members gradually arrived, then, shortly after 3 p.m., asked one of them for a cigarette and where the soldiers were heading.        

After the airman confirmed that they were on their way to Afghanistan, Mr. Uka turned around, reached into his backpack and loaded a magazine into the pistol concealed there, authorities said.        

Mr. Uka waited until almost all the airmen had boarded the bus, then shot one of them, 25-year-old Senior Airman Nicholas J. Alden, in the back of the head from about five feet away, prosecutors and Air Force officials said. Airman Alden died at the scene.        

Boarding the bus, Mr. Uka then fatally shot 21-year-old Airman First Class Zachary R. Cuddeback in the driver&rsquo;s seat and &mdash; repeatedly shouting &ldquo;God is great&rdquo; &mdash; seriously wounded two other men standing in the aisle of the bus, prosecutors said. One of them was blinded in one eye as a result.        

The Air Force identified the two wounded men as Senior Airman Edgar Veguilla and Staff Sgt. Kris Schneider.        

Mr. Uka next aimed the pistol point-blank at a 22-year-old airman who was trying to hide behind a seat, but the weapon jammed, prosecutors said. Mr. Uka then fled, pursued by an airman. He was captured by two German police officers in the terminal.        

Prosecutors formally charged Mr. Uka, identified officially only as Arid U., with two counts of murder and three counts of attempted murder. The charges must still be confirmed by a court before the case can go to trial.        

Mr. Uka has admitted the general circumstances of the attack, though there is dispute about his motive, said Marcus K&ouml;hler, a prosecutor in Karlsruhe, where the case is being handled. If convicted, Mr. Uka would face life in prison.        

Federal prosecutors in New York have also charged Mr. Uka with murder. Mr. K&ouml;hler said that he had no knowledge of the American investigation but that prosecutors in Karlsruhe intended to bring the case to conclusion in Germany.        

The two wounded men are &ldquo;recovering fantastically&rdquo; but have not yet returned to active duty, Air Force Capt. Tristan T.. Hinderliter said Thursday. Some of the other airmen on the bus have since been deployed to Afghanistan.        

Before the attack, Mr. Uka was not known to friends and family as being radical in his religious or political beliefs. &ldquo;We are still shocked about the situation and really don t know what to say,&rdquo; Hastrid Uka, 27, brother of Arid Uka, said Thursday.        
Souad Mekhennet contributed reporting from London.
