
The News Corporation&rsquo;s decision to shut down the British tabloid The News of the World on Thursday did little to silence the growing uproar over revelations that the newspaper had hacked into the voice mails of private citizens.        

In fact, it may have only fueled the outrage.        

An outpouring of suspicion and condemnation came from all directions on Thursday, and was directed chiefly at the News Corporation&rsquo;s chairman, Rupert Murdoch, a figure as powerful as he is polarizing.        

The British media establishment, Facebook and Twitter users and even Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s own employees questioned his move. Some said it was a ploy to salvage government approval of the News Corporation&rsquo;s potentially lucrative controlling stake in the satellite company British Sky Broadcasting, or BSkyB. Others saw it as merely a rebranding.        

There are already indications that The News of the World may be reconstituted in some form. People with ties to the company said Thursday that the News Corporation had for some time been examining whether to start a Sunday edition for its other British tabloid, The Sun.        

The demise of The News of the World, which publishes only on Sundays, would seem to create the opportunity for that, these people said, speaking anonymously because they were not authorized to discuss the matter publicly.        

Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s News International is the largest national newspaper publisher in Britain, a status that affords him tremendous economic and political influence. In addition to publishing The News of the World and The Sun, News International owns The Times of London, a smaller but more prestigious paper.        

The News of the World has a circulation of 2.7 million, a size that gives News International scale with advertisers and a dominance in the market that analysts say Mr. Murdoch is unlikely to want to see diminished.        

&ldquo;Their significant share of the newspaper market is a very important part of their power base in this country &mdash; it is essential to their force and clout,&rdquo; said Claire Enders of Enders Analysis, a media research firm.        

The News Corporation is unlikely to walk away from that much power, Ms. Enders added, and it would be wise to examine whether to start a publication similar to The News of the World under a different brand. Not to do so, she said, &ldquo;would be a very severe business issue in terms of the existing economics of their newspapers, their revenues.&rdquo;        

But others questioned whether The News of the World&rsquo;s success could be replicated so easily.        

&ldquo;I think they would be very hard pressed to get the Sunday Sun circulation to that level,&rdquo; said George Brock, head of journalism at City University in London.        

A Sunday Sun, he said, &ldquo;is not likely to be a complete offset.&rdquo;        

Closing The News of the World is likely to benefit the News Corporation in one major way, Mr. Brock noted: It could help tame any threat to the company&rsquo;s pending purchase of BSkyB.        

The News Corporation is also dealing with a flight of advertisers, something that users of social media hoped they could accelerate by creating an online campaign to encourage a boycott of the company.        

One Twitter user, Paul Friend, generated a Google document with e-mail addresses of the chief executives of the companies that advertise in the paper. The document was used by hundreds of people who then sent e-mails to executives with their complaints.        

By Thursday morning, more than 20 companies said that they would be suspending or re-evaluating their advertising spending with The News of the World.        

As the scandal widened this week, social media became an important vehicle for people to voice their discontent.        

&ldquo;The goal was not to shut down the paper,&rdquo; said Melissa Harrison, a freelance magazine editor whose efforts on Twitter on Monday helped prompt thousands of people to demand that companies withdraw advertising dollars from The News of the World.        

&ldquo;No one wants people to lose their jobs,&rdquo; Ms. Harrison said. &ldquo;I think our goal was to voice public outrage. What really happened is that people have found that they have a voice. And News Corp. heard that people have a voice.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;There is quite a lot of cynicism about what is really happening here,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It is looking like The Sun will go seven days a week and that everything stays the same.&rdquo;        

Ms. Harrison and a growing chorus of users on Facebook and Twitter are demanding a full accounting of the allegations that executives from The News of the World paid police officers, lied to members of Parliament and hired investigators to listen to voice mail messages left on the cellphones of a murdered girl and the victims of terrorist attacks.        

&ldquo;The idea that he can close the paper and it will all be forgotten is not going to work,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;What we wanted was someone taking responsibility for this behavior, which means a criminal investigation.&rdquo;        

David Babbs, executive director of 38 Degrees, a grass-roots online advocacy group, said that more than 110,000 signatures had been gathered in recent days demanding a full inquiry and that they would be presented to government officials on Friday as a British regulatory agency formally ended its public comment period on the BSkyB deal.        

The group is demanding that the government decline Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s request for a controlling stake in the satellite company.        

&ldquo;This latest scandal has generated such an outpouring of disgust because it reflects the sheer scale of power that the Murdoch presses have over us, not just our media but our democratic process,&rdquo; Mr. Babbs said. &ldquo;The phone hacking is disgusting and disgraceful, but it also reflects the broader way that he has hacked our democratic process.&rdquo;        

The outrage was not limited to people who see Mr. Murdoch as a political threat. Even people on his payroll objected. Employees of The Sun walked out in protest on Thursday evening.        
