
CAIRO &mdash; More than two dozen onetime officials and allies of former President Hosni Mubarak were charged Thursday with murder, attempted murder and terrorism, accused of organizing one of the most memorable attacks on protesters during the 18-day revolution, one in which assailants riding horses and camels charged into the crowds at Tahrir Square.        

The charges were announced by the Judicial Investigation Commission, an independent office set up by the prosecutor, and came amid rising public anger over the slow pace with which officials and the police have been held accountable for the killings of more than 840 people during the revolution.        

Some activists and analysts said they saw the announcement as an effort to neutralize plans for a demonstration scheduled for Friday, in large part to press the interim military government for greater accountability.        

&ldquo;The announcement of the accusations against these people happened because of tomorrow&rsquo;s protest,&rdquo; said Nabil Abdel Fattah, an analyst at the state-financed Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies. &ldquo;But where is Hosni Mubarak and his two sons? Where is the ex-president of Egypt?&rdquo;        

The government had previously announced that Mr. Mubarak would stand trial next month in connection with the deaths and on other corruption-related charges.        

With its announcement on Thursday, the commission expanded the pool to include a virtual Who&rsquo;s Who of Mubarak-era loyalists, including the former speakers of both houses of Parliament, as well as cabinet ministers and lawyers close to the government, Egyptian state media reported.        

The accused were &ldquo;referred to criminal court on charges of inciting the killing of protesters in the camel event,&rdquo; said Mohamed el-Sabrout, head of the country&rsquo;s Judicial Investigation Commission, Reuters reported.        

The attack on horseback and camelback took place on Feb. 2 and was part of an intense street fight between antigovernment protesters and plainclothes fighters. It seemed at the time to illustrate just how desperate, and fragile, Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s government had become.        

In an account published in Al Ahram, Egypt&rsquo;s most widely circulated state owned newspaper, the commission charged that former presidential allies paid and armed &ldquo;unidentified outlaws and thugs&rdquo; and instructed them to attack &ldquo;peaceful protesters&rdquo; in major squares across the capital.        

Protest organizers and activists, who said they were pleased to see such high-level Mubarak-era officials charged in the deaths, were nevertheless troubled by the timing, saying it was another example of the military council offering a concession to calm public anger, rather than actually seeking justice. Demonstrators have complained that while the military takes months to detain ex-officials, whose cases are then routinely adjourned and postponed for months on end, hundreds of civilians have been tried and sentenced by military courts.        

Shady Ghazali Harb, a member of the Coalition of Revolutionary Youth and founder of the liberal Awareness Party, said the indictments were meant to &ldquo;calm us down&rdquo; before Friday&rsquo;s planned protest. But he said he doubted they would blunt the spreading sense that the revolution&rsquo;s goals were so far unmet.        

&ldquo;We are way past that stage now,&rdquo; he said.        

Tensions between protesters and the authorities have boiled over into violent clashes several times in the last week. Policemen and the families of those killed in the revolution fought in Cairo and Suez throughout the week. The violence was sparked by a court ruling that released on bail seven officers accused of killing 17 protesters and wounding 350 more in Suez. So far, only one police officer has been convicted, in absentia, for killing protesters.        

Among the most prominent former officials charged were the former leaders of the upper and lower houses of Parliament, Safwat Sherif and Fathi Surour. Both are already in jail. Others included, Mohamed Aboul Enein and Ibrahim Kamel, former members of Parliament and senior party leaders, as well as the country&rsquo;s longtime minister of manpower, Aisha Abdelhadi. The commission also referred to trial a high-profile lawyer, Mortada Mansour, widely disliked for his close association with the Mubarak family.        

Hani Shakrallah, editor of the news Web site Ahram Online, said if the military were interested in aligning itself with the protesters, it would hold the police and former officials accountable for the deaths, and not just make announcements before demonstrations.        

&ldquo;Every time there is a Friday they feel will be serious they make concessions, and then they try to sidestep them,&rdquo; said Mr. Shakrallah. &ldquo;The trial of these people might happen, but it will be too late. Why did this not happen three months ago, for God&rsquo;s sake? What are they waiting for?&rdquo;        
