
RUJBAN, Libya &mdash; For months now, military leaders in the rebel capital, Benghazi, have boldly predicted lightning advances by their fighters and an imminent rout of the forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in Tripoli that would finally snuff out his brutal four-decade rule.        

The rebels have made some advances in the west in recent days, taking a small village in the Nafusah Mountains and pushing westward some distance from Misurata toward Tripoli. But a senior rebel military officer here in the mountains who said he defected last month from the Libyan Army called the prospects of a collapse by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces highly unlikely.        

The officer, Col. Mohammed Ali Ethish, who now commands opposition fighters here, said that even if the rebels were able to reach Tripoli, shortages of fuel, personnel and weapons made it unlikely that they would try to invade or march on the heavily fortified city.        

A more realistic possibility, he said, is for rebels and others within the city to rise up against Colonel Qaddafi. &ldquo;I hope that when we do reach the borders of Tripoli, the revolutionaries there free it,&rdquo; Colonel Ethish said. &ldquo;If we don&rsquo;t go in with an organized army, there&rsquo;s going to be a huge mess.&rdquo;        

In the meantime, he said, the mountain fighters were focused on the more modest goal of winning cities in the region, either by persuading Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s soldiers to defect or by driving them out in battle.        

His candid comments raised the possibility of a protracted endgame in the Libyan conflict. They also provided little comfort to NATO countries that face increasing pressure to end the bombing campaign and seem desperate to find a quick exit, either by arming the rebels or by killing Colonel Qaddafi with airstrikes.        

Although Colonel Ethish said he was speaking for the fighters from Rujban, rebel fighters from other mountain towns also said that talk of a Tripoli offensive was misplaced or premature because they had their hands full on several fronts.        

To the east, they have been fighting in the city of Kiklah, where at least five rebel fighters were killed in clashes this week, commanders said. On Wednesday, the rebels pushed past Kiklah to capture Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s positions in a small village, Qawalish. At least 13 pro-Qaddafi soldiers and 7 rebels were killed in that fighting.        

North of Kiklah, on the plain that leads toward Tripoli, the rebels have been engaged in a running battle with Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces in Bir al-Ghanim and have so far been unable to advance, despite NATO&rsquo;s repeated bombings of the area.        

Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s soldiers also control lowland towns stretching from the border with Tunisia to Qasr al-Hajj, leaving rebel control of the border crossing exposed and vulnerable to attack.        

Colonel Ethish said the rebels were low on ammunition for the weapons they rely on in the quick, fluid battles in the mountains, including antiaircraft guns and small rocket-launchers. He also said he had seen no evidence on the battlefield of the weapons the French said they had provided to the rebels.        

In several rebel-held mountain towns, new training centers are being constructed, with the aim of building the kind of disciplined forces that can cope with any chaos that follows the war, the colonel said.        

In Kiklah, on the site of a former teachers college for women, hundreds of recruits will be trained to serve as a &ldquo;protection force&rdquo; for civilians in the event that Colonel Qaddafi leaves power, according to a volunteer, a small-business owner who lives in the United States and who asked not to be identified because he has family in territory controlled by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces.        

&ldquo;A lot of people are going to have a lot of anger,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We want to keep it under control.&rdquo;        

Colonel Ethish said a center being built in Rujban, in trailers that once stored food, would be for training special forces troops who would also serve a policing function if Colonel Qaddafi left power.        

A soldier since high school, Colonel Ethish, 57, said he had worked most recently for the Libyan Ministry of Defense, heading offices for infantrymen and for technology at a base in Jufra, a province in central Libya. He is originally from Rujban, and in the past few months he traveled back and forth between the military base and the mountains by lying at checkpoints and saying he was going to Tripoli.        

He said he and other officers were isolated during the revolution from the war effort. Power and information were concentrated among Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons and close allies who commanded elite brigades. Colonel Ethish said he had seen evidence that mercenaries were used in the early days of the conflict, but he refused to say exactly where they were from, citing diplomatic efforts to cut off Colonel Qaddafi from his allies.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sorry to say they were from another Arab country,&rdquo; he said.        

When it came time for him to defect, his family left everything in its home in Tripoli, and he left Jufra, again lying about his destination. In the mountains, he joined scores of other defecting officers, who still seem to be adjusting to their role as revolutionaries. At a recent news conference announcing dozens of defections, for instance, the officers were silent when the rebel national anthem was played, seeming not to know the words.        

Colonel Ethish said that several other colleagues were ready to defect but were concerned for their families and &ldquo;were waiting for the right time.&rdquo; His claims about his own defection and his colleagues&rsquo; intentions were impossible to confirm.        

But he makes their defections sound inevitable. Speaking of his colleagues at the Ministry of Defense base in Jufra, he said: &ldquo;Everyone is bored. They watch Al Jazeera. They&rsquo;ve lost trust in Qaddafi.&rdquo;        
