
LONDON &mdash; A year after he first testified before Britain&rsquo;s official inquiry into the invasion of Iraq, Tony Blair, the former prime minister, returned on Friday to revisit his reasons for going to war and, he said, to do something he did not do the first time around &mdash; express his regret for the loss of life.        

But that fleeting moment of contrition &mdash; in answer to the severe criticism he received during the inquiry last year &mdash; seemed to offer little solace to the relatives of the British men and women who died in the Iraq war. Many family members were on hand Friday at the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Center in central London, where the 18-month-old investigation is unfolding.        

At the end of his first grueling session before the inquiry panel in January 2010, Mr. Blair was asked whether he wished to express regret. &ldquo;I took that as a question about the decision to go to war,&rdquo; he said on Friday, &ldquo;and I answered that I took responsibility.        

&ldquo;That was taken as my meaning that I had no regrets about the loss of life, and that was never my meaning or my intention,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I wanted to make it clear that, of course, I regret deeply and profoundly the loss of life, whether from our own armed forces, those of other nations, the civilians who helped people in Iraq or the Iraqis themselves.&rdquo;        

A cry of &ldquo;Too late, too late&rdquo; came from the mother of a Royal Air Force pilot killed in Iraq, who was seated in the public gallery. The inquiry&rsquo;s chairman, Sir John Chilcot, then demanded silence.        

When Britain ended its combat role in Iraq in 2009, 179 of its soldiers had been killed and several thousand wounded, and some bereaved families have joined the wider public condemnation of the former prime minister for joining President George W. Bush  in planning the 2003 invasion that toppled Saddam Hussein.        

For Mr. Blair, 57, the four-hour encounter with the inquiry panel was a rare public appearance in Britain, where he has become something of a pariah. A year ago, he underwent six hours of questioning by the panel, which announced last month that it had recalled him to investigate what it saw as discrepancies between his testimony and that of other senior officials who had dealt with Iraq.        

In contrast with last year, when Mr. Blair was smuggled into the hearing room to avoid angry demonstrators, on Friday he entered by the front door, encountering only scattered catcalls from a small crowd of protesters.        

He arrived looking every inch of what he has become since leaving office in 2007 &mdash; a gym-fit, suntanned, expensively tailored multimillionaire, thanks to highly paid jobs as a celebrity speaker and as a consultant to international banks, work he juggles with travels as a Middle East peace emissary.        

This year, as last, he gave a polished performance, retreating only on minor details from his unwavering defense of his role in the Iraq war. Using the counterpunching skills honed during his years in politics, he displayed a mastery of the official documents amassed by the inquiry and used them, along with recollections of critical moments on the road to war, to fend off the undisguised skepticism of the five panel members.        

As he did a year ago, Mr. Blair, in effect, cast his lot with the judgment of history, saying he was sure that toppling Mr. Hussein had been the right course, despite the failure to discover illicit weapons, and that he would do it again. His central reference point was the new global landscape he said the Western world confronted after the attacks in the United States on Sept. 11, 2001.        

&ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t see Sept. 11 as an attack on America; it was an attack on us,&rdquo; he said, meaning Britain and the other Western democracies. His consistent message to Mr. Bush, he said, had been: &ldquo;Whatever the political heat, I&rsquo;m going to be with you. I&rsquo;m not going to back out.&rdquo;        

Much of Friday&rsquo;s hearing addressed issues that that had haunted Mr. Blair through years of recriminations over the war: whether he pressured Peter Goldsmith, the British attorney general at the time, to make a formal finding that the war would be legal under the terms of a United Nations resolution on Iraq&rsquo;s weapons, and whether he had given Mr. Bush secret assurances that Britain would commit its forces regardless of the political and legal reservations in London.        

Speculation was heightened last week when Britain&rsquo;s top civil servant, Sir Gus O&rsquo;Donnell, rejected a request from the inquiry chairman to approve the release of private letters that passed between Mr. Blair and Mr. Bush ahead of the invasion. Mr. Blair defended that decision on Friday, saying, &ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s extremely important that the British prime minister and the president of the United States should be able to communicate with each other in confidence.&rdquo;        

Towards the end of his testimony, the former prime minister sought to shift the focus of the exchanges from Iraq to Iran. He accused Tehran of supporting terrorist groups in the region, and of seeking to block Middle East peace efforts and  &ldquo;the modernization the region so badly needs.&rdquo;        

Perhaps mindful of the criticism he himself has endured over Iraq, he said the West should abandon what he called &ldquo;the wretched policy of apology&rdquo; for the wrongs that beset the Muslim world, and focus on their true cause &mdash; Islamic extremism and its deep-rooted hostility to the West. &ldquo;At some point, we have to get our heads out of the sand and understand that,&rdquo; he said.        

He added: &ldquo;The single most difficult thing we have to face today &mdash; and we face it still &mdash; is the risk of this new type of terrorism and extremism based on an ideological perversion of the faith of Islam combined with technology that allows them to kill people on a large scale. Although this is a time where many people think this extremism can be managed, I personally don&rsquo;t think that is true. I think it has to be confronted and changed.&rdquo;        
John F. Burns reported from London, and Alan Cowell from Paris.
