
S&Atilde;O PAULO, Brazil &mdash; The resignation this week of yet another minister in the government of Dilma Rousseff, the president of Brazil, may have added to the tumult of her nascent presidency, but it is also showing that her managerial push for efficiency could make it tougher for corruption to persist in her administration, analysts said.        

The resignation of Alfredo Nascimento, the transportation minister, is giving Ms. Rousseff a chance to distance herself from the government of her mentor and predecessor, Luiz In&aacute;cio Lula da Silva.        

Mr. Nascimento, who had served in the same post under Mr. da Silva, resigned on Wednesday amid accusations of corruption involving overbilling and solicitation of bribes. He is the second official to fall for suspected corruption since Ms. Rousseff became president six months ago.        

Last month, Antonio Palocci, the chief of staff and most important political adviser to the president, resigned amid accusations that he had illegally enriched himself with consulting work while a congressman and manager of Ms. Rousseff&rsquo;s presidential campaign.        

Both officials were holdovers from the previous administration. &ldquo;She is gradually reducing the number of Lulalistas that he imposed on her,&rdquo; said David Fleischer, a political science professor at Bras&iacute;lia University. &ldquo;She is branding her own government rather than making this a third term for Lula.&rdquo;        

While the president appeared to be caught by surprise in the Palocci case, this time it was Ms. Rousseff who was seeking answers for why the Transportation Ministry had appeared to increase the value of several contracts for highway and rail projects.        

The scandal became public when the Brazilian magazine Veja reported that Ms. Rousseff had questioned the leadership of the Transportation Ministry, which controls important infrastructure projects for the World Cup in 2014 and the Olympic Games in 2016, about the apparent overbilling.        

The magazine reported that the ministry had solicited kickbacks from engineering and construction companies, and that the majority of the payments flowed to Mr. Nascimento&rsquo;s political party. In a statement from the ministry, he denied that he had done anything illegal, saying he hoped to clarify matters in an appearance before the Senate next Tuesday. Some analysts applauded Ms. Rousseff&rsquo;s supervision.        

&ldquo;This is a sign of progress, a sign of a president that is going to have less tolerance for this kind of behavior,&rdquo; said Christopher Garman, an analyst at Eurasia Group, a risk consultancy in New York. &ldquo;This is a government that is going to place a premium on efficiency, diminishing the space for corruption.&rdquo;        

But while the episode highlighted the managerial skills of Ms. Rousseff, a former chief of staff, it did little to assuage concerns that she lacks one of her predecessor&rsquo;s strengths: the &ldquo;political skill set to manage a coalition,&rdquo; Mr. Garman said.        

Ms. Rousseff, who is in a battle to rein in spending to control inflation, needs to rally congressional support, which the scandal surrounding Mr. Palocci already cost her, analysts said.        

Before joining the cabinet, Mr. Nascimento was president of the Party of the Republic, a midsize member of the governing coalition, which expects a certain level of representation in her cabinet. As of late Friday, Ms. Rousseff had not yet settled on a successor for Mr. Nascimento.        

In announcing his resignation, Mr. Nascimento returned to the Senate and reassumed his post as president of the party.        

At the president&rsquo;s urging, Mr. Nascimento established a commission to investigate the charges for 30 days. Ms. Rousseff suspended, by decree, the majority of the projects and auctions connected to the Transportation Ministry pending the outcome of the inquiry.        

The latest revelations seemed to open the floodgates to even more questions about cozy government ties to contractors. The newspaper O Globo revealed that the transportation minister&rsquo;s son, Gustavo Morais Pereira, had increased his wealth to $32 million from $38,500 in five years, in part from contracts his construction company reached with public entities, including one tied to the Transportation Ministry.        

Still, the government has emphasized that Ms. Rousseff moved swiftly to get to the bottom of the concerns about pricing in the ministry. Even before she took over as president in January, she had been questioning Mr. Nascimento in her role as chief of staff for unexplained additions to contracts by the Transportation Ministry.        
