
LEICESTER, England &mdash; Despite the scandal burning around News International, its top executive, Rebekah Brooks, rebuffed numerous calls for her to resign on Friday, raising questions about the strategy of its parent company, the News Corporation, in defending itself against a barrage of police inquiries and lawsuits stemming from phone hacking at one of its British tabloid newspapers.        

After Prime Minister David Cameron &mdash; a close personal friend of Ms. Brooks &mdash; said that if he were her boss he would have accepted her resignation as chief executive because of the conduct of journalists under her watch, her position looked increasingly untenable. But Ms. Brooks subsequently told her employees that she would not resign, suggesting that she retained the backing of Rupert Murdoch, News Corporation&rsquo;s chairman.        

Legal experts and other analysts familiar with the company expressed surprise that Ms. Brooks had not been suspended or removed earlier, given that she was the top editor at The News of the World when some of the hacking took place. The fact that she has stayed, they said, suggested that Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s backing may go beyond loyalty, possibly amounting to a calculation that dismissing Ms. Brooks could end up exposing other, higher-ranking executives to scrutiny about decisions they made related to the hacking scandal.        

&ldquo;If she goes, the next question is who else knew?&rdquo; said a former counsel at another prominent newspaper who requested to remain anonymous because he is not privy to the News Corporation&rsquo;s deliberations. &ldquo;You want her on the inside and not on the outside.&rdquo;        

Ms. Brooks has repeatedly denied knowing anything about phone hacking during her editorship of The News of the World early last decade when, police investigations have revealed, employees of the newspaper were blatantly hacking the private voice mail messages of numerous people to gather material for sensational news stories.        

Her position looked more vulnerable on Friday after the British police arrested Andy Coulson, her former deputy and the man who succeeded her as editor of The News of the World.        

It is unclear how retaining Ms. Brooks will affect the regulatory decision-making on News International&rsquo;s most important business goal in Britain, its attempt to take full control of British Sky Broadcasting. Some analysts said it could further complicate the bid because regulators are likely to consider the track record of News International&rsquo;s top executives when considering whether the company passes a so-called fit-person test to assume full ownership of a major broadcaster.        

But if there are risks in retaining Ms. Brooks, there may be risks in removing her from her post as well, analysts said. She has been a close confidante of both Rupert Murdoch and his son James, people who have worked with the Murdochs said. If the company acknowledges, directly or implicitly, that she was responsible for the wrongdoing at The News of the World, it could be difficult to maintain that she alone made poor choices in the matter.        

&ldquo;If it was not resignation by agreement on both sides, Rebekah Brooks would have some very interesting insights about the Murdochs,&rdquo; said Adam Price, a former member of Parliament who played a central role in the parliamentary investigation into phone hacking. &ldquo;She is the barrier. If you take her away, who is left?&rdquo;        

Ms. Brooks has worked side by side with James Murdoch, who is now in charge of the News Corporation&rsquo;s European operations. He came to Britain after the period when the phone hacking took place. But he approved out-of-court settlements to hacking victims, including Gordon Taylor, a former professional soccer player.        

For a time, James Murdoch had a more direct role in managing the fallout of The News of the World&rsquo;s problems than Ms. Brooks had. When he approved the Taylor payment, she had moved to run another News International newspaper, The Sun.        

&ldquo;James Murdoch is in a very vulnerable position for having signed on the Gordon Taylor deal,&rdquo; said Brian Cathcart, professor of journalism at Kingston University who has been a prominent advocate for a public inquiry.        

Another executive who could face greater scrutiny if Ms. Brooks were to leave is Les Hinton, who currently runs Dow Jones for the News Corporation in the United States. A powerful player in the Murdoch empire, Mr. Hinton held Ms. Brooks&rsquo;s current post during the period when journalists at The News of the World were hacking voice mail messages. He told before a parliamentary committee that he knew of no hacking at the newspaper beyond what was done by a single reporter and an investigator, both of whom where jailed in 2007.        

Legal experts said that whatever the company&rsquo;s internal rationale for retaining Ms. Brooks, she and other top executives would be unlikely to escape heavy scrutiny in the coming months.        

&ldquo;The prime minister has agreed to the public inquiry, and this will have the power to subpoena any person, including Rupert Murdoch and Rebekah Brooks,&rdquo; said Geoffrey Robertson, an expert on media law.        
