
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Tens of thousands of Syrians on Friday poured into a square that has emerged as a focus of defiance in Hama, Syria&rsquo;s fourth-largest city, as the French and American ambassadors stayed there for a second day in what their countries called a gesture of support for demonstrators and Syrian officials lambasted as interference.        

The protests in Hama, remarkable scenes that evoked demonstrations in Egypt and Tunisia earlier this year, continued for a second week. Though Syria&rsquo;s two largest cities, Damascus and Aleppo, have yet to experience similar protests so far, other large cities &mdash; Dayr az Zawr in the east and, to a lesser extent, Homs, south of Hama &mdash; had demonstrations on Friday that participants said were bigger than in past weeks, according to activists, residents and images they filmed.        

The scale of the protest in Hama posed no immediate threat to President Bashar al-Assad, but it thrust his leadership into territory thus far uncharted in the rebellion: it is unclear how the government would confront a mass challenge to its legitimacy in a city that suffered a brutal crackdown a generation ago and still carries deep symbolism. To underscore their peacefulness, protesters in Hama said they carried roses and olive branches on Friday.        

&ldquo;They&rsquo;ll have to answer the question of what do we do now,&rdquo; Wissam Tarif, executive director of Insan, a human rights group, said of the government. &ldquo;They want to be in control, but they can&rsquo;t be in control everywhere.&rdquo;        

So far, even some of the government&rsquo;s supporters acknowledge that Mr. Assad&rsquo;s leadership has yet to forge any real strategy to cope with the most serious challenge in his 11 years as president. The government has said it will tolerate peaceful dissent but indicated otherwise in a crackdown in Hama, in which 16 people were killed during 48 hours this week, according to Human Rights Watch. Across Syria, activists said security forces killed 15 more people and wounded dozens on Friday, though the government blamed armed insurgents for at least some of those deaths.        

A true national dialogue that Syria had proposed for Sunday, meanwhile, appeared to be stillborn. Leading opponents have said they will stay away, given the violence, suggesting that a government whose intention to reform is questionable will be left talking with an opposition it has chosen.        

&ldquo;The atmosphere is not suitable for having such a dialogue,&rdquo; said Hassan Abdel-Azim, an opposition figure in Damascus, Syria&rsquo;s capital, who announced that he would boycott the session.        

The American and French ambassadors, Robert S. Ford and &Eacute;ric Chevallier, arrived in Hama on Thursday and stayed into Friday, the traditional day for protests. Officials in both countries said the men left in the afternoon, before the protests gathered strength. An American official said the visits had not been coordinated beforehand.        

A video posted to YouTube captured a scene unusual for an American diplomat in the Arab world, where resentment at American support for authoritarian rulers runs deep. In Hama, crowds chanting &ldquo;People want the fall of the regime&rdquo; cheered what appeared to be Mr. Ford&rsquo;s vehicle, and some protesters tossed flowers on its hood. In the background was a huge banner that said, &ldquo;Syria is free, down with Bashar al-Assad.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Residents feel a kind of protection with the presence of the ambassador,&rdquo; said Omar al-Habbal, an activist in Hama. &ldquo;The authorities wouldn&rsquo;t dare react with violence.&rdquo;        

While most residents interviewed expressed appreciation for the visit by Mr. Ford, a seasoned diplomat and Arabic speaker who filled a post this year that had been vacant since 2005, some worried that his presence might allow the government to taint the protests. Others said they were angry that the United States had yet to take a blunter stand in calling for Mr. Assad to resign. Unlike their response to the situation in Libya, American officials dealing with Syria have continued to urge Mr. Assad to carry out reforms, although they have warned him that time is running out.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and employees of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria.
