
JUBA, Sudan &mdash; On the desk in his office in Juba, the capital of what will soon be the world&rsquo;s newest country, R. Barrie Walkley, the American consul general, has a telling picture. It is of him and George Clooney shaking hands in a crowd during the independence referendum here in southern Sudan in January.        

The photograph offers a unique window into what is happening now. American celebrities and religious groups teamed up with policy makers and helped a forlorn underdog region finally achieve what very few separatist movements achieve: independence. On Saturday, after decades of guerrilla struggles and intense international pressure, the Republic of South Sudan will officially split off from the north and become Africa&rsquo;s 54th country.        

&ldquo;Once you got someone like George Clooney, for example....&rdquo; Mr. Walkley trails off with a smile. &ldquo;George packs power.&rdquo;        

Sudan has been an obsession for the West for more than 100 years, and it is an interesting question why, of all the world&rsquo;s war zones and all the blood baths Africa has witnessed &mdash; Liberia, Somalia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, to name a few &mdash; this place has grabbed so much attention.        

On Friday, last-minute preparations were being made for an expected deluge of high-powered guests including Colin L. Powell and President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe. Juba&rsquo;s streets were coursing with soldiers in red berets. Work crews were putting fences up and applying final coats of paint. Throngs of young people marched down the road in impromptu parades. Passing drivers honked gleefully and pumped their fists in the air, in solidarity.        

&ldquo;In the coming hours,&rdquo; said Barnaba Marial Benjamin, South Sudan&rsquo;s information minister, &ldquo;we will bear witness to the passage of history and the transformation of the map of Africa.&rdquo;        

John Voll, a professor of Islamic history at Georgetown University, said one reason Sudan has attracted so much attention over the years is that its internal conflicts were easily reduced by outsiders to Manichaean absolutes of oppressed Africans, many of them Christians, getting crushed by Arabs, &ldquo;with echoes of the Crusades.&rdquo;        

Sudan &mdash; or soon, the two Sudans &mdash; is a vast, complex place with a dizzying amount of diversity. Before Saturday&rsquo;s breakup, Sudan was the biggest country, geographically, in Africa. But it also has an unusually clear fault line, reinforced by the British colonizers, with the southern part mostly animist and Christian and the north mostly Muslim and long dominated by Arabs. A huge swamp, the Sudd, roughly separates the two, and in the 19th century, Western missionaries began to champion the southern Sudanese cause.        

&ldquo;Long before there was such a thing as secular human rights groups or a United Nations, missionaries rallied behind Sudan&rsquo;s suffering,&rdquo; said Eliza Griswold, author of &ldquo;The Tenth Parallel,&rdquo; a book on the line of latitude that roughly separates the Muslim and Christian worlds in Africa and Asia.        

In 2001, Christian groups found a friend in the White House. The administration of George W. Bush pushed southern rebels, who had been fighting for self-determination for decades, and Sudan&rsquo;s central government to sign a comprehensive peace agreement in 2005, which guaranteed the southerners the right to secede.        

But this policy success &mdash; which Bush officials consider one of their top achievements, and may be one reason that Mr. Powell, Mr. Bush&rsquo;s first secretary of state, was expected here on Saturday &mdash; was soon overshadowed by the crisis in Darfur. That conflict became the focus of one of the biggest humanitarian advocacy projects since the Live Aid benefit concert in 1985 raised hundreds of millions of dollars for Ethiopian famine victims.        

Darfur, in western Sudan, exploded in 2003 after rebels attacked government forces and the government responded by arming Arab militias that burned villages, massacred civilians and drove more than two million people off their land.        

Just about everyone in Darfur is Muslim, so looking at this internal conflict through the Crusades lens did not really apply. But an even more powerful way of presenting the violence emerged: many called it genocide.        

&ldquo;This gave the Darfur cause a distinctiveness that could gain real support,&rdquo; Professor Voll said. &ldquo;There were few other conflicts at that time that could so easily be called &lsquo;genocidal,&rsquo; even though the conflicts in Congo were, and are, more destructive.&rdquo;        

Aid groups estimate that more than 5 million people have died in Congo as a result of the continuing conflict there, compared with around 300,000 who may have died of conflict-related causes in Darfur.        

But the reference to &ldquo;genocide&rdquo; gave Darfur added urgency; once it was branded as such, there was a widespread sense that something had to be done. Movie stars soon became engrossed, including Don Cheadle, Matt Damon, Mia Farrow (who has frequently traveled in Africa with American officials) and Mr. Clooney, who is now helping to pay for a satellite to monitor parts of Sudan.        

There was a relationship between two seminal events in Sudan: the explosion of violence in Darfur and the end of the decades-long war in the south. Many Sudan analysts have said that Darfur &mdash; and all the attention it was getting &mdash; was the added pressure that finally pushed the Sudanese government, facing an international public relations disaster, to sign the treaty in 2005 that gave the southerners just about all they wanted.        

This past January, Sudan&rsquo;s division became a fait accompli when southerners voted in a referendum, by 98.8 percent, to secede. In the months leading to the vote, celebrities like Mr. Clooney urged the Obama administration to stay focused on Sudan.        

&ldquo;Would this have taken place without celebrities?&rdquo; Mr. Walkley, the consul general, asked. &ldquo;I think the celebrities had a lot to do with it.&rdquo;        

Celebrities, he said, &ldquo;focus attention on a problem. They do it in a bumper sticker fashion, perhaps,&rdquo; but &ldquo;if you get millions of people sending blogs to the president, that will have an impact.&rdquo;        

But in Darfur, Western advocates may have complicated matters, too, some analysts contend, pushing a hard line against the government that has made the rebels there more intransigent and peace negotiations more difficult.        

Mr. Clooney, who got malaria the last time he was in Sudan, was not expected for the festivities on Saturday. But religious groups will be represented. The only nongovernment employee in President Obama&rsquo;s official delegation to Juba besides Mr. Powell is Ken Hackett, president of Catholic Relief Services.        
Josh Kron contributed reporting.
