
MOSCOW &mdash; For a month, this city has been preparing for the most spectacular, glittering charity concert in recent history.        

Giant video screens and billboards plastered the city in June, advertising a Federation Fund benefit for children with cancer and eye disease. Most eye-catching was the lineup of Hollywood stars who were said to be attending events here on Saturday and Sunday, including Woody Allen, Dustin Hoffman, Francis Ford Coppola, Sophia Loren, Larry King and Isabella Rossellini.        

This is not the first splash the Federation Fund has made. In December, when it was totally unknown in charitable circles, the organization staged a gala in which Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin sang &ldquo;Blueberry Hill&rdquo; to a crowd that included Sharon Stone and Kevin Costner. Complaints emerged later that the event had focused more on publicity than charity, and they have been revived this summer.        

Bristling at the criticism, the charity&rsquo;s director, Vladimir V. Kiselyov, said that his organization does not raise money for charity, but instead directs private donors to needy hospitals.        

But many officials of the hospitals listed as beneficiaries said in interviews that they had never had any contact with the Federation Fund, and were surprised to be listed on its Web site. Until two days before the concert, the organizers declined to disclose its location and callers were told that no tickets would be sold.        

Among those pressing for answers are the directors of several charities, who say they fear the concert and other events this weekend will undercut public trust in fund-raising. Yekaterina Bermant, who runs a fund for children with heart disease, said she was puzzled by the participation of Hollywood celebrities.        

&ldquo;There are clear stories, understandable ones, like Hurricane Katrina and the earthquake in Japan,&rdquo; said Ms. Bermant, director of the charity Children&rsquo;s Hearts. &ldquo;Why on earth are they coming to Moscow for some unclear story? Were they given that much money?&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Maybe they were not paid, maybe Putin asked them personally,&rdquo; she added. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s so unclear that I want very much for someone to explain it to me.&rdquo;        

The Federation Fund&rsquo;s gala in December made international headlines because of Mr. Putin&rsquo;s singing. The appearance was a public-relations coup for the prime minister; a remix of his &ldquo;Blueberry Hill&rdquo; performance can be heard at Moscow nightclubs. But in March, the mother of a girl Ms. Stone had visited published an open letter complaining that after the event no money had reached the hospital where the girl had been treated. Doctors at hospitals named as the concert&rsquo;s beneficiaries echoed her criticism. After that, several hospitals, including the one that treated the girl, received donations of money and equipment.        

Mr. Kiselyov told a reporter from the magazine Afisha that he is being criticized because his organization breaks the mold of Russian charities. &ldquo;Our principle is not to take money,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We attract stars &mdash; and their quantity and their names show that they assess our work as better than the work of other funds, which say they are transparent when they are not.&rdquo;        

He said most charities pass on a tiny fraction of the income from fund-raising events because of large overheads, and he contended that the Federation Fund avoids this pitfall by connecting donors directly with hospitals.        

The stars involved, he said, &ldquo;in contrast to many Russians, not only do not talk about honoraria, but, on the contrary, are bringing their own money here.&rdquo;        

It was not clear how many of the celebrities would take part this weekend, though posters advertising their attendance have been hanging in Moscow since mid-June. Representatives for several stars said their clients, though mentioned in the promotions, did not plan to attend or were proceeding with caution.        

Representatives of Mr. Hoffman and Mr. King said neither planned to attend. Mr. Allen still expects to attend, according to a spokeswoman, Leslee Dart. But Mr. Allen&rsquo;s decision to go forward came only after making some inquiries in the wake of earlier news reports about the charity.        

&ldquo;He asked for additional information from his lawyer, who did some due diligence,&rdquo; said Ms. Dart, who added that she did not know the size of an honorarium Mr. Allen is being paid in connection with the event. (Payments to celebrities who attend charity galas are not uncommon in Hollywood circles.)        

In a letter dated May 11, Svetlana Kiseleva, a representative of the Federation Fund, responded to a request for &ldquo;evidence to demonstrate the seriousness&rdquo; of the foundation by dismissing criticism as being based on &ldquo;false information.&rdquo;        

Ms. Kiseleva cited an endorsement from the mayor of Moscow and favorable Russian media reports, and said the charity had donated $12.5 million to an institute of scientific research for children with cancer and hematologic diseases, and two public hospitals for children.        

Critics say the foundation has received extraordinary support from the government, compared with other charitable organizations, while providing virtually no information about its expenditures or donations.        

Space for the event&rsquo;s huge advertising campaign was provided without charge by the City of Moscow, which is required to use 15 percent of advertising space for public service, said Vladimir A. Yakovlev, press secretary for the city&rsquo;s media and advertising department. The largest advertisement for the gala covers the facade of a six-story building and extends for most of a city block.        

Of 12 hospitals listed as beneficiaries on the Federation Fund&rsquo;s Web site whose representatives agreed to be interviewed, seven said they had had no contact with the fund. Five said they had recently been asked to supply lists of needed equipment or had received gifts for children; of those, two said they had received substantial amounts of medical equipment and cash donations.        

In response to written questions, a federation spokesman, Sergei S. Bunin, forwarded letters of thanks from doctors at hospitals and research centers, a spreadsheet detailing about $4.7 million of new equipment to be given to one hospital and photos of celebrities visiting hospitals.        

Many critics have focused on the participation of celebrities.        

&ldquo;There is a big tradition of bringing American stars to corporate events and paying them exorbitant fees for participation,&rdquo; said Anton Nossik, who blogged about the Federation Fund last week. &ldquo;I believe it is their way of making fast cash &mdash; but in this particular case I believe they should be concerned about their reputations.&rdquo;        
Ellen Barry reported from Moscow, and Michael Cieply from Los Angeles. Ilya Mouzykantskii contributed reporting from Moscow.
