
The Industrial and Commercial Bank of China signed an agreement on Friday to obtain an 80 percent stake in the American arm of the Bank of East Asia, according to a person briefed on the agreement. The deal, if approved by regulators, would mean that for the first time, a state-owned Chinese bank would have a controlling stake in a United States financial institution.        

Although the deal had been in the works for several weeks, the final terms were struck as China&rsquo;s president, Hu Jintao, wrapped up a state visit to the United States focused on improving economic relations between the nations.        

Federal Reserve officials and other government authorities were briefed on the proposed acquisition and raised no objections, the person with knowledge of the deal said. Still, regulators are expected to conduct a lengthy review, delaying the deal&rsquo;s completion until the end of 2011.        

Barbara Hagenbaugh, a spokeswoman for the Federal Reserve, said the Fed had not received an application required for such an acquisition.        

Federal regulators are expected to examine the Chinese bank&rsquo;s operations to ensure that its financial reporting, risk management and money-laundering controls meet United States standards. The Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States may also weigh in, given the involvement of the Chinese government in the acquiring bank.        

Although China&rsquo;s banks appeared to emerge from the global financial crisis on a strong footing, analysts in the West have raised questions for years about the true condition of many Chinese banks.        

The deal, which could open the door for other Chinese banks to acquire deposit-taking institutions in the United States, was formalized in Chicago, at a ceremony arranged by commerce officials from both countries. Chinese banks are aggressively seeking to expand overseas, hoping that they can support Chinese companies abroad instead of losing them to American and European financial companies.        

The Industrial and Commercial Bank of China previously had one commercial bank office in New York but had no retail branches there. The deal is considered a cornerstone of its North American expansion plans, giving it access to American depositors. The deal could also allow American customers to open accounts containing Chinese currency.        

Under the terms of the deal, I.C.B.C. will pay about $100 million for the 80 percent stake in the United States subsidiary of the Bank of East Asia, which is based in Hong Kong and has 13 branches in New York and California. Last year, I.C.B.C. bought a 70 percent stake in the Canadian operations of the Bank of East Asia, which is now known as the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (Canada).        

Bank of China Mainland, another state-owned bank, is the only Chinese bank that operates retail branches in the United States.        
