
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; A bodyguard for Afghanistan&rsquo;s intelligence service killed two members of the NATO-led coalition on Saturday morning when he opened fire on a convoy heading out to train police officers, Afghan officials said.        

The gunman, whose motives remained unclear, was killed by coalition troops.        

American military and diplomatic officials confirmed the attack, which occurred in Panjshir Province in northeast Afghanistan, one of the country&rsquo;s most peaceful areas. They said the victims were a service member and a civilian employee of the Defense Department. Another person was wounded.        

The gunman &mdash; a bodyguard for a high-ranking deputy of Afghanistan&rsquo;s National Directorate of Security &mdash; was identified only as a 30-year-old named Aminullah. He was returning to the capital after a few days at his home in the province&rsquo;s Hesai Awal District when he flagged down the convoy about 8:45 a.m. and began arguing with the people in one vehicle, the provincial police chief and district governor said. Then he opened fire.        

An Afghan government official who knew the bodyguard said he did not appear to have been connected to the Taliban. &ldquo;He was a proud, arrogant man, but he didn&rsquo;t have any ties with militants,&rdquo; said the official, who was not authorized to discuss the case publicly.        

Military helicopters took the dead and wounded from the scene.        

The military also said Saturday night that a service member had been killed in a separate attack in eastern Afghanistan, but provided no other details.        

Attacks by the Afghan police and soldiers have claimed the lives of about 50 members of the NATO coalition over the past two and a half years. Some of them stemmed from personality clashes or arguments that erupted into violence. Others were attacks by Taliban militants who exploited flimsy security screening procedures to infiltrate the ranks of Afghanistan&rsquo;s security forces.        

Attacks by erstwhile allies have also been deadly for American troops in Iraq during that eight-year war.        

Before Saturday, only one coalition soldier had been killed in mountainous Panjshir Province, according to icasualties.org, which tracks military fatalities. Panjshir is one of seven areas whose security will become the responsibility of Afghanistan forces this month.        

In Zabul Province in southeast Afghanistan, where officials have reported security gains in recent months, the provincial governor survived a suicide bomb attack on his convoy Saturday morning. Mohammad Jan Rasul Yaar, a deputy governor, said one civilian was killed and nine others were wounded in the attack.        
An Afghan employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Zabul Province.
