
LONDON &mdash; With the tremors of The News of the World scandal still spreading across the landscape of British life, the newspaper&rsquo;s staff assembled on Saturday for the paper&rsquo;s last working shift before it is shut down by the Murdoch empire as part of its strategy for limiting the damage to its worldwide brand.        

At the newspaper&rsquo;s plant in Wapping, East London, plans were to double the number of copies printed of the Sunday issue, the paper&rsquo;s last after 168 years of publication. The run of five million copies was expected to sell out.        

The paper&rsquo;s closing also meant the loss of jobs for 280 reporters, editors and other employees. While some of them had hopes of being rehired for a publication said to be planned by News International, the Murdoch subsidiary in Britain &mdash; a new Sunday edition of The Sun, Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s mass-circulation daily paper &mdash; the mood as they prepared to send the final edition to press was one that mixed pride over the paper&rsquo;s history of revealing some of the most lurid scandals in British life with bitterness at becoming sacrificial lambs.        

&ldquo;We feel like we have paid the price for a small group of people who are no longer at the paper,&rdquo; Jamie Lyons, the deputy political editor, said in a Twitter post. He said that his colleagues were &ldquo;appalled and disgusted&rdquo; by the phone-hacking that brought the paper low, but added a defiant note. &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go out with a bang,&rdquo; he said.        

Colin Myler, the paper&rsquo;s editor and a former editor of the New York Post, struck a similar note in a staff memo. Calling The News of the World &ldquo;the greatest newspaper in the world,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s try to make the most of this historic day.&rdquo;        

The scandal that has erupted over the paper&rsquo;s practices has shaken Britain in ways that few could have imagined only a week ago. Revelations in recent days have rocked the $30-billion-a-year Murdoch empire, but also British politics and one of the country&rsquo;s most iconic institutions, the police establishment at Scotland Yard.        

Prime Minister David Cameron and the opposition leader, Ed Miliband, have been battling for the high ground in the affair, which both appear to have identified as crucial to the electoral prospects of the Conservative and Labour Parties. The two have sparred bitterly over Andy Coulson, the former News of the World editor who was the Cameron government&rsquo;s media chief until he resigned this year. He underwent nine hours of questioning by the police after being arrested on Friday.        

On Saturday, their dispute spread to the two public inquiries Mr. Cameron has said he will set up to look into the scandal, one led by a judge to investigate the &ldquo;abysmal&rdquo; failures of the police to effectively investigate the phone-hacking over the years, another to examine journalism ethics in Britain. In a letter to Mr. Cameron, a Labour official, Ivan Lewis, demanded &ldquo;immediate discussions&rdquo; on which judge would lead the police inquiry.        

Mr. Cameron has said the inquiry must proceed cautiously to avoid prejudicing any criminal proceedings against Murdoch employees, but his spokesman said it would be appointed &ldquo;as rapidly as possible and legally permissible.&rdquo;        

Attempts to contain the scandal by News International, the Murdoch subsidiary that dominates the British media with its newspaper and television holdings, have so far proved largely fruitless despite the announcement on Thursday by James Murdoch, the subsidiary&rsquo;s chairman and Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s son, that The News of the World would close. The paper has been feared and admired in equal proportions for decades.        

Much of the criticism has focused on Rebekah Brooks, News International&rsquo;s chief executive, a former editor of The News of the World, and until recent days a celebrated friend of many of the most powerful people in the country, including Mr. Cameron. She has held steadfastly to her job, saying that Mr. Murdoch, the founder and chief of News Corporation, had rejected her offer to leave. She said that she knew nothing of the phone-hacking at The News of the World, some of which occurred on her watch, and condemned the practice. But many commentators believe her presence could jeopardize News International&rsquo;s $12 billion bid to take full control of British Sky Broadcasting, Britain&rsquo;s most lucrative cable television network.        

On Saturday, Mr. Murdoch was quoted by Reuters as saying that he would interrupt his vacation in Idaho to come to Britain either late Saturday or Sunday, but that Ms. Brooks had his complete support. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not throwing innocent people under the bus,&rdquo; he said.        
