
LONDON &mdash; In 2004, Clare Short, a Labour member of Parliament, learned what could happen to British politicians who criticized the country&rsquo;s unforgiving tabloids. At a lunch in Westminster, Ms. Short mentioned in passing that she did not care for the photographs of saucy, topless women that appear every day on Page 3 of the populist tabloid The Sun, owned by Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s News Corporation. &ldquo;I&rsquo;d like to take the pornography out of our press,&rdquo; she said.        

Big mistake.        

&ldquo;&nbsp;&lsquo;Fat, Jealous&rsquo; Clare Brands Page 3 Porn&rdquo; was The Sun&rsquo;s headline in response. Its editor, Rebekah Wade (now Rebekah Brooks and the chief executive of News International, Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s British subsidiary), sent a busload of semi-dressed models to jeer at Ms. Short at her house in Birmingham. The paper stuck a photograph of Ms. Short&rsquo;s head over the body of a topless woman and found a number of people to declare that, in fact, they thoroughly enjoyed the sexy photos.        

&ldquo;Even Clare has boobs, but obviously she&rsquo;s not proud of them like we are of ours,&rdquo; it quoted a 22-year-old named Nicola McLean as saying.        

It is the fear of incidents like this, along with political necessity, that has long underpinned the uneasy collusion between British politicians and even the lowest-end tabloids here.        

However much they might deplore tabloid methods and articles &mdash; the photographers lurking in the bushes; the reporters in disguise entrapping subjects into sexual indiscretion or financial malfeasance; the editors paying tens of thousands of dollars for exclusive access to the mistresses of politicians and sports stars; the hidden taping devices; the constant stream of stories about illicit sex romps &mdash; politicians have often been afraid to say so publicly, for fear of losing the papers&rsquo; support or finding themselves the target of their wrath.        

If showering politicians with political rewards for cultivating his support has been the carrot in the Murdoch equation, then punishing them for speaking out has generally been the stick. But the latest revelations in the phone-hacking scandal appear to have broken the spell, emboldening even Murdoch allies like Prime Minister David Cameron to criticize his organization and convene a commission to examine press regulation.        

The power to harass and intimidate is hardly limited to the Murdoch newspapers; British tabloids are all guilty to some extent of using their power to discredit those who cross them, politicians and analysts say.        

&ldquo;The tabloid press in Britain is very powerful, and it&rsquo;s also exceedingly aggressive, and it&rsquo;s not just News Corp.; The Mail is very aggressive,&rdquo; said John Whittingdale, a Conservative member of Parliament who is chairman of the Culture, Media and Sport Committee. &ldquo;They do make or break reputations, so obviously politicians tread warily.&rdquo;        

Those who do not pay a price. Cherie Blair, wife of former Prime Minister Tony Blair, was regularly tortured in print by the right-leaning Daily Mail because she made no effort to cultivate it and because it was not an admirer of her husband&rsquo;s Labour government. In a stream of articles, The Mail portrayed her as greedy, profligate and a follower of wacky alternative-medicine regimes, selecting unflattering photos to make her look chunky and ill-dressed, her mouth invariably curled in a strange rictus.        

But politicians have always been most afraid of the sting of The Sun and its Sunday sister (at least until this Sunday, when it is to close), The News of the World, because the papers&rsquo; good will is so important politically.        

&ldquo;They go on little feeding frenzies against various politicians,&rdquo; said Roy Greenslade, a professor of journalism at City University London. Until the floodgates opened on Wednesday, when the outrage over the latest phone-hacking revelations had politicians voicing disgust in a cathartic parliamentary session, most members of Parliament were terrified of crossing Mr. Murdoch, Professor Greenslade said.        

&ldquo;Privately, M.P.&rsquo;s say all sorts of things, but most of them have kept very, very quiet about Rupert Murdoch until now,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;When you are facing the wrath of News International, you can bet they will turn up anything about you &mdash; whether it be true or just spun in a certain way.&rdquo;        

Labour politicians still shudder about the fate of Neil Kinnock, the party leader in the early 1990s, who was leading the Conservative Party&rsquo;s John Major in the 1992 election when The Sun mounted a sustained attack on him. The reasons were political &mdash; the paper supported the Conservative Party &mdash; but the means were personal. Mr. Kinnock was the subject of a barrage of articles depicting him as inept, long-winded, strange looking, and even mentally unstable.        

The day before the election, The Sun printed a package of articles under the headline &ldquo;Nightmare on Kinnock Street.&rdquo; It printed a picture of a fat topless woman and the warning, &ldquo;Here&rsquo;s How Page 3 Will Look Under Kinnock!&rdquo; And, in an image he would never live down, the paper printed a large front-page photograph of Mr. Kinnock&rsquo;s head inside a light bulb, under the headline: &ldquo;If Kinnock Wins Today Will the Last Person to Leave Britain Please Turn Out the Lights.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
The attacks have not been limited to Labour politicians. David Mellor, a Conservative member of Parliament who served in several Tory governments, had a different sort of bad experience. In 1989, Mr. Mellor declared that the tabloids were reckless, too powerful and in need of more regulation; they were, he warned, &ldquo;drinking at the last-chance saloon.&rdquo;        

But he was the one at that particular bar. And Mr. Mellor, who returned to the anti-tabloid theme three years later, ended up leaving the government after a series of racy tabloid expos&eacute;s about his personal indiscretions. In the most famous one, The News of the World paid about $48,000 for his mistress&rsquo;s account of their affair, complete with secret recordings and the indelible detail that Mr. Mellor had made love to her while wearing only a Chelsea soccer jersey. (He always said that part was not true.)        

Sometimes it is just the threat of harassment that frightens politicians.        

&ldquo;I can think of at least two members of Parliament who could have been criticizing Murdoch five years ago, and said nothing because they were afraid,&rdquo; said Chris Bryant, a Labour member of Parliament who serves on the Culture, Media and Sport Committee and who has been a persistent critic of Mr. Murdoch.        

It was Mr. Bryant who, at a hearing on press standards in 2003, asked Ms. Brooks, then editor of The Sun, whether she had ever paid the police for information. She was seriously displeased with the tough tone of his questions; so were other tabloid editors who spoke at the hearing.        

A few months later, Mr. Bryant was the subject of an article in The Mail on Sunday, illustrated by a photo of him in his underpants that he had posted on a gay dating site. (He does not make a secret of his sexuality.) The News of the World also printed the story, copying the account.        

After Mr. Bryant spoke last fall in Parliament against tabloid tactics, he said a friend received telephone calls from two Murdoch underlings. &ldquo;They told him, &lsquo;You know Chris Bryant? Just let him know that this will not be forgotten,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Bryant related.        

A spokeswoman for News International said the company had no comment for this article.        

Mr. Bryant received a stranger form of threat, he said, when he ran into Ms. Brooks at a News International party at a Labour conference.        

&ldquo;She said, &lsquo;Oh, Mr. Bryant, it&rsquo;s after dark &mdash; surely you should be on Clapham Common,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; a notorious gay cruising spot, Mr. Bryant related. He said she was not trying to be funny.        

On Wednesday, Mr. Bryant led the debate in Parliament about phone hacking. &ldquo;We politicians, I believe, have colluded far too long with the media,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We rely on them. We seek their favor. We live, we die politically because of what they write and what they show, and sometimes that means we are not courageous or spineful enough to stand up when wrong has occurred.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This is a remarkable turnaround,&rdquo; Professor Greenslade said, speaking of attitudes toward Mr. Murdoch. &ldquo;All these years, he&rsquo;s been a tycoon, a media mogul &mdash; and now it&rsquo;s as if he&rsquo;s suddenly become Citizen Kane.&rdquo;        
