
BEIJING &mdash; The United States&rsquo; top military officer met with Chinese officials in Beijing on Sunday, in the first such trip in more than four years and a sign of revival in what has for years been a stagnant military relationship between the two powers.        

The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Mike Mullen, held talks with his Chinese counterpart, Gen. Chen Bingde, the chief of the general staff of the People&rsquo;s Liberation Army, and senior Chinese government officials. Admiral Mullen&rsquo;s visit follows a similar trip by General Chen to the United States in May.        

Ties between the two militaries have been improving since January&rsquo;s summit meeting in Washington between President Hu Jintao and President Obama. The Chinese had suspended relations with the Pentagon for much of 2010 to protest American arms sales to Taiwan and a January 2010 visit to the White House by the Dalai Lama.        

But Admiral Mullen&rsquo;s visit comes as tensions between the two militaries are threatening to rise once more, this time over China&rsquo;s claim to virtually all the South China Sea. The Philippines, Vietnam, Indonesia, Malaysia and Brunei also claim parts of the sea, which is believed to hold valuable oil and mineral deposits beneath the seabed.        

Vietnam conducted live-fire naval drills last month after Chinese vessels severed an exploration cable of a Vietnamese ship that was searching for oil deposits in a disputed area. Admiral Mullen arrived in Beijing almost two weeks after the United States Navy held joint drills with the Philippines, and as the United States conducted what it called a low-level exercise with Japanese and Australian warships off the Brunei coast.        

For its part, China last month sharply criticized the Senate for unanimously approving a resolution that condemned what it called China&rsquo;s use of force against other nations&rsquo; ships in the area.        

In a meeting Sunday with journalists, Admiral Mullen said repeatedly that the United States alliances with Pacific nations and its naval presence in the region were &ldquo;enduring&rdquo; and that they posed no threat to China. &ldquo;History is replete with peaceful resolutions of these kinds of conflicts, as well as those that are resolved and not resolved, quite frankly, that turn into miscalculations and conflict,&rdquo; he said of the territorial claims. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s certainly what we all seek to avoid.&rdquo;        

Admiral Mullen said that his visit to Beijing, following a January trip to Beijing by Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates, marked the beginning of a military relationship between the two sides, a telling illustration of the fitful and deeply suspicious nature of past relations.        

His Beijing trip in many ways repeats the March 2007 visit by his predecessor on the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Peter Pace. General Pace called on the two sides to build trust, and praised the start of low-level joint operations like search-and-rescue missions. He later observed a Chinese land-combat exercise outside Beijing and was given a firsthand look at the Chinese Air Force&rsquo;s top combat fighter jet.        

Admiral Mullen made the same points on Sunday. On Tuesday he flies to Shandong and Zhejiang Provinces, on China&rsquo;s Pacific Coast, to visit two People&rsquo;s Liberation Army bases. The state-run Xinhua news service reported that they house branches of the Second Artillery Corps, the P.L.A.&rsquo;s strategic missile force.        

Admiral Mullen is also expected to meet with Xi Jinping, China&rsquo;s vice president and the apparent successor to President Hu in the Communist Party&rsquo;s planned changeover of top leaders scheduled for 2012.        
