
JERUSALEM &mdash; Israel is to submit a claim to the United Nations in the next few days demarcating its maritime boundary with Lebanon, officials here said Sunday, amid a dispute between the countries over an area of the Mediterranean Sea that is potentially rich with energy resources.        

The Israeli cabinet approved a map of the Israeli-proposed line on Sunday. &ldquo;This boundary will delineate the area in which the state enjoys exclusive economic rights, including the right to exploit the sea&rsquo;s natural resources,&rdquo; Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told his cabinet. &ldquo;Our goal,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;is to determine Israel&rsquo;s position regarding its maritime border, in keeping with the principles of international maritime law.&rdquo;        

Israel&rsquo;s line stakes out more territory for itself than one that Lebanon drew and submitted to the United Nations a few months ago. Mr. Netanyahu said that the boundary drawn by the Lebanese conflicted with the line that Israel had agreed upon with Cyprus and, more significantly, with the line that Lebanon itself had agreed upon with Cyprus in 2007.        

Since Israel recently confirmed the existence of a major natural gas field off its northern coast, drawing a maritime boundary with Lebanon has become a matter of some urgency.        

Officials here have said that the gas discovery could turn Israel into an energy exporter, a surprising turnaround for a country with a long history of dependence on foreign energy in a largely hostile region.        

Noble Energy, a company based in Houston that is working with several Israeli partner companies, said that the field, named Leviathan, has at least 16 trillion cubic feet of gas, at a likely market value of tens of billions of dollars. Last year, the United States Geological Survey estimated that more than 120 trillion cubic feet of recoverable gas reserves lie beneath the waters of the Eastern Mediterranean, most of it within Israeli territory.        

But the windfall has spurred Lebanon to auction undersea energy exploration rights and to draw its own maritime boundaries, worsening tensions between the countries, which have no diplomatic relations. Both have warned against interference with drilling in what they consider their own territory. Some Israelis believe that Lebanon&rsquo;s motives are mainly economic, while others fear that the Lebanese government may be seeking a new territorial justification for continued conflict with Israel. In particular, there is concern that Hezbollah, the influential Lebanese Shiite militant organization, could exploit a maritime dispute to launch rocket attacks against Israeli gas fields.        

There is still no agreed-upon land border between Israel and Lebanon, though both sides are committed to a cease-fire along the so-called Blue Line, a technical boundary demarcated by the United Nations after Israel&rsquo;s withdrawal from South Lebanon in 2000. The lack of an established land border complicates the drawing up of maritime limits.        

The Lebanese are said to have begun explorations in the contested area of the Mediterranean. Israeli officials said that international law allowed for such exploration, but not for exploitation of resources from disputed areas.        
