
BERLIN &mdash; In a turn of events worthy of a spy novel, the German government said Monday that it had begun an investigation into reports that classified blueprints for its new billion-dollar foreign intelligence headquarters had been stolen.        

Chancellor Angela Merkel&rsquo;s spokesman, Steffen Seibert, said the intelligence agency had established a commission working under &ldquo;high pressure&rdquo; to look into whether plans for its new headquarters in Berlin had been taken and, if so, how far-reaching the security breach had been.        

&ldquo;The government is keenly interested in clarifying the situation quickly,&rdquo; Mr. Seibert said, adding that it took the matter &ldquo;very seriously.&rdquo;        

The weekly news magazine Focus first reported that the classified building plans had been stolen, including those for the technical and logistics center that a former high-ranking official at the agency called the &ldquo;beating heart&rdquo; of the complex. According to the magazine, the plans included &ldquo;the exact function of every single room, the thickness of each wall, the exact position of every toilet and every emergency exit and every security checkpoint.&rdquo;        

Wolfgang Bosbach, a leading member of Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s party, told the newspaper Saarbr&uuml;cker Zeitung that it was &ldquo;embarrassing to the highest degree that a secret service of all things would have secret documents stolen.&rdquo; It is also an embarrassment for Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s government, which already was coping with severe criticism over the leaked news of a secret agreement to send 200 tanks to Saudi Arabia.        

The German public television station ARD reported that the theft had taken place more than a year ago from the supposedly secure construction site and that the blueprints may have been taken on a USB stick. The core of the building may have to be redesigned as a result, ARD reported.        

The government currently estimates the construction costs for the headquarters at $1.2 billion. With associated moving costs the total rises to about $2 billion. The building will be 2.8 million square feet and house 4,000 workers.        

The newspaper Die Zeit had called it &ldquo;the most expensive and secret building&rdquo; in the country, though only the former remains a certainty at this point.        

Since its creation in 1956, the headquarters of the foreign intelligence service, known by the initials BND, has been in Pullach, a small town near Munich.        

The decision to move the headquarters was made in 2003, after the government re-evaluated its security priorities in light of the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. The construction site, near Berlin&rsquo;s central train station, sits behind a nine-foot-tall fence. Signs warn against using cameras and cellphones and inform passers-by that they are being filmed.        

Sabine Holder, who works in assisted-living apartments across Chausseestrasse from the site, called the reported theft &ldquo;laughable.&rdquo; The gigantic complex is &ldquo;a symbol of strength when the money could be far better spent,&rdquo; Ms. Holder said as she entered the subway.        

It was another theft that preoccupied her, however, as the building blotted out her former view of the sky from work. &ldquo;It stole our sunset,&rdquo; she said.        
Stefan Pauly contributed reporting.
