
PARIS &mdash; An audio message attributed to Osama bin Laden warned Friday that the fate of French hostages held by Islamic militants would hinge on the withdrawal of French forces from Afghanistan. In response, the French government promptly reaffirmed its commitment to the military mission there.        

&ldquo;We are determined to pursue our action in favor of the Afghan people, with our allies,&rdquo; Bernard Valero, the Foreign Ministry spokesman, told reporters. About 3,750 French soldiers are stationed in Afghanistan.        

The voice on the recording, identified as that of Mr. bin Laden, did not refer to specific French hostages. At least seven French citizens are being held in North Africa and Afghanistan by Islamic militants.        

The warning on the recording was blunt. &ldquo;President Nicolas Sarkozy&rsquo;s refusal to remove his forces from Afghanistan is nothing but a green light for killing the French hostages,&rdquo; a voice said in the recording, broadcast Friday on Al Jazeera. &ldquo;We repeat the same message to you: the release of your prisoners in the hands of our brothers is linked to the withdrawal of your soldiers from our country.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The size of your debts and the weakness of your budget will not allow you to open a new front,&rdquo; the message added mockingly.        

Mr. Valero said the French authorities were in the process of authenticating the recording. Mr. bin Laden made similar threats against France in a recording released in October, also condemning the country&rsquo;s law banning the wearing of facial veils in public.        

Five French citizens kidnapped in northern Niger in September are being held by members of Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, the terrorist group&rsquo;s North African affiliate. French officials say they believe that the hostages have been moved to northeastern Mali.        

Two French television journalists have also been held by Afghan Taliban fighters since December 2009, after being abducted in Kapisa Province.        

This month, two young French men were seized by armed men in Niamey, the capital of Niger. The two were found dead after a rescue attempt by Nigerois and French forces. Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb has claimed responsibility for the kidnapping.        

In July, the group said it had executed a 78-year-old French aid worker kidnapped in Niger after a failed rescue attempt.        
