
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Ahmed Wali Karzai, the powerful half brother of Afghanistan&rsquo;s president, was assassinated Tuesday, removing from the political scene a divisive power broker who was accused of corruption and alienated the American military, but whose connections and ruthlessness made him a critical force in volatile southern Afghanistan.        

Go to Timeline

The death of Mr. Karzai, who effectively ruled much of the country&rsquo;s southern tier from Kandahar, sent tremors through the country&rsquo;s political establishment and raised questions about whether tenuous security gains made by the influx of American forces in the south could hold.        

Mr. Karzai was shot to death by a police official, Sardar Muhammad, a longtime confidant, who was immediately killed by Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s bodyguards, Afghan officials said. Mr. Muhammad&rsquo;s body was later hung above a busy Kandahar street. His motives were not known; the Taliban claimed responsibility for the killing, but there was no evidence that Mr. Muhammad, a member of the Karzais&rsquo; Populzai tribe, had ties to the insurgency.        

The immediate implications of Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s death for the American-led war against the Taliban and the withdrawal of American troops beginning this month were uncertain. Many in the region warned that the Taliban, as well as competitors for Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s position, would try to take advantage of the power vacuum and that without him the hard-earned security gains made by American and Afghan troops over the past year could erode.        

American military commanders have long argued that Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s reputation for blatant self-dealing undercut support for the government among many Afghans, and some wondered on Tuesday whether his death might make room for a leader with greater integrity.        

But those commanders had clashed with Central Intelligence Agency officers who had long paid Mr. Karzai for information and other services and saw him as a crucial broker of intelligence and influence. Mr. Karzai identified Taliban fighters for attack by American forces, recruited Afghan men for a NATO-allied &ldquo;Kandahar Strike Force,&rdquo; and even rented space to the agency in the city, officials said.        

In a sense, contradictory American attitudes toward Mr. Karzai have reflected the evolving American war strategy. When the United States was trying to win over the population with a counterinsurgency strategy, the corruption he symbolized was an insurmountable obstacle. But as the Obama administration has gradually embraced a more limited counterterrorism policy &mdash; killing Taliban fighters and moving toward political negotiations &mdash; Mr. Karzai became an indispensable, if never fully trustworthy, ally.        

&ldquo;We viewed him as more of an enemy of our enemy than as a friend,&rdquo; said Bill Harris, who until last November served as the senior American diplomat in Kandahar.        

&ldquo;The fact is, we made common cause with A.W.K. during the last fighting season to run the Taliban out of Kandahar, and we should make no apologies for that,&rdquo; Mr. Harris said, using the government&rsquo;s shorthand for Ahmed Wali Karzai. &ldquo;His death will only complicate an already complicated situation.&rdquo;        

One American official on Tuesday lamented the &ldquo;huge power vacuum&rdquo; left by the assassination. &ldquo;Do we care more about security and fighting the Taliban, or about drugs and corruption?&rdquo; said the official, who would discuss the internal debate only on the condition of anonymity. &ldquo;I think that most people would agree that taking on the Taliban is our top priority, and Ahmed Wali Karzai helped us with that.&rdquo;        

Mohammed Naim Hamidzai Lalai, the chairman of the Afghan Parliament&rsquo;s internal security committee and a Kandahari, said, &ldquo;His presence in Kandahar was like a backbone for the security of the province.&rdquo;        

The president, Hamid Karzai, held a news conference in Kabul with President Nicolas Sarkozy of France barely two hours after the shooting, speaking in a steady but somber voice as he confirmed the death of his half brother.        
Alissa J. Rubin reported from Kabul, and Scott Shane from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Carlotta Gall, Jack Healy, Abdul Waheed Wafa and Sangar Rahimi from Kabul; Eric Schmitt and Mark Mazzetti from Washington; and Andrew W. Lehren from New York.
