
GAZA &mdash; Several dozen Palestinians confronted France&rsquo;s foreign minister as she entered Gaza from Israel on Friday, throwing eggs and shouting angry slogans at her armored motorcade over a comment falsely attributed to her about an Israeli soldier being held in captivity here since 2006.        

The minister, Mich&egrave;le Alliot-Marie, had met in Jerusalem on Thursday with the parents of the abducted soldier, Staff Sgt. Gilad Shalit, after which a statement by Sergeant Shalit&rsquo;s father accusing the captors of a war crime was misreported as hers.        

The protesters were bused to the Erez crossing point by Waed, a Hamas-affiliated group focused on freeing Palestinian prisoners in Israel, and they intercepted the motorcade as it entered Gaza. Eventually, the Hamas police dispersed the protesters at the crossing, but they then followed the motorcade to a United Nations building and later to a hospital that France is helping rebuild from damage sustained during Israel&rsquo;s three-week war here two years ago. At one point, Ms. Alliot-Marie was nearly hit in the head with a shoe as she ducked into her heavily armored Jeep. A member of her entourage received an injury that required an examination later at an Israeli hospital.        

In keeping with European Union policy, Ms. Alliot-Marie did not meet with any Hamas officials during her visit. At the French Cultural Center, the last stop of the Gaza visit, she called on Israel to lift its blockade of Gaza, saying it had increased poverty and fed violence.        

A Foreign Ministry spokesman, Bernard Valero, told reporters in Paris that France &ldquo;strongly supports the Gazan population,&rdquo; and that the protests were based on &ldquo;an erroneous attribution to Mich&egrave;le Alliot-Marie, for remarks she never made.&rdquo;        

The trip was Ms. Alliot-Marie&rsquo;s first to the region as foreign minister, having just taken up the post from her predecessor, Bernard Kouchner.        

Last summer, Israel eased the blockade on Gaza imposed in 2007 to isolate Hamas, and agreed to a limited number of construction projects, like the rebuilding of the French-sponsored Al Quds Hospital. But the Gazan economy remains virtually frozen. Negotiations to exchange the captured Israeli soldier for hundreds of Palestinians held by Israel have broken down numerous times over the years.        
Maïa de la Baume contributed reporting from Paris.
