
The News Corporation moved on Tuesday to reverse the accelerating drop in its stock price, announcing a program to repurchase $5 billion in shares.        

Since last week, when a phone-hacking scandal involving one of the company&rsquo;s British tabloids was revealed to be far more widespread than previously known, the company&rsquo;s stock lost about 15 percent of its value. Investors, nervous that the widening controversy would imperil the company&rsquo;s bid to acquire the parts of British Sky Broadcasting, or BSkyB, that it does not already own, have dumped shares over the last several days.        

The announcement of the stock repurchase had only a fleeting positive effect on the News Corporation&rsquo;s share price. While the price rose early in the day, it closed at $15.35, down almost 1 percent. The News Corporation had $11.8 billion in cash and cash equivalents as of the end of March, money that it had planned to put toward the purchase of BSkyB, a satellite company. It already owns just under 40 percent of BSkyB but last year it bid for the remainder. The deal is a centerpiece of the its efforts to expand.        

[On Wednesday, the News Corporation announced it was withdrawing its&nbsp;$12 billion bid, just hours before Britain's Parliament was to approve a cross-party call that it do so.]        

The drop in share price has brought new attention to the management of the company. The News Corporation is already facing an amended shareholder lawsuit from some institutional investors that alleges it should have known about the phone hacking at the tabloid, The News of the World, at the time it happened and failed to take action.        

Alan Gould, a managing director with Evercore Partners, a research firm, said the repurchase would probably benefit the News Corporation as it weathers a rough period. &ldquo;Returning cash to shareholders is almost always a good idea, especially when the stock has been hit as much as News Corp. has and appears as cheap as News Corp. is,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a good use of cash.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gould noted that it was somewhat of an irregular move for Rupert Murdoch, the chairman and controlling shareholder in News Corporation, but that the company could well afford it. &ldquo;Given News Corp.&rsquo;s capital position, shareholders have almost been crying out for a share repurchase program. But historically, Rupert Murdoch has not been a big fan of share buybacks.&rdquo;        

On Monday, the News Corporation withdrew its intention to spin off BSkyB&rsquo;s 24-hour Sky News Channel, a move that automatically led to a more lengthy regulatory review process.        

The deal has appeared in increasing jeopardy. Members of the British government urged Mr. Murdoch to withdraw his bid. Nick Clegg, the deputy prime minister, said Monday that Mr. Murdoch should &ldquo;do the decent and sensible thing, and reconsider&rdquo; his efforts to buy the rest of BSkyB. Mr. Clegg&rsquo;s remarks helped send the News Corporation&rsquo;s shares tumbling almost 8 percent on Monday.        
