
KAZAN, Russia &mdash; Prosecutors in Russia opened a broad investigation into the river transport industry Tuesday after a tour boat sank and as many as 128 people drowned, including dozens of children trapped in a playroom.        

After recovering bodies from other areas of the ship, divers entered the circular cabin on a lower deck in the stern, called the music room, where the children were located, and began bringing their bodies to the surface.        

At a dockside ceremony in this city east of Moscow that was closest to the site of the sinking, relatives of the dead threw red carnations and inflatable children&rsquo;s toys into the Volga River, while all the riverboats at the dock sounded their horns in a long, mournful blast.        

Tuesday was declared a day of mourning in Russia, and flags on the riverboats flew at half-mast.        

The authorities seemed to focus their attention broadly, looking at riverboat captains, the owner of the vessel, the tour operator that chartered the boat and sold tickets for the cruise, and the poor state of the river cruise ships in general.        

Summer river cruises are a beloved pastime in Russia, but the fleet has deteriorated badly since Soviet times. &ldquo;We have far too many old ships sailing our waters,&rdquo; President Dmitri A. Medvedev said on Monday, calling them &ldquo;tubs.&rdquo;        

Police on Tuesday arrested the director of Argorechtur, the tour company that organized the outing, and a senior riverboat inspector who had signed off on the vessel, the Bulgaria, as seaworthy just last month.        

Criminal investigations were also opened Tuesday into the boat&rsquo;s owner and the captains of two cargo boats, the Arbat and Dunaisky-66, which passed survivors in the water without stopping.        

These captains could be criminally prosecuted, Igor Levitin, the minister of transport, said on state television. Yet the captain of the boat that did stop to pick up survivors deflected blame from his colleagues, telling a television interviewer that he had waved away an approaching vessel because his was better equipped to retrieve the survivors.        

Try as they might, some commentators said, it may ultimately be impossible for Russia&rsquo;s leaders to shift the blame away from the state. &ldquo;The &lsquo;old tub&rsquo; is our entire state,&rdquo; said Vladimir Varfolomeyev, deputy editor at the radio station Ekho Moskvy, on his blog. &ldquo;Poorly controlled, despite the notorious power vertical, it&rsquo;s thoroughly rotten, and therefore allows for operation of these leaky washtubs.&rdquo;        

While the boat that sank was 56 years old, the Transport Ministry said Tuesday that more than 100 passenger boats in Russia were older. But age is less a determining factor in the boats&rsquo; safety than is maintenance, which is notoriously poor, many here said in interviews.        

Before the sinking on Sunday, little was done to hold owners to account, Dmitri A. Platonov, the captain of a river patrol boat that carries maritime inspectors, conceded in an interview. Owners can delay ostensibly mandatory repairs in negotiations with inspectors, he said.        

&ldquo;That happens,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Just look at the Bulgaria.&rdquo; One of the Bulgaria&rsquo;s engines was broken, the boat intended for 140 passengers and the crew was overloaded with 208 people, and it listed even at the dock. &ldquo;They talk, they make deals with the inspectors, they look the other way at some things,&rdquo; Mr. Platonov said with a shrug, speaking of the vessels&rsquo; owners.        

Indeed, sinkings have reached epidemic proportions on the Volga in recent years. The newspaper Novaya Gazeta reported last year that 2,300 sunken boats and barges clutter the bottom of the Volga River, more than a thousand of them in just the past three years. Most are old cargo vessels and barges that sank or were illegally scuttled by owners and are now navigation hazards.        

With the breakdown of the Soviet system, maintenance for older vessels became increasingly difficult, said a mechanic who worked on the Bulgaria last winter. &ldquo;All the parts were Soviet,&rdquo; Vladislav Andreyev, a mechanic at a shipyard in Perm, told Life News, an Internet news site, explaining that replacement parts were no longer available.        

&ldquo;They hadn&rsquo;t been changed, and we repaired them. How should I say it? Say a part doesn&rsquo;t work. We take it out, take it to the shop, fix it up and then put it back in. That&rsquo;s how it went this year,&rdquo; he said.        

Among the additional, undocumented passengers were children who were put on board with their parents without tickets, local television in Kazan reported Tuesday. The children were ushered into the music room during a rainstorm, while many of the parents remained on upper decks and survived.        

While blame was passed around Tuesday, one participant in an Internet forum said the Bulgaria&rsquo;s captain, Aleksandr Ostrovsky, who died in the wreck, bore ultimate responsibility. Mr. Ostrovsky decided to set sail despite a storm warning and the listing boat. &ldquo;Only the Volga River water will wash away his sin,&rdquo; the post said.        
