
MUMBAI, India &mdash; Three explosions ripped through Mumbai at the height of the evening rush on Wednesday, killing at least 17 people in what Indian officials called a coordinated terrorist attack on the country&rsquo;s economic capital.        

The bombs struck central locations in the city, including the crowded Dadar neighborhood; Zaveri Bazaar, a popular jewelry market; and near the Opera House, according to India&rsquo;s Home Ministry, which said 141 people had been injured.        

The attack was the first in Mumbai since terrorists from Pakistan mounted a large-scale assault on hotels, a train station and a Jewish community center in November 2008, killing more than 160 people. Those attacks prompted India to break off peace talks with Pakistan, although that dialogue has since been resumed and a high profile meeting is scheduled for later this month.        

No group claimed responsibility for the bombings on Wednesday. Palaniappan Chidambaram, the home minister of India, said at a news conference in New Delhi that investigation teams had been sent to the sites of the explosions and that Mumbai had been put on high alert.        

A senior American law enforcement official said that early indications pointed to India-based militants, not to Lashkar-e-Taiba, a militant group in Pakistan. But the official cautioned that the investigation was still in its very early stages and that it was premature to make any firm conclusions about what group carried out the bombings. The police described the bombs as improvised explosive devices.        

&ldquo;This is an attack on the heart of India,&rdquo; Prithviraj Chavan, the chief minister of Maharashtra State, where Mumbai is located, told NDTV, a private television station.        

Bhavesh Bhansali, a diamond wholesaler, was leaving his office near the Opera House when he heard a loud blast. Rushing to the site, which is in a narrow, busy street, he said he encountered a bloody scene of dismembered bodies. Mr. Bhansali, who said he knew several of those killed, said the timing and location of the explosion suggested a &ldquo;very well thought-out conspiracy.&rdquo;        

Sidewalks in the Dadar neighborhood were littered with shattered glass as crowds entering a nearby train station jostled to gawk. The explosive device in Dadar appeared to have been hidden in an electrical box near a bus station, officials said. Another device, at Zaveri Bazaar, was hidden in an umbrella, police officials said.        

The device near the Opera House exploded just before 7 p.m. A fourth explosive device was found in Mumbai, but it did not detonate.        

The Zaveri Bazaar jewelry market has been bombed at least twice before, including an explosion in 2003 that killed at least two dozen people. In July 2006, seven coordinated bombs on Mumbai&rsquo;s commuter trains killed more than 200 people.        

The police in Mumbai have been bracing for trouble for months. In December, police officials said that several men suspected of belonging to Lashkar-e-Taiba had entered the country; Indian and American officials have said the group carried out the terrorist attacks in November 2008.        

In February, in the city of Pune, 100 miles east of Mumbai, a bomb exploded in a popular bakery, killing 17 people and injuring 60. Indian officials have said that attack was the work of terrorists affiliated with Ilyas Kashmiri, a Pakistani militant commander.        

Mr. Chavan said the city and the state were much better prepared to deal with the violence on Wednesday than they had been during the 2008 attacks, when it took police officers and commandos nearly three days to regain control. The city has increased security at train stations, hotels and other public spaces. But it would be difficult to secure public places of the kind that were attacked on Wednesday in a city with a population of more than 12 million people.        

&ldquo;I have appealed to the people of Mumbai to maintain calm and peace,&rdquo; Mr. Chavan said.        

In a statement, Pakistan condemned the attack, saying that Pakistani leaders &ldquo;expressed their deepest sympathies to the Indian leadership&rdquo; on the loss of life in Mumbai. President Obama in a statement called the bombings &ldquo;outrageous&rdquo; and said the United States would stand with the Indian people.        

The meeting later this month between the two South Asian neighbors is scheduled to include the foreign ministers of India and Pakistan. It is part of a continuing dialogue between the nuclear-armed nations, which have fought several wars with each other over a disputed border. In recent months, both sides have been trying to improve the relationship through a series of &ldquo;confidence-building measures&rdquo; like releasing war prisoners and relaxing trade rules.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton will visit India next week, and security and terrorism are likely to be prominent on her agenda.        
Vikas Bajaj reported from Mumbai, and J. David Goodman from New York. Lydia Polgreen contributed reporting from New Delhi.
