
BEIJING &mdash; Ai Weiwei, the Chinese artist and recently imprisoned dissident, said Wednesday that he had agreed to become a visiting lecturer at the Berlin University of the Arts in 2012, but that he did not know whether China&rsquo;s government would allow him to leave the country to work there.        

He said he was concerned about how the Chinese authorities would react to the offer because &ldquo;it shows strong support for my moral position.&rdquo;        

Caught up in China&rsquo;s broad crackdown on political dissension after the revolutions in the Middle East and North Africa this year, Mr. Ai was detained by state security officials in April, held incommunicado this spring and later charged with tax evasion. A hearing on his case is to be held on Thursday in Beijing.        

Normally a voluble critic of political and social mores, he emerged from confinement last month noticeably thinner and quieter. The rules of his release technically prohibit him from leaving China for one year without permission from the authorities.        

The president of the Berlin University of the Arts, Martin Rennert, said he was optimistic that Mr. Ai would be allowed to take up the post.        

&ldquo;We of course also interpret the acceptance as a positive signal as far as his present situation is concerned, and are confident that Ai Weiwei will start working at our university in the near future,&rdquo; Mr. Rennert said in a statement posted on the university&rsquo;s Web site.        

News of Mr. Ai&rsquo;s appointment, first reported by The Associated Press, came as another prominent Chinese dissident, the writer Liao Yiwu, appeared in Berlin after secretly fleeing China. Mr. Liao, who declared himself &ldquo;ecstatic&rdquo; at his newfound freedom, was imprisoned and tortured in the 1990s, apparently for writing poems that deplored the violent suppression of student demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in 1989.        

Mr. Ai also has ties to Germany. One of his more provocative installations, a collection of 5,000 student backpacks hung on the wall of the Haus der Kunst, an art museum in Munich, in 2009, took aim at the shoddy construction of Sichuan Province schools that collapsed in a 2008 earthquake, killing thousands of children.        

On Wednesday, he said that the lecturing position in Berlin had been in the works for some time, &ldquo;but I never really made my mind up&rdquo; until recently. He said that he had not discussed the post with the Chinese government or sought permission to travel abroad.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think there&rsquo;s any reason to stop me&rdquo; from leaving China to teach, he said, &ldquo;but it&rsquo;s really unpredictable.&rdquo;        

In a telephone interview on Wednesday evening, Mr. Ai said he did not know whether the government would allow him to return should he leave. &ldquo;I have no idea. I cannot predict,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I think that would be a tragedy.&rdquo;        
Nicholas Kulish contributed reporting from Berlin.
