
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; At midday, the glare and dust obscures Afghanistan&rsquo;s horizon in what seems a metaphor for the position of the Afghan president as political and economic crises mount on every front: it is increasingly hard to see how he will find his way.        

The death of President Hamid Karzai&rsquo;s half brother, who was shot by a police commander on Tuesday, was only the latest in a series of blows to the stability of the government as the United States and Afghanistan&rsquo;s other international backers have made it clear they want to reduce their commitments here.        

Without his brother, who gave the president the assurance that he could count on the political and economic backing of at least a quarter of the country &mdash; the south &mdash; Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s government appears increasingly adrift.        

&ldquo;The situation is very difficult for him,&rdquo; said Ahmad Wali Massoud, the former Afghan ambassador to Britain who lost his own brother, Ahmed Shah Massoud, in a suicide bombing in 2001. &ldquo;His brother&rsquo;s killing is not just a political matter, but a personal and family blow as well.&rdquo;        

Often a critic of President Karzai, Mr. Massoud struck a more empathetic tone on Wednesday, a day when the president buried his half brother, Ahmed Wali Karzai, noting that the president faced many serious problems.        

In Parliament, many members are talking openly about impeaching Mr. Karzai, who wants to dismiss a quarter of the assembly&rsquo;s members over allegations that they gained their seats through electoral fraud. Their deadlock with Mr. Karzai has meant that he has not been able to form a full cabinet for nearly 18 months.        

The banking system is such a shambles that the International Monetary Fund has refused to extend its program here and the lack of one has meant the loss of at least $70 million in aid. More is likely to be lost this summer and fall; another Afghan bank appears to be mired in fraud and is likely to need a cash infusion.        

Meanwhile, efforts to reconcile with the insurgency are barely moving, and Pakistan is firing artillery rounds over the border, even as it professes to support a peace plan between Afghanistan and Taliban insurgents, many of whom live in the Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal areas.        

The Pakistani bombardment is said to be an effort to repel Taliban insurgents who have taken refuge in Afghanistan. However, it is widely believed that the Pakistanis are trying to make the point that the Afghan government is weak and cannot protect its own borders and should look to Pakistan, not the Americans, for support.        

In this case, President Karzai has seemed clear: he has resisted calls from Afghan nationalists to fight back, since Afghanistan cannot win a fight with Pakistan.        

The troubles facing him, like the Pakistani artillery fire, are not all of his making, but some are, and he appears increasingly isolated and overwhelmed.        

&ldquo;He is under enormous pressure,&rdquo; said a knowledgeable businessman here, who did not want to be named because he feared retribution for his analysis. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s dealing with six or seven crises and on none is he really prevailing and on every single one he is creating new enemies.&rdquo;        

Confronted at a news conference on July 6, Mr. Karzai played down the seriousness of the country&rsquo;s troubles. &ldquo;Afghanistan has to go through these problems,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;These are maturity problems. As a child grows and grows teeth, he gets a fever; when his bones grow he feels pain. These all are signs of maturity. We should not worry about it.&rdquo;        

But the severity of the symptoms has become alarming. The problems with Parliament verge on a constitutional crisis and are in many ways self-inflicted. Mr. Karzai has struggled to address complaints of fraud from losing candidates &mdash; many of them his supporters &mdash; after the 2010 parliamentary elections, which the country&rsquo;s international backers and its election commission agreed were flawed but fair enough.        

His solution &mdash; to set up a special court to adjudicate the complaints &mdash; has satisfied no one. Three weeks ago the court ruled that 62 members of Parliament should be replaced with candidates whose electoral defeat had been certified.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Parliament has refused to recognize the court or its order, and a majority decided to fight the president and began talking about impeachment. Although that option is unlikely, the mere discussion of it was a measure of the enmity between the president and Afghan lawmakers.        

Mr. Karzai now risks either infuriating members of Parliament by allowing the court to force them out or infuriating the losing candidates, who have come to believe that they should be in office.        

&ldquo;When he set up the special court I don&rsquo;t think he thought about how the situation might turn out,&rdquo; said Fazal Ahmad Manawi, the chairman of the Independent Election Commission.        

Mr. Manawi offered the president a way out last week: he offered to have the commission examine the cases of the losing candidates and determine whether there was fraud that needed to be reviewed by the attorney general&rsquo;s office. The president did not accept that approach and the fight goes on.        

On the financial front, too, there are few signs of immediate relief. The I.M.F. is demanding greater scrutiny of the banking system as well as a more legally binding way to ensure that borrowers with loans from Kabul Bank, the nation&rsquo;s largest bank, will pay back the bank, which was found to have nearly $900 million in losses.        

The president and his close associates want to draw a line, fearing that if they look too closely, the whole financial system may collapse, said several Afghan and Western officials.        

&ldquo;But if you need to audit two banks, you audit two,&rdquo; said a Western official here, who is familiar with the situation. &ldquo;If three, you audit three. You need to look at the health of the whole system.&rdquo;        

In the meantime, Afghanistan is without an I.M.F. program and has lost at least $70 million because some of the money in the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, administered by the World Bank, can be doled out only if there is a working I.M.F. program.        

As the problems mount, NATO&rsquo;s military commanders and civilian officials express cautious optimism that there will be &ldquo;Afghan solutions.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Afghans have shown innovation and the capacity to overcome crises,&rdquo; said Vygaudas Usackas, the European Union&rsquo;s ambassador here. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m hopeful it will bring a new pattern of political culture &mdash; instead of fighting each other, finding a political solution.&rdquo;        

However, other analysts are far more doubtful and say that NATO lacks a strategy to handle the increasingly treacherous landscape. &ldquo;There is no plan,&rdquo; said Thomas Ruttig, a co-director of the Kabul-based Afghanistan Analysts Network, a research group.        

&ldquo;What we have is a public relations strategy &mdash; &lsquo;Everything is improving; it&rsquo;s hard but we&rsquo;re making progress,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Ruttig said, quoting Western officials here. &ldquo;But for the president, the picture is gloomy. For Afghanistan, the picture is gloomy.&rdquo;        
