
Public criticism of the News Corporation&rsquo;s conduct in the British hacking scandal has crossed the ocean as half a dozen members of Congress this week urged the United States government to investigate possible misconduct, including violations of a law that guards against foreign corruption.        

In a letter on Wednesday, Representative Peter T. King, Republican of New York, pressed the F.B.I. to investigate whether journalists working for News Corporation newspapers tried to obtain phone records of victims of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, as one British newspaper claimed, citing anonymous sources.        

Mr. King was the first Republican to call for an investigation into the company&rsquo;s activities. The News Corporation&rsquo;s chief executive, Rupert Murdoch, is a longtime supporter of conservative causes and Republican politicians.        

Several of the other lawmakers who spoke out this week have been publicly critical of the News Corporation in the past. The first to issue a statement, Senator John D. Rockefeller IV, Democrat of West Virginia, said Tuesday that the United States government should hold investigations to &ldquo;ensure that Americans have not had their privacy violated.&rdquo;        

He was joined on Wednesday by senators like Robert Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey, who asked the Justice Department to investigate the claims involving 9/11 victims. Mr. Menendez said in his letter that the &ldquo;large scope&rdquo; of the hacking in Britain made it &ldquo;imperative to investigate whether victims in the United States have been affected as well.&rdquo;        

New Jersey&rsquo;s other senator, Frank R. Lautenberg, suggested Wednesday that both the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission should examine the case and consider starting a formal investigation. Mr. Lautenberg referred to news media reports that journalists &ldquo;paid London police officers for information, including private telephone information, about the British royal family and other individuals for use in newspaper articles.&rdquo;        

Because the News Corporation is based in the United States, such payments may have violated the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which forbids payments to foreign officials. Citing the act&rsquo;s accounting rules, he added, &ldquo;If indeed bribes were made and were not properly recorded, this too may be a violation of law.&rdquo;        

Several of the lawmakers echoed what Mr. Lautenberg asserted: that &ldquo;further investigation may reveal that current reports only scratch the surface of the problem at News Corporation.&rdquo;        

Asked about Mr. Lautenberg&rsquo;s letter, Mary Schapiro, the chairwoman of the S.E.C., said, &ldquo;We will look at it very carefully, as we do all Congressional correspondence.&rdquo;        

Some legal experts cast doubt that the government would pursue a legal case against News Corporation. Ellen S. Podgor, a law professor at the Stetson University College of Law and a regular contributor to a blog about the anticorruption act, said that initiating an investigation against the company &ldquo;would be like entering a minefield.&rdquo; She said prosecutors would weigh the First Amendment issues involved and the fact that other statutes covered the conduct in Britain &ldquo;where they allegedly occurred.&rdquo;        

Several civic and public interest groups, including some that have been longtime opponents of Mr. Murdoch, have set up petitions and proposed Congressional hearings into the company&rsquo;s conduct.        
Floyd Norris contributed reporting.
