
MOSCOW &mdash; More than a year after an adopted-child abandonment scandal led Russian officials to threaten a ban on adoptions of Russian children by Americans, the United States and Russia have reached an agreement that will allow such adoptions to proceed under heightened scrutiny.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and her Russian counterpart, Foreign Minister Sergei V. Lavrov, signed the accord at a ceremony in Washington on Wednesday, and officials from both sides expressed hope that it would end the animosity and suspicion that had plagued the adoption issue for years.        

&ldquo;We take very seriously the safety and security of children that are adopted by American parents, and this agreement provides new important safeguards to protect them,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said. &ldquo;It also increases transparency for all parties involved in the adoption process.&rdquo;        

Russian officials have long demanded greater oversight of American adoptions.        

Russia is one of the largest sources of adopted foreign children in the United States, with more than 50,000 adopted by American families since 1991. While the vast majority have been successful, both sides have acknowledged some cases in which adopted children died from abuse in American homes.        

The issue reached a crisis in April 2010, when a 7-year-old boy named Artyom arrived alone at a Moscow airport on a commercial jetliner from the United States. He had been sent back from Tennessee by his adoptive mother, who said she could not handle what she described in a note she sent with him as his severe emotional problems.        

The Russian government threatened to halt adoptions, and although it never did, adoption agencies said their work was significantly slowed amid heightened scrutiny by officials.        

&ldquo;After every one of these incidents the screws tighten a little further,&rdquo; said Marina V. Amirkhanova, the Russian representative of Home Studies and Adoption Placement Services, an American adoption agency.        

From a peak of 5,862 in 2004, adoptions of Russian children by Americans fell to 1,079 last year, according to State Department statistics.        

The new agreement will give the Russian government the authority to approve which adoption agencies operate in the country, and will provide mechanisms for improving the monitoring of families after adoptions, the State Department said in a statement. Prospective parents will now be screened more thoroughly and be better informed about children&rsquo;s medical histories and upbringing.        

Mr. Lavrov suggested that Russian negotiators had encountered difficulties with American adoption laws, which differ from state to state; in Russia, adoption is federally regulated. He did not discuss points of disagreement, but the government-run Ria Novosti news agency said that laws in some states granting same-sex couples the right to adopt were a particular sticking point. Russian officials insisted that same-sex couples not be allowed to adopt Russian children.        

The Russian Parliament must ratify the agreement, and is expected to do so.        

Despite the agreement, the issue of international adoption will continue to be contentious here in Russia, experts said. Many Russians find it difficult to acknowledge that their country can no longer take care of all its children.        

Social upheaval and economic travails in the aftermath of the Soviet collapse have disrupted Russian families, leaving the country with more orphans now than at the end of World War II, officials say.        

Thousands languish in Russian orphanages. While many of these institutions have improved markedly in recent years, most of their inhabitants remain trapped in them. Few Russian families are willing to adopt, and large government subsidies to orphanages keep the system entrenched.        

Adoption by foreigners, particularly Americans, has been like a &ldquo;giant rescue operation,&rdquo; said Boris L. Altshuler, director of Children&rsquo;s Rights, an advocacy group in Moscow.        

&ldquo;I am very happy that this was signed,&rdquo; Mr. Altshuler said, referring to the adoption accord. &ldquo;For children who remain in Russian orphanages because of the difficulties of international adoption, this has been a calamity &mdash; it is a crime committed by us all.&rdquo;        
