
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; A suicide bomber killed five French soldiers guarding a meeting between NATO officers and Afghan tribal elders on Wednesday morning northeast of the capital, one of the bloodiest days for French troops in Afghanistan.        

The deaths, confirmed in a statement from President Nicolas Sarkozy of France, occurred just one day after he visited Kabul and announced that France would withdraw 1,000 of its approximately 4,000 troops from Afghanistan by the end of 2012.        

The suicide attack came as the President Hamid Karzai and other Afghan leaders converged in southern Afghanistan for the funeral of the president&rsquo;s powerful half brother, Ahmed Wali Karzai, a power broker and sometimes nettlesome ally of the American military who was assassinated by a close associate on Tuesday morning.        

As television channels broadcast emotional scenes from the funeral, Afghanistan&rsquo;s political class remained gripped by questions of how Ahmed Wali Karzai&rsquo;s death might affect the president&rsquo;s fortunes, and whether it would undermine security gains in the southern Kandahar Province.        

The governor of neighboring Helmand Province, Mohammad Gulab Mangal, survived a roadside bombing on Wednesday morning as he drove through Kandahar&rsquo;s Miawand district, on his way to the funeral, a spokesman for the governor said. Two of his bodyguards were lightly wounded.        

The attack against the French soldiers took place in a village in the Tagab District of Kapisa Province, which borders Kabul Province to the northeast and is home to many of the French troops in Afghanistan.        

According to the district&rsquo;s police chief, Pacha Gul, the French soldiers, local leaders and tribal elders had gathered to discuss potential road projects, new dams, bridges and other development projects that are important elements of the military&rsquo;s attempts to build goodwill among Afghans and restore the country&rsquo;s shattered infrastructure.        

Mr. Gul said the meeting had ended and a group of soldiers were standing together and chatting with Afghans at about 11:20 a.m. when the suicide bomber walked up and detonated his explosives.        

One Afghan civilian was also killed in the blast. Four French soldiers and three Afghan civilians were wounded.        

The toll, the worst for France since 2008, could amplify calls to speed the withdrawal.        

&ldquo;This new tragedy shows the urgency of having a precise and concerted plan for withdrawing our troops from Afghanistan,&rdquo; the head of the Socialist Party, Martine Aubry, said in a statement posted on Le Monde&rsquo;s Web site. &ldquo;In the absence of political stability, the coalition&rsquo;s military presence seriously exposes our soldiers, with no prospect of a solution.&rdquo;        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting.
