
GA&rsquo;A, Libya &mdash; Five months after the armed uprising erupted in Libya, a new round of portable antiaircraft missiles &mdash; weapons that governments fear could be obtained by terrorists and then fired at civilian jetliners &mdash; have been slipping from storage bunkers captured by rebels.        

In February, in the early stages of the uprising, large numbers of the missiles slipped from the hands of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s government as the rebels established control over eastern Libya and the ammunition depots there. The leakage resumed recently with rebel gains here in the western mountains, which opened up new ammunition stores.        

The new leakage of the missiles, which are of the same type that officials in other African nations have said have already been trafficked over Libya&rsquo;s borders, underscores the organizational weakness of the forces opposed to Colonel Qaddafi; it also raises concerns that if more Qaddafi depots fall to the rebels, then further stocks of the weapons could become accessible to black markets.        

Signs of the diversion are readily visible here, at an ammunition depot captured late last month from the Qaddafi forces after repeated NATO bombings.        

On a recent day, 43 emptied wooden crates &mdash; long, thin and painted in dark green &mdash; had been left behind on the sand inside the entrance. The boxes had not been there during a visit to the same spot a few days before, and the weapons were gone.        

The stenciled markings showed each crate had contained a pair of lightweight missiles called SA-7s &mdash; early Soviet versions of the same class of weapon as the better known American-made Stingers, which were used by Afghan fighters against the Soviets in Afghanistan. It was not clear who had taken them. The rebel guards variously blamed Qaddafi forces and misinformed opposition fighters.        

During more than four decades in power, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s often bellicose government is thought to have acquired as many as 20,000 of these missiles, known as Manpads, for Man-Portable Air-Defense Systems, in arms deals with the former Eastern bloc.        

Many are assumed to remain in the Qaddafi military&rsquo;s custody, American officials say, and others have been fired in the conflict, meaning that the number loose is most likely much smaller than the original stock.        

There has been no publicly available evidence that Libya&rsquo;s rebels are directly involved in missile trafficking. Rebel leaders say that if their fighters have taken any missiles, they meant to use them in battle, and that they say they suspect soldiers in the Qaddafi military of selling and smuggling these kinds of arms.        

But American officials and Western security analysts say there are grave worries that once the weapons inherited by rebels have been made accessible and reach unsupervised hands, opportunistic smugglers can match them to potential buyers.        

In a telephone interview, Andrew J. Shapiro, assistant secretary of state for political-military affairs, described the unsecured missiles in Libya as &ldquo;one of the things that keep me up at night.&rdquo;        

Two other American officials, speaking anonymously so as not to upset diplomatic relations with the rebels, said that after the initial leakage of the SA-7s the American government repeatedly asked the National Transitional Council, the de facto rebel authority, to collect and secure the missiles and to prevent more missiles from getting loose.        

When the depot here at Ga&rsquo;a fell, however, those requests appeared to have had little effect. &ldquo;The rebels came from all over the western mountains, and they just took what they wanted,&rdquo; said Riyad, a supervisor of the ruined arsenal&rsquo;s small contingent of rebel guards.        

The United States is giving $1.5 million to two international organizations &mdash; the Mines Advisory Group from Britain and the Swiss Foundation for Mine Action &mdash; that it hopes can help secure the stockpiles and prevent more missiles from slipping out.        

Last month, Washington also sent an interagency team to four nations near or bordering Libya &mdash; Algeria, Chad, Mali and Niger &mdash; to talk with those countries about border security and identifying the missiles should they cross, Mr. Shapiro said. Visits to other countries are planned.        
(Page 2 of 2)
The president of Chad and officials in Algeria have been quoted since the war began as saying that Manpads diverted from Libya have traveled over their borders to Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, which operates in North Africa. Neither Chad nor Algeria has publicly offered evidence for the claims, and Mr. Shapiro declined to comment on the matter.        

Mr. Shapiro also said the State Department is seeking more funds for the effort &mdash; first another $1.5 million, then possibly more.        

As the operation gains traction, the ammunition bunkers here in western Libya &mdash; whether intact or shattered by NATO &mdash; have been extensively scavenged, just as bunkers were in the country&rsquo;s east. And there are signs of fresh missile diversion.        

Inside the depot, two more emptied SA-7 cases were visible beside a ransacked bunker. A 15-minute drive from the depot entrance, at a place where several men were sipping tea by the road, two intact SA-7s were visible in a wooden crate. The weapons were complete and appeared to be in good condition.        

A man eagerly demonstrated how to assemble the three components &mdash; grip stock, missile tube and battery/cooling unit. During another visit by two journalists, someone in the desert outside the&nbsp;depot fired one of the missiles into the air.        

Rebel guards and officers offered insights into factors that allowed such weapons to end up on the side of the road in this way &mdash; including rebels who know little of weapons, undisciplined forces and inadequate security.        

On the day Ga&rsquo;a was captured, rebels and local men were seen carrying away crates of SA-7s, even though &mdash; given that the only aircraft over the battlefields are from NATO &mdash; they did not need them for the fighting.        

The rebel military said that this diversion was the ordinary confusion of an untrained force made up of civilians, many of whom assumed the missiles could be useful in a ground war. &ldquo;They think, &lsquo;I have this missile and I will not use it against aircraft, I will use it against a tank,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said Col. Juma Ibrahim, a rebel military spokesman. Another officer said rebels are not allowed to bring any missile that can be used against planes to the front lines. &ldquo;Our fighters are forbidden from using them,&rdquo; said Col. Mukhtar Farnana, the rebel military commander in western Libya.        

But the rebel leadership has apparently taken few steps to collect the missiles its fighters carried away from Ga&rsquo;a or to prevent more of them from leaking. And no one could explain the newly emptied Manpad crates in the sand.        

The crates were in a pile that suggested that scavenging crews had cherry-picked the missiles from the ample collection of munitions inside the depot, removed them from their cases and loaded them on trucks.        

Officially, the depot is closed to the public. Only rebels approved by the rebel military leadership are given access to the site.        

But three visits to the depot in the past 10 days found many people roaming its ruined grounds, including, the guards said, people they allowed to take empty wooden crates for use as firewood or as storage containers in their homes.        

When trucks departed with crates, the drivers sometimes honking horns, the guards did not check to see if the crates were empty, or search some of the trucks at all.        
