
ROME &mdash; Even as the Italian Senate rushed through approval of a deficit-cutting austerity package on Thursday to fend off a sovereign debt crisis, doubts were growing about the staying power of the government of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi.        

The bill, which passed in a confidence vote by 161 to 135, 
 moves to the lower house for final approval on Friday, where it is all but certain to pass. What happens afterward is far less clear.        

The center-left opposition has been stepping up calls for Mr. Berlusconi to resign after the vote and floating the idea of a 
 transitional government followed by early elections to be held long before Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s mandate is up in 2013. 
        

On Thursday, Italy&rsquo;s borrowing rates rose to record levels in a bond sale, putting more pressure on Mr. Berlusconi, who has uncharacteristically kept out of the public eye since bond spreads rose after he disparaged the finance minister, Giulio Tremonti, in a newspaper interview last week.        

Though Italy&rsquo;s sovereign debt is hefty, around 120 percent of gross domestic product, and its economy is stuck in neutral, the market&rsquo;s jitters also stem from the country&rsquo;s political instability and rising fears of contagion from Greece and other debt-ridden euro zone countries. The tensions between Mr. Berlusconi and Mr. Tremonti, whom he has seen as a rival and repeatedly attacked as a traitor in newspapers owned by the Berlusconi family, are nothing new. But the intense international attention on Italy&rsquo;s political circus is. Apparently responding to the new investor awareness, Parliament rushed to pass the austerity bill after attacks by speculators. The center-left opposition voted against the bill, saying it unfairly asked Italians to bear the brunt of the Berlusconi government&rsquo;s mistakes. But it said it would not present any obstructionist amendments.        

On Thursday, Italy sold five-year bonds at auction, but yields were at the highest level in three years &mdash; 4.93 percent, up from 3.9 percent &mdash; showing that some investors remained nervous about the sovereign debt crisis spreading across Europe.        

In an effort to keep the crisis at bay, the Finance Ministry increased the four-year austerity package to $68 billion from $57 billion this week.        

The package aims to reduce Italy&rsquo;s budget deficit to 2.3 percent by 2014 from the current 4.6 percent through a combination of tax increases, cuts to local and regional governments, an increase in fees for public health care, cuts to some high-level pensions, and a raise in the retirement age.        

Mr. Tremonti, who remains the face of fiscal rigor in Italy despite being embroiled in a worsening scandal involving a close adviser accused of corruption, addressed the Senate ahead of Thursday&rsquo;s vote.        

He called the attacks on the euro by speculators &mdash; and the lack of a clear solution to the Greek sovereign debt crisis &mdash; a European problem. &ldquo;No one should have any illusions of individual salvation,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Just like on the Titanic, not even the first-class passengers will be saved,&rdquo; he added, an implicit warning to wealthier euro zone countries.        

Yet to some analysts, it was the Berlusconi government itself that eventually might not survive the storm.        

Beyond the euro zone crisis, the Berlusconi government is embroiled in a variety of corruption scandals. Prosecutors in Palermo want to try the agriculture minister for Mafia ties, and prosecutors are investigating what they say is a Masonic lodge with ties to high-ranking members of the government.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a sense that Berlusconi is an obstacle for the credibility of Italy and that the country needs a new government, a more authoritative government,&rdquo; said Stefano Folli, a columnist for the daily Il Sole 24 Ore. &ldquo;But how to do it technically, no one knows.&rdquo;        

Indeed, Mr. Berlusconi has shown no signs of wanting to step down, and his government still has a majority in Parliament. There are signs of mini-revolts inside his own party, but none has gathered enough momentum or credibility to bring the government down in a confidence vote.        

Pierluigi Bersani, the leader of the center-left opposition Democratic Party, has reiterated his call for Mr. Berlusconi to step down after the austerity package is passed. On Thursday, Massimo D&rsquo;Alema, a former prime minister and a center-left power broker, told Il Sole 24 Ore that the Democratic Party was willing to support a transitional government aimed at weathering the financial crisis.        
Julia Werdigier contributed reporting from London.
