
LONDON &mdash; Facing the unpleasant prospect of being represented by a pair of empty chairs and a period of silence at a parliamentary committee hearing on phone hacking next week, Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of the News Corporation, and his son James reversed themselves on Thursday and said that yes, they would testify at the hearing after all.        

The select committee on culture, media and sport will now have the chance to interrogate not only the two Murdochs but also Rebekah Brooks, chief executive of News International, the company&rsquo;s British newspaper subsidiary. Ms. Brooks had agreed from the outset to testify.        

Word that the Murdochs had shifted course came as one of several other moves by the News Corporation on Thursday that signaled the company was adopting a more assertive strategy to deflect the condemnation being hurled its way. It brought on outside public relations help for the crisis, hired a prominent white-collar defense lawyer and was said to be planning to run full-page apology advertisements in newspapers across Britain.        

The elder Mr. Murdoch made his first extended comments on the matter, phoning a reporter at The Wall Street Journal, which he owns, to defend his company&rsquo;s handling of the crisis. He said the matter had been handled &ldquo;extremely well in every way possible,&rdquo; and rejected claims that his son James had moved too slowly to address concerns about the hacking.        

He added that he was eager &ldquo;to address some of the things that have been said in Parliament, some of which are total lies,&rdquo; and said reports that the News Corporation was contemplating spinning off its newspapers into a separate entity were &ldquo;pure rubbish.&rdquo;        

Meanwhile, the company&rsquo;s woes increased on Thursday when yet another former senior editor of its tabloid The News of the World, now defunct, Neil Wallis, became the ninth person since January to be arrested in the phone-hacking scandal. Mr. Wallis also appears to have unusually close ties to top officers at the Metropolitan Police Service, and worked for them as a public relations consultant last year.        

Next Tuesday&rsquo;s meeting will be the first time the Murdochs and Ms. Brooks will have to publicly answer questions about the affair. With evidence mounting by the day of criminality and dubious journalistic practices at The News of the World and other News Corporation newspapers here, the company not only has summarily closed the paper, but  also has withdrawn its $12 billion bid for British Sky Broadcasting.        

In response to earlier letters from the culture committee, Rupert Murdoch at first announced he was &ldquo;not available&rdquo; to attend the hearing, while James Murdoch said that next week would not work for him, either, but that he would be available sometime in August, if that was convenient for everyone else.        

Not convenient, the angry committee retorted. Using only rarely invoked powers, the committee&rsquo;s chairman, John Whittingdale, responded by ordering that the Murdochs be presented with formal summonses to appear.        

Mr. Whittingdale, a Conservative member of Parliament, also declared that he was fully prepared to &ldquo;empty-chair&rdquo; the Murdochs by holding their portion of the hearing without them, using two chairs as stand-ins. After waiting a while for them to turn up, he said, he then planned to ask that they be declared in contempt of Parliament.        

Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s hasty U-turn reflects the company&rsquo;s confusion in handling the crisis and a sense that its chairman has been unable to properly judge the public mood. By cooperating with the committee, people close to Mr. Murdoch believe, he can demonstrate that he is taking the scandal seriously.        

The public relations firm Edelman confirmed on Thursday that it had been hired here by News International to provide &ldquo;communications and public affairs support and counsel,&rdquo; another sign that the company was trying to develop a better strategy to help it navigate the crisis. News International also flew staff members from Rubenstein Associates, the powerful New York public relations firm that already advises Mr. Murdoch, to London to help out.        

The criminal lawyer they hired, Brendan V. Sullivan Jr. of Williams & Connolly in Washington, has defended Richard A. Grasso, the former chief of the New York Stock Exchange, and Oliver North.        

Mr. Wallis&rsquo;s arrest, while bad news for the company, is also doubly worrying for the Metropolitan Police Service. The police are already under attack for failing to adequately pursue the phone-hacking inquiry in 2006, and again for failing to reopen the investigation in light of new evidence in 2009. While Mr. Wallis is not the most important figure yet to be arrested &mdash; that would be Andy Coulson, a former editor of The News of the World who until January was Prime Minister David Cameron&rsquo;s chief spokesman &mdash; he is close to Scotland Yard.        

After leaving The News of the World in 2009, Mr. Wallis became a media consultant, whereupon he was immediately hired to &ldquo;provide strategic communication advice&rdquo; to Scotland Yard officials from October 2009 to September 2010, according to a police spokesman. His firm offered the lowest rate, the spokesman said, explaining how he got the job.        

But his ties to the police went back longer. In September 2006, one month after The News of the World&rsquo;s royal correspondent, Clive Goodman, was arrested on suspicion of phone hacking and the paper Mr. Wallis worked for was supposedly under investigation, Mr. Wallis had dinner with Sir Paul Stephenson, then Scotland Yard&rsquo;s deputy commissioner, and Dick Fedorcio, its chief spokesman.        

Sir Paul, now the police commissioner, said on Thursday that he was &ldquo;very satisfied with my own integrity.&rdquo;        

More recently, Assistant Commissioner John Yates, another top police official, told a parliamentary committee in March that he could not remember exactly when he last had lunch with Mr. Wallis, but that it &ldquo;may well&rdquo; have been in February.        

A police spokesman said he did not know the precise date of this engagement. But if it was indeed in February, that meant that it took place after the police had already opened Operation Weeting, the investigation into phone hacking under which Mr. Wallis has now been arrested.        

Late Thursday, London&rsquo;s mayor, Boris Johnson, summoned Sir Paul to City Hall for a stern lecture about his decision to hire Mr. Wallis in 2009, local news outlets reported, and Mr. Johnson said he would press for a full investigation.        

Meanwhile, the House of Commons&rsquo; culture committee is gearing up for its confrontation with the Murdochs and Ms. Brooks at next week&rsquo;s hearing. Judging from the outraged remarks lawmakers have been making about the News Corporation and its officers in raucous, angry sessions in Parliament the last few days, it is not likely to be a friendly discussion.        

But it is unclear how much the trio will say, in the end. In a letter to Mr. Whittingdale in which she agreed to testify, Ms. Brooks declared that it &ldquo;might not be appropriate&rdquo; to answer questions about the police investigation for fear of prejudicing it.        

&ldquo;As a result this may prevent me from discussing these matters in detail,&rdquo; she said.        

Mr. Whittingdale said in response: &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll see.&rdquo;        
Reporting was contributed by Don Van Natta Jr., Ravi Somaiya and Jo Becker from London, and Jeremy W. Peters from New York.
