
          

TUNIS &mdash; The powerful Tunisian trade union squared off against the interim government on Friday as thousands of protesters demanding the complete eradication of the old ruling party stormed into the streets.        

The demonstrations, the biggest since the huge protests a week ago that pushed out Tunisia&rsquo;s dictator, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, demanded the breakup of the old ruling party&rsquo;s continued domination of the interim government that replaced him. The union, which withdrew its four members of the interim cabinet in protest a few days ago, called a general strike for Saturday in an effort to achieve the same goal.        

Mouldi Jendoubi, the union&rsquo;s second-ranking leader, said in an interview that his organization had helped turn out workers for this week&rsquo;s continued wave of protests. &ldquo;We want the resignation of the whole government to form a new government,&rdquo; he said.        

But he acknowledged that Friday&rsquo;s crowds were far bigger and more diverse than the trade union alone could muster. Waves of marchers &mdash; students as well as workers, male and female, a few in Muslim scarves or beards &mdash; poured through the narrow corridors of the old city to surround the prime minister&rsquo;s office, chanting that the people would rise up until the government collapsed.        

Slogans like &ldquo;Long live the revolution&rdquo; and &ldquo;Death to the dictatorship&rdquo; were spray-painted on the walls, and demonstrators hurled insults at top cabinet officials. &ldquo;Coward,&rdquo; they called the interior minister.        

But the police and soldiers stood by without interfering, letting the crowd vent some of the anger pent up under 23 years of Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s authoritarian rule.        

After five resignations this week, the cabinet has appeared to hold together. The interim prime minister, Mohamed Ghannouchi, previously Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s right-hand man, appears to hope he can outlast the protests. The trade union, with about half a million members in a country of more than 10 million, has a history of political protests dating to the fight against the French colonial power here. Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s government had co-opted the group, requiring loyalty from its top officials, and it initially only followed the youth-led protests that pushed Mr. Ben Ali from office, joining demands for more jobs and economic development.        

But in recent weeks the union broke free of its government ties. Members leaped to the barricades to demand Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s resignation, and they have stayed in the streets demanding the eradication of his party.        

Now the union is the biggest institutional force still pushing for the breakup of the interim government. The small, legally recognized opposition parties are represented in the cabinet, and the outlawed Islamist movement here is only beginning to reconstitute itself.        

Opposition leaders in the new government said they feared a collapse that could invite a military takeover. But Mr. Jendoubi said he was not worried. &ldquo;The Tunisian Army is from the people and for the people,&rdquo; he said, noting that Mr. Ben Ali had risen through the bureaucracy and interior ministry rather than at the head of a military coup.        

On their way to the protests, some Tunisians stopped to enjoy the first fruits of their new government. A crowd gathered outside a bookstore window to gawk at previously banned books, including Islamist tracts and a scathing biography of the former first lady, Leila Trabelsi. Cafe patrons listened, rapt, to news reports of the revolt from the pan-Arab network Al Jazeera, which had been banned from such public sites. Tunisian state television mixed official announcements with talk shows with opposition leaders and angry person-on-the-street interviews.        

At Friday Prayer services in Tunis mosques, where imams had previously preached only government-approved sermons and dutifully included prayers for the state, many hailed as a martyr the vegetable peddler whose suicide kicked off the protests.        

&ldquo;It was the best Friday Prayer in 23 years,&rdquo; one man said, leaving a mosque in central Tunis.        
