
MOSCOW &mdash; In what appeared to be a calculated pre-election appearance, Prime Minster Vladimir V. Putin on Friday reflected on his 11 years in power and acknowledged that elements of the system he created needed to change.        

Mr. Putin, meeting with factory workers in Magnitogorsk, an industrial town in the Ural Mountains, said that authority in Russia had become too concentrated and that some leaders had become ineffective and &ldquo;calcified.&rdquo;        

He even admitted a moment of regret over what may be his most famous comment &mdash; saying of Chechen terrorists in 1999, &ldquo;we will waste them in the outhouse.&rdquo;        

But with a presidential election looming in March &mdash; and little indication of whether he or President Dmitri A. Medvedev will run &mdash; Mr. Putin did not suggest that he was thinking of stepping aside. Indeed, he seemed to be sketching a portrait of himself as a leader: salty, maybe a little bit crude, but ultimately in tune with the Russian people.        

When an engineer asked what qualities he should teach his son so that he could become president, Mr. Putin said, &ldquo;Decency.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Of course knowledge is important and professionalism and the ability to build relationships with people,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But without that basic quality, nothing is possible.&rdquo;        

Mr. Putin&rsquo;s appearance in the workshop of a large metals factory had all the trappings of a campaign event. And many of his remarks, along with the questions from workers, seemed tailored to present Mr. Putin as a tentative reformer.        

&ldquo;Stability is not the same as stagnation,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It does not mean that we should not develop, that we should not implement innovative methods in administering the economy. In political life, it does not mean that we should stop the processes of democratization.&rdquo;        

Mr. Putin suggested that United Russia, the party he heads, had become too comfortable in its position as Russia&rsquo;s dominant political organization, and he offered as a counterforce the All-Russia People&rsquo;s Front, a new political entity, though one that he created.        

His vow of support for decentralizing authority in Russia came only after a lengthy defense of his decision to do away with the election of governors, instead making them presidential appointees.        

After elections, he said, &ldquo;these half-criminal elements show up, stuffing their pockets with money and manipulating society and the elected governors.&rdquo;        

And even though he said he regretted his outhouse comment at the time, he said that a friend, along with a supportive taxi driver, ultimately convinced him that he had been right to say it.        

Asked by a worker to name a defining moment in his life, Mr. Putin described his decision to go to war with rebels in Chechnya in 1999. &ldquo;I could have sat around sucking on snot waiting for elections,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But it was clear, to me at least, that if we did not act consistently and toughly the country would collapse.&rdquo;        

Mr. Putin said nothing explicit about the presidential election next year. He and Mr. Medvedev have said they will decide who will run, but most people assume that Mr. Putin, still Russia&rsquo;s paramount leader, will make the final decision.        

&ldquo;I have always been able to make decisions, so far at least, based upon what my heart says is necessary,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And strange as it may seem, each time, and unexpectedly for me, things have turned out positively.&rdquo;        
