
ISTANBUL &mdash; The United States formally recognized the rebel leadership in Libya as the country&rsquo;s legitimate government on Friday, allowing the rebel government access to $30 billion in Libyan assets held in the United States. It is not yet clear how and when the money would be released.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said at an international gathering held to discuss the Libyan conflict that Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s government no longer had any legitimacy, and that the United States would join more than 30 countries in extending diplomatic recognition to the main opposition group, known as the Transitional National Council.        

&ldquo;We will help the T.N.C. sustain its commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Libya,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said, &ldquo;and we will look to it to remain steadfast in its commitment to human rights and fundamental freedoms.&rdquo; The decision by Washington not only increased diplomatic pressure on Colonel Qaddafi to step down, but also held the prospect of funneling money to rebels to propel an offensive that has proceeded in fits and starts.        

American officials explained Saturday that the vast bulk of the roughly $30 billion of Libyan assets frozen by the United States was not liquid, since much of it consists of property. About $3.5 billion of the sum is liquid, the officials said, and could be provided to the Transitional National Council over time.        

Although the officials expressed hope that the newly recognized Transitional National Council would use the money for traditional public services &mdash; to pay for health care and electrical power, for example &mdash; one of the council&rsquo;s immediate priorities is arming and training its fighters so they can finally defeat the forces loyal to Colonel Qaddafi.        

But even a major increase in financing for the rebel war effort is not expected to yield immediate results on the battlefield, according to senior officials involved in the NATO-led air campaign against Colonel Qaddafi. The rebels are severely lacking in training as well as equipment, and NATO has been frustrated by the rebels&rsquo; inability to organize themselves into a force strong enough to topple the government, even with thousands of airstrikes on Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s strongholds.        

With a &ldquo;no boots on the ground&rdquo; policy in Libya, Western nations have found it hard to dislodge Colonel Qaddafi from power, as his forces have dug in around the capital, Tripoli, and other strategic cities where he retains at least some support among the civilian populations. Possibly reflecting their frustrations, several countries, including Britain and France, have sent arms, ammunition and other military supplies to the rebels in an effort to accelerate the development of their war-fighting capacity.        

While the opening of the money spigots holds out some hope that the rebels can eventually turn the military tide against Colonel Qaddafi, it has also raised concerns about controls on the money and the potential for corruption.        

&ldquo;The Transitional National Council, in its discussions today, did pledge that this assistance would be delivered in a transparent manner and that it would indeed be inclusive in how it was delivered to the Libyan people,&rdquo; said Mark C. Toner, the State Department&rsquo;s deputy spokesman.        

Mr. Toner acknowledged that there was &ldquo;a sense of urgency&rdquo; in transferring funds to the rebel group, and he stressed that the Departments of State and Treasury would keep watch to ensure &ldquo;that accountability and transparency and monitoring is in place.&rdquo;        

In the early stages of the war, Western nations were reluctant to extend recognition to the rebels, uncertain of who they were and worried about possible ties to Al Qaeda and other militant groups. Over the months, though, those fears have been assuaged, and most nations are lining up behind the transitional government.        

Mahmoud Shammam, a rebel spokesman, tried to address the concerns of Western nations, saying that the Transitional Council had &ldquo;assured them in many ways that we are heading towards a democratic state, and with the support of allies, friends we would make that happen.&rdquo;        

Colonel Qaddafi lashed back in a speech on Friday night, dismissing the significance of the broad recognition of the rebel government.        
Sebnem Arsu reported from Istanbul, and Steven Erlanger from Paris. Reporting was contributed by J. David Goodman from New York; C. J. Chivers from Zintan, Libya; Kareem Fahim from Amman, Jordan; and Thom Shanker from Washington.
