
BAGHDAD &mdash; Two members of the United States military were killed Sunday night in central Iraq, the first such deaths here this year at a time when American casualties had become a rarity.        

The deaths, confirmed Monday, came amid two days of attacks against Iraqi security forces and the killing of a Christian woman in her home in Baghdad. Police officials said they believed that the killing was a robbery not related to the woman&rsquo;s religion.        

The attacks on Iraqi forces began shortly after 7 p.m. on Sunday and unfolded with what appeared to be deadly coordination. Over the course of two hours, gunmen using silencers killed a police colonel, an army colonel, two police commissioners, a colonel from the traffic police and a municipal employee, all in a tight area of central and eastern Baghdad. The attacks resembled a similar wave of killings two weeks earlier, also involving weapons with silencers, that left several security members dead, according to an official at the Ministry of the Interior.        

The attacks on Sunday were most likely in retaliation for recent arrests of Al Qaeda leaders, said Adnan al-Aside, under secretary of the ministry, who said that the police had lately started successful undercover operations against terrorist groups.        

&ldquo;Al Qaeda is suffering from a major weakness now,&rdquo; Mr. Aside said. &ldquo;That is the only way remaining for them to sow instability and fright.&rdquo;        

Early Monday, near Baquba, the capital of Diyala Province, a suicide bomber drove a car laden with more than 300 pounds of explosives in an assault on the intelligence headquarters for eastern Iraq. According to Capt. Mohammed al-Tamimi of the police, the attack began with a roadside bomb that exploded 75 yards from the building&rsquo;s fortified main gate. A few minutes later, the car with the suicide bomber exploded within 25 yards of the gate.        

The explosions killed 2 people and wounded 16, many of them schoolgirls whose minibus was passing nearby when the car exploded, a police official said. The two people killed were passers-by.        

An intelligence official said that officers had had information about a planned car bomb attack days in advance but had not taken adequate measures. The headquarters are surrounded by six checkpoints that might have stopped a suspicious car.        

&ldquo;What happened was a security breach,&rdquo; the official said, declining to be identified because he was not authorized to speak to the news media.        

One victim, Ghaida Nuri, 12, said she was on her way to school near the intelligence building when she heard a loud blast and was thrown to the ground, losing consciousness. When she came to, she said, she was in Baquba General Hospital.        

In Baghdad, the police responded  Monday to a call at the house of Rafah Toma, a Christian, whose neighbors reported that her doors were open. Officers found her suffocated and the house looted. She  had lived alone.        

Iraq&rsquo;s dwindling Christian minority has been terrorized in recent months by deadly attacks for which extremist groups have claimed responsibility. But police officers said Ms. Toma&rsquo;s killing appeared to be part of a robbery. Ms. Toma liked to wear a lot of gold jewelry, which probably attracted the robbers, said a neighbor, Abu Amal.        

The deaths of the two American military members on Sunday came four months after President Obama declared an end to combat operations in Iraq, and days after the end of the least deadly year for American troops since the 2003 invasion. The troops no longer perform combat missions but remain targets for insurgents.        

A military spokeswoman would not release details about the deaths because relatives had not been notified, she said.        

Last year, 60 American service members were killed, down from 961 in 2007, according to the Web site icasualties.org, which tallies coalition and civilian deaths.        
Khalid D. Ali and employees of The New York Times in Diyala and Baghdad contributed reporting.
