
CHRISTCHURCH, NEW ZEALAND &mdash; The once bustling central business district resembles a wasteland. Office furniture can be seen sitting inside partially collapsed buildings. Piles of bricks and steel lie along the closed, empty streets.        

&ldquo;Welcome to Limboland,&rdquo; declares a sign attached to the fencing that still marks off a large section of the inner city. &ldquo;When is the recovery starting?&rdquo; asks another sign.        

Ten months after a powerful earthquake hit New Zealand&rsquo;s second-largest city, residents have experienced more than 7,300 aftershocks. Although no one died in the initial 7.1 magnitude earthquake, the most violent aftershock, on Feb. 22, killed 181. It was the country&rsquo;s second-deadliest natural disaster ever, surpassed only by the 1931 quake in the North Island city of Napier, which killed more than 250.        

It has also become the costliest natural disaster in New Zealand history.        

In May, a report by the International Monetary Fund estimated that the Christchurch earthquakes would cost the country&rsquo;s economy around 15 billion New Zealand dollars, about $12.6 billion, or 7.5 percent of gross domestic product. It said the burden on the economy was &ldquo;larger relative to G.D.P. than for major earthquakes elsewhere,&rdquo; including the 1995 earthquake in Kobe, Japan, and the quake last year in Chile.        

Since that report was published, there have been many more aftershocks, including one of magnitude 6.3 on June 13 that caused further damage to homes and infrastructure and frustrated efforts to rebuild.        

Dozens since September have measured over 5.0, and shaky ground has become a part of life for those who live here. Scientists say another aftershock between 6.0 and 7.0 in coming months is not unlikely.        

Earlier this year the New Zealand government set up an agency &mdash; the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority &mdash; to coordinate the city&rsquo;s reconstruction for a five-year term, imbuing it with extraordinary powers. It can override the city council, demand information from almost anyone and enter buildings without permission.        

One of its first tasks is to come up with an overarching recovery strategy, due by Jan. 19. It is already beginning a series of meetings to discuss the community&rsquo;s views and aspirations for the reconstruction, and residents will also be able to make online or postal submissions.        

But while the planning is getting under way, the continuing aftershocks are still one of the biggest obstacles to progress.        

Nicole Taikato, a hairdresser from the town of Kaiapoi, just north of Christchurch, was in the wine aisle of a supermarket when the familiar rumbling began on June 13. Bottles started flying.        

&ldquo;I was all bruised up my legs, my feet, the whole lot,&rdquo; she recalled. &ldquo;Everything dropping on you &mdash; you cannot run, because the ground is going. You try to pick through broken glass and try and get out, get out.&rdquo;        

Ms. Taikato said her business had suffered badly since September. She has come to believe that, for the time being, it is too difficult to rebuild. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s too much movement going on,&rdquo; she said.        

Still, efforts to rebuild Christchurch are moving forward, slowly.        

Scientists have been mapping out in detail fault lines around the city to identify the potential risks of building in certain areas. They have already discovered several previously unknown faults, although the findings have not significantly increased the known hazard, said Jarg Pettinga, a geologist at the University of Canterbury.        

A recent report by the Royal Society of New Zealand said that, given the strength of the earthquake and aftershocks, it is surprising more buildings have not collapsed. But it added that building standards were likely to be strengthened.        

Christchurch was often called &ldquo;New Zealand&rsquo;s most English city&rdquo; for its Gothic revival-style churches, public gardens and flat-bottomed punt boats leisurely navigating tourists down the Avon River. Now, many of the historic buildings have crumbled in the succession of quakes, and the 19th-century Christchurch Cathedral, described by many here as the heart of the city, is all but destroyed. There are plans to rebuild it, eventually. For now, preserving historical landmarks is not the pressing issue.        
(Page 2 of 2)
At a recent community meeting in the Christchurch suburb of Parklands, Roger Sutton, chief executive of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, told residents there had not yet been time to consider what should be done with damaged churches and public buildings like school gymnasiums and community centers. The focus now, he said, is on homes.        

Engineers have been surveying land throughout the city to determine which parts are too dangerous to live and build on for the foreseeable future. While most of the land has been approved, more than 4.2 million square meters, or 1,037 acres, have been designated as &ldquo;red zones&rdquo; that will eventually be abandoned as the city council phases out services like electricity and water.        

The government has offered to buy houses and land in these red zones, a deal that could cost up to 685 million New Zealand dollars. More than 5,000 houses are affected so far, mostly to the east of the city and along the banks of the Avon River, where many were built on former swampland.        

Other areas have yet to be tested or require further testing, so it is likely that more land will be added to the red zones.        

Homeowners with affected properties will have about 21 months before they are required to move, but it is expected some will take the opportunity to leave earlier.        

Stephen Marlowe&rsquo;s house is uninhabitable, and the land it sits on has yet to be examined and classified as part of the government assessments. But he is not waiting for a verdict.        

He is selling his possessions and plans to leave the city as soon as possible. He has already sold his coffee shop and is moving to Auckland, on the North Island, where his wife and children have already gone.        

&ldquo;I decorated every room &mdash; put brand new carpets in, brand new curtains in &mdash; it took me probably five months to renovate the house. I painted every brick outside,&rdquo; recalled Mr. Marlowe, 40, standing in one of the rooms where cracks now run across many of the walls.        

&ldquo;But it&rsquo;s all in the past,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s done. I&rsquo;m over it.&rdquo;        

The government&rsquo;s Statistics Department said it had not compiled population data since the September earthquake but pointed to a report suggesting that the city could lose 2.5 percent of its population &mdash; estimated around 320,000 before the quake &mdash; by next April. This could be offset, at least temporarily, by an influx of workers engaged in reconstruction.        

For those like Ms. Taikato, the hairdresser, who would prefer to stay in Christchurch, the continuing aftershocks are an unpleasant but unavoidable reality that is likely to persist for some time. Scientists estimate that in about a year, they should slow to about one a month.        

&ldquo;You wonder how much is enough,&rdquo; Ms. Taikato said. &ldquo;How much before we just get up and go?&rdquo;        
