
WATERLOO, Sierra Leone &mdash; The paramedic&rsquo;s eyes were bloodshot, his features drawn. Pregnant women jammed into the darkened concrete bunker, just as they had yesterday and would tomorrow. The increase in patients had been fivefold, or tenfold. The exhausted paramedic had lost count in a blur of uninterrupted examinations and deliveries.        
Saving Lives

More Photos &#x00bb;


The word was out: it was no longer necessary to give birth at home and risk losing a baby or dying in childbirth. Hadiatou Kamara, 18, waited in the crowd. She had already lost a baby boy and girl. &ldquo;They both died,&rdquo; she said quietly.        

Now, for her third pregnancy, she was at this rural health clinic outside Freetown, the capital. The Sierra Leone government has eliminated fees for pregnant women and children, and Ms. Kamara, like thousands of women in a country where surgery has been performed by the light of cellphones and flashlights, could afford trained medical staff to oversee her pregnancy for the first time.        

At the Waterloo Community Health Center here, the women were spilling out the door, as they have consistently since the fees were lifted last year.        

Sierra Leone is at the vanguard of a revolution &mdash; heavily subsidized for now by international donors &mdash; that appears to be substantially lessening health dangers here in one of the riskiest countries in the world for pregnant women and small children.        

Country after country in sub-Saharan Africa has waived medical fees in recent years, particularly for women and children, and while experts acknowledge that many more people are getting care, they caution that it is still too early to declare that the efforts have measurably improved health on the continent.        

In Sierra Leone, though, it seems clear that lives are being saved, providing an early and concrete lesson about the impact of making health care free for the very poor and vulnerable.        

By waiving the requirement for payments &mdash; which sometimes amount to hundreds of dollars and clearly represent the main barrier to using health facilities &mdash; the government here appears to have sharply cut into mortality rates for pregnant women and deaths from malaria for small children.        

The results in Sierra Leone have been &ldquo;nothing short of spectacular,&rdquo; said Robert Yates, a senior health economist in Britain&rsquo;s Department for International Development, which is paying for almost 40 percent of the $35 million program, with most of the rest coming from donors like the World Bank. Since waiving the fees, Sierra Leone has seen a 214 percent increase in the number of children under 5 getting care at health facilities, a 61 percent decrease in mortality rates in difficult pregnancy cases at health clinics, and an 85 percent drop in the malaria fatality rate for children treated in hospitals, according to figures Mr. Yates supplied.        

&ldquo;We have signs that there are positive results,&rdquo; said Vijay Pillai, the World Bank country manager in Sierra Leone.        

In recent years, Zambia, Burundi, Niger, Liberia, Kenya, Senegal, Lesotho, Sudan and Ghana have gone to some form of free care, particularly for pregnant women and young children, Mr. Yates noted two years ago in the health journal The Lancet. Rwanda has been offering nominal rates for health insurance for over a decade, and after fees were dropped in Burundi in 2006, average monthly births in health facilities rose by 61 percent and Caesarean sections went up by 80 percent, he found.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s absolutely common sense that if we increase the consumption of the services,&rdquo; improvements in health follow, he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s blindingly obvious. We know these medicines work.&rdquo;        

Still, the hurdles loom large. Here in Sierra Leone, the health minister, Zainab Bangura, says her country needs 54 gynecologists but has only 4. Likewise, she says, there are only two pediatricians in a nation of over five million people. &ldquo;We lost 10 years&rdquo; to civil war, Ms. Bangura said of the impetus behind increasing access to health care. &ldquo;We needed to embark on a drastic measure.&rdquo;        
Simon Akam contributed in Freetown, Sierra Leone.
