
CAIRO &mdash; Conflicts about the deteriorating health of former President Hosni Mubarak reached a new peak on Sunday, when his lawyer announced he had suffered a stroke and slipped into a coma, only to be contradicted hours later by state television and hospital officials who said he had a temporary bout of low blood pressure.        

The questionable health alarms, which were not the first the lawyer has raised, occurred two weeks before Mr. Mubarak, 83, is to stand trial on charges of corruption and ordering demonstrators to be killed. Thousand s of protesters have occupied Tahrir Square in Cairo for more than a week demanding his vigorous prosecution and, in heated moments, his swift execution.        

While his two sons and several of his former associates have been imprisoned, Mr. Mubarak has been confined, under guard, to a hospital near his home in the Red Sea resort of Sharm el Sheik since April, when he complained of chest pains while being questioned by prosecutors.        

Last month, Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s lawyer, Farid el-Deeb, said that in addition, the former president had cancer. But like the coma claims on Sunday, those reports were quickly countered by officials in the Sharm el Sheik hospital and the Health Ministry, who said that Mr. Mubarak had only a heart condition and depression.        

On Sunday, a doctor at the hospital insisted that Mr. Mubarak was in stable condition after a brief spell of dizziness.        

Mr. Deeb could not be reached Sunday night, but staff members in his office said he stood by his statement about the coma despite the official denials. Mr. Deeb first made the claim to Al Jazeera, saying that he had heard the report from Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s wife, Suzanne, and that he was rushing to Sharm el Sheik.        

Word of Mr. Deeb&rsquo;s announcement raced through the crowd at Tahrir Square, where activists denounced the assertion as &ldquo;a trick by his defense team,&rdquo; in the words of Mohamed Adel, a member of the so-called April 6 Youth Movement, which helped set off the revolution. Another activist, Mona Seif, said by telephone from Tahrir Square, &ldquo;Until I see him being prosecuted, I don&rsquo;t care about his news.&rdquo;        

The health reports keeping the former president out of jail have become a lightning rod for public frustration with the pace of retribution for the corruption of the Mubarak government, which many here blame for Egypt&rsquo;s continued poverty. &ldquo;Egypt is one of the richest countries in the world, but Mubarak and his friends were thieves, and they stole the country,&rdquo; said Mohamed Haroum, a 17-year-old demonstrating in the square. &ldquo;Every Egyptian wants to see Mubarak on trial in court like a regular citizen, not above us any longer.&rdquo;        

Attention on the case ahead of his trial, set for Aug. 3, has been stirred by two privately owned Egyptian newspapers that have published leaked transcripts of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s interrogation.        

In those accounts, Mr. Mubarak denied responsibility for corruption or other crimes, but he appeared to shrug off the death of more than 800 people during the 18-day uprising against him. &ldquo;Our people and our security are like that,&rdquo; he said.        

He denied giving orders to shoot demonstrators, and he said that in any case he could not have stopped the violence. &ldquo;No one would have paid any attention to me or my orders,&rdquo; he said.        

He faulted the military, which announced early in the uprising that it would not use force against Egyptian civilians, for failing to keep the peace. And he professed ignorance of the instigation of what has become known as the Battle of the Camels, when armed thugs used makeshift cavalry tactics to try to clear Tahrir Square of demonstrators in a bloody, daylong battle. &ldquo;I was surprised to see on TV demonstrations with a camel running in the middle,&rdquo; he said.        

Egyptian prosecutors, in an apparent effort to mollify the protesters, have recently charged some of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s closest allies in the former ruling party with paying the mounted thugs and orchestrating the attack.        

On the weekend, the military-led interim government began a cabinet reshuffle aimed at the same goal, dismissing the ministers of finance, foreign affairs, among others. Egypt&rsquo;s minister of antiquities, Zahi Hawass, a globe-trotting television celebrity denounced by Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s opponents as a publicity seeker with close ties to Mrs. Mubarak, was also dismissed, a development that had been widely expected.        

But the interim ministers of justice and interior &mdash; faulted by protesters &mdash; remained in place.        

Ultimately, a council of military officers has remained in control since Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s ouster in February. In an interview with Reuters, Samir Radwan, the departing finance minister, said that policy making in the transitional government had become &ldquo;confused.&rdquo; He noted that his ministry had negotiated a $3 billion loan facility from the International Monetary Fund, only to see it returned in part because of concerns in the military council over taking on excessive debt.        
