
JUBA, Sudan &mdash; Nearly 99 percent of southern Sudanese voters have chosen to split off from northern Sudan and form their own country, according to preliminary results of an independence referendum conducted this month.        

The commission that ran the referendum said Friday that 98.6 percent voted for secession, and 1.4 percent voted for unity, according to more than 3 million votes cast, which brings the largest country in Africa a step closer to splitting in two.        

The commission said that the results were still incomplete, and that they were being continually updated, though all indications point to the vote being overwhelmingly for secession. Election officials have also said that the turnout soared past the 60 percent threshold necessary for the referendum to be valid. The official results are due to be released Feb. 14.        

&ldquo;The last counties are about to report in,&rdquo; said Aleu Garang Aleu, a spokesperson for the referendum bureau in the southern capital Juba.        

Voters in nearly every state in the south chose independence by 99 percent; in Eastern Equatoria, only 229 people voted for unity with the north out of 455,466 votes, according to the preliminary results.        

But southern Sudanese living in northern Sudan were more ambivalent &mdash; 42 percent opted for unity and 58 percent for secession. Many southerners work in Khartoum, Sudan&rsquo;s capital, and they may fear that secession will mean that they have to leave, though citizenship questions have yet to be resolved.        

Now the wait begins. Southern Sudan will not achieve formal independence until July 9, when the United States-backed peace treaty that put the referendum in motion is set to expire. By then southern Sudan hopes to pick a national anthem and a name; leading contenders are Nile Republic and South Sudan.        

But there are still a number of delicate and potentially combustible issues that need to be resolved before Sudan can peacefully break in two, namely how the two sides would share the south&rsquo;s sizeable reserves of crude oil and what to do about the Abyei region, which straddles the north-south border and is claimed by both.        

Fighting this month in Abyei claimed dozens of lives, and Western diplomats worry that the region could threaten what has been an otherwise remarkably peaceful and orderly referendum period.        
Josh Kron reported from Juba, Sudan, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Mogadishu, Somalia.
