
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates (AP) &mdash; Bahrain&rsquo;s largest Shiite party on Sunday withdrew from talks with the kingdom&rsquo;s Sunni rulers, saying that the government was not serious about addressing Shiite demands for greater rights and political freedoms.        

The United States has strongly pushed for dialogue in the strategic island nation in the Persian Gulf, which is home to the American Navy&rsquo;s Fifth Fleet. The political protests that began in February, inspired by the wider Arab uprisings, have been the gravest challenge to any gulf monarch in decades.        

Khalil Ebrahim al-Marzooq, a senior member of the Shiite party, Al Wefaq, and the leader of its delegation to the talks, said in an interview that the party&rsquo;s leaders decided to withdraw from the so-called national dialogue during a meeting. Mr. Marzooq said party leaders had concluded that the government was not interested in political reform.        

&ldquo;They have disregarded the opposition&rsquo;s efforts to make the talks meaningful, and we were not given a chance to put our demands for discussion,&rdquo; he said. Al Wefaq was also given only 5 of 300 seats at the talks.        

The government did not immediately comment on the party&rsquo;s decision to withdraw from the talks, which started July 2.        

Al Wefaq reluctantly entered the dialogue amid widespread anger among the kingdom&rsquo;s majority Shiites, who say they suffer systematic discrimination at the hands of the Sunni dynasty ruling Bahrain. Sectarian tensions have deepened during five months of protest demonstrations and security crackdowns that have killed at least 33 people.        

Hundreds of protesters; activists; and Shiite doctors, lawyers and other professionals are in prison awaiting trial on charges like trying to topple the government and participating in illegal protests. Amid the crackdowns, Al Wefaq staged a mass resignation of its 18 lawmakers in the 40-member lower house of Parliament.        

Before the reconciliation talks began, the government made some modest concessions, including sanctioning an international investigation that is to include an inquiry into the conduct of security forces during the protests. The authorities halted the trials of opposition supporters in a military-linked tribunal and moved them to civilian courts.        

But the government has not agreed to opposition demands that all detainees be released and that those convicted of charges connected to the protests be cleared, including eight prominent activists sentenced last month to life in prison.        
