
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Gen. David H. Petraeus handed over command of the Afghan war on Monday, leaving behind a country racked by deep political instability whose fledgling security forces are fighting a weakened but deadly insurgency that kills coalition troops and Afghan civilians and officials nearly every day.        

His successor, Gen. John R. Allen, will confront those challenges &mdash; and many more &mdash; as he guides NATO-led forces through the handoff of security control to Afghan forces by the end of 2014 &mdash; a process that is still in its earliest stages.        

&ldquo;There will be tough days ahead,&rdquo; General Allen said in prepared remarks, which he delivered at a ceremony at the headquarters of the International Security Assistance Force here, &ldquo;and I have no illusions about the challenges we will face together.&rdquo;        

His first day in command offered a grim snapshot of those difficulties. Three NATO soldiers were killed on Monday by a bomb in eastern Afghanistan, and another died in the south, NATO forces said in statements.        

Elsewhere in Kabul, Afghan officials gathered at the presidential palace to pay tribute to the second powerful political figure to be assassinated in less than a week. The politician, Jan Mohammed Khan, was a former governor from the south and a close ally of the president. He was gunned down at his home on Sunday night.        

To gain entry, the two killers pretended to be members of Mr. Khan&rsquo;s tribe who were seeking his assistance as a tribal elder, Afghan officials said Monday. Mr. Khan gave one of the men 3,000 Afghanis &mdash; about $60 &mdash; before they began shooting, the officials said. A member of Parliament was also killed in the attack.        

The two gunmen in turn were killed by Afghan security forces, though one of them held the police off for nearly eight hours. The police finally set off a bomb in the room inside Mr. Khan&rsquo;s home where the gunman had taken refuge.        

The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack, as they did for the assassination last Tuesday of President Hamid Karzai&rsquo;s powerful half brother, Ahmed Wali Karzai, who was shot dead by a close associate.        

On Monday, a Karzai spokesman lionized both of the slain men as national heroes, dismissing as defamation the widespread criticism of both men&rsquo;s unsavory alliances and suspected ties to the drug trade. The spokesman, Waheed Omer, said their deaths were part of a concerted attempt to disrupt Afghanistan&rsquo;s security.        

&ldquo;The enemy is trying to remove these personalities,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They want to remove them in a very systematic manner.&rdquo;        

At the handover ceremony, General Petraeus offered similar warnings about the dedication of the insurgents, whom he said were willing to carry out &ldquo;barbaric&rdquo; and indiscriminate attacks against civilians.        

Indeed, the United Nations recently said that civilian casualties in the last six months had risen sharply compared with the same period a year ago. It blamed antigovernment forces like the Taliban for 80 percent of the killings .        

&ldquo;We should be clear-eyed about the challenges that lie ahead,&rdquo; General Petraeus said, adding later, &ldquo;There is nothing easy about such a fight.&rdquo;        

Still, as General Petraeus prepared to depart for Washington to become the next director of the Central Intelligence Agency, his overall assessment was hopeful.        

He said Afghan and NATO troops had pushed back Taliban fighters in their southern strongholds of Helmand and Kandahar Provinces. And he said there were fewer insurgent attacks on security forces in the last two and a half months than in the same period in 2010, &ldquo;even though there are over 80,000 more Afghan and I.S.A.F. forces this year, and we have been on the offensive.&rdquo;        

He also cited as signs of progress the transition of seven cities and provinces to Afghan-led security. The central province of Bamiyan &mdash; home to the ancient Buddha statues that were destroyed by the Taliban a decade ago &mdash; was handed over on Sunday, and officials said that more areas would begin the formal transition this week.        

But violence flared Monday just outside the next city on the list, Lashkar Gah, the capital of Helmand Province in the south. Daoud Ahmadi, spokesman for the Helmand governor, said that seven police officers had been shot to death at a checkpoint east of the city after somehow having been poisoned, and that their weapons and vehicles had been stolen. A Taliban spokesman claimed responsibility for the attack.        

Most of the seven areas included in the first round of transitions are relatively stable, or have handled their own security for years with little help from NATO forces. Afghan officials in Kabul and some of the seven areas have acknowledged that the change will be more symbolic than substantive, at least in the short term.        

In Kandahar Province, the police chief of the Registan district was killed along with three bodyguards when a homemade bomb detonated under their vehicle as they were driving to the Shorabak district. Three more bodyguards were wounded, said Sher Shah Yousufzai, the chief of security for Kandahar Province.        

The device appeared to have been freshly planted, Mr. Yousufzai said. The police, even more than the army, have been insurgent targets in part because their vehicles are not armored, but also because they often work in remote and dangerous areas.        

And in the western province of Farah, four people from a mountainous village called Toot were found beheaded Monday, a week after being kidnapped by the Taliban. Their deaths appeared to be a grisly reprisal for the killing of three Taliban fighters a few weeks earlier in a firefight with a local security commander, said Mohammed Ghous Malyar, the province&rsquo;s acting police chief.        
Alissa J. Rubin, Abdul Waheed Wafa and Sangar Rahimi contributed reporting.
