
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; At least six people have been killed in a wave of sectarian bloodshed in the central province of Homs, including three people whose bodies were mutilated, activists and residents there said Monday.        

The violence signaled a dangerous turn in the four-month-old antigovernment uprising, as tensions seem to mount among segments of Syria&rsquo;s religiously mixed society. Although most Syrians are Sunni Muslims, President Bashar al-Assad and his ruling clan belong to the minority Alawite sect, an offshoot of Islam.        

Residents and pro-democracy activists said the government has been enlisting thousands of plainclothes security men, known as shabiha, since March to help quell dissent. Most of the shabiha are Alawites, and resentment against them runs high: many people accuse them of killing thousands of unarmed civilians.        

On Sunday, residents of Homs, Syria&rsquo;s second-largest city, discovered the bodies of three Alawites mutilated and dumped in a deserted area, according to Omar Idlibi of the Local Coordination Committees, a group that helps organize and document protests. All three were armed government loyalists, he said.        

News of the deaths enraged other Alawites, who went on a rampage, according to residents and activists. Three people were killed, including a mother of three, and scores of shops owned by Sunnis were burned and vandalized, Mr. Idlibi said.        

&ldquo;The reaction was so violent and quick that we suspect the regime had a hand in the killings,&rdquo; Mr. Idlibi said.        

Opposition figures have accused the government of fomenting sectarian tensions in order to present itself as the only authority that can maintain stability and protect minorities, which include religious groups like Shiites, Christians and Druze and ethnic groups like Kurds and Circassians. Many Syrians have voiced fears that the uprising could ignite sectarian warfare.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s like a time bomb,&rdquo; said a protest organizer. &ldquo;Sectarianism is the regime&rsquo;s wild card.&rdquo;        
