
Magnus Malan, a South African general and defense minister who in the 1980s helped devise and carry out his nation&rsquo;s last-ditch strategy to preserve its system of rigid racial segregation, including ordering raids into surrounding countries, died on Monday in Cape Town. He was 81.        

A family spokesman said the cause was heart failure, The South African Press Association reported.        

General Malan used the phrase &ldquo;total onslaught&rdquo; to describe the threats to apartheid, as the country&rsquo;s racial laws were known. He saw those threats coming from Communists, neighboring African countries and liberals in the United States. His answer was &ldquo;a total strategy,&rdquo; combining elements of the political, economic and psychological spheres as well as the military.        

He approved counterinsurgencies in Mozambique and Angola; set up a covert agency responsible for disinformation and assassination; sent troops to control unrest in so-called townships, areas designated for blacks; and declared that political rights were not a relevant concern for blacks. He and his aides regularly used terms like &ldquo;annihilate&rdquo; and &ldquo;exterminate.&rdquo; He approved a biological warfare program.        

He also created programs to win the support of middle-class blacks by easing restrictions on black businesses and opening some hotels, theaters and restaurants to blacks.        

General Malan was charged with authorizing an assassination squad that mistakenly killed 13 civilians, mainly women and children, in 1987. He was the highest-ranking apartheid official ever prosecuted. He was acquitted in 1996 after a seven-month trial on the ground that there was no evidence linking him to the massacre. President Nelson Mandela, without commenting on the substance of the verdict, defended the court&rsquo;s legitimacy.        

In 1997, General Malan volunteered to testify before South Africa&rsquo;s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which investigated atrocities in the country&rsquo;s past. He accepted responsibility for the cross-border counterinsurgencies and for setting up the secret police agency, and for the deaths they caused. But he characterized the actions as &ldquo;legal acts of state.&rdquo;        

The commission condemned General Malan and other top government leaders for using words like &ldquo;eliminate,&rdquo; &ldquo;take out&rdquo; and &ldquo;wipe out,&rdquo; a predilection that it said led to the killing of political opponents. It also condemned the assassination teams. It passed these findings on to prosecutors, who for reasons of &ldquo;national interest&rdquo; did not take up the case.        

Magnus Andre De Merindol was born in Pretoria on Jan. 30, 1930, and later adopted his mother&rsquo;s surname, Malan. His father was a biochemistry professor who went on to become a member of Parliament and parliamentary speaker for the National Party, which governed South Africa from 1948 to 1994.        

He tried to join the Army at 13, then returned to school after he was rejected. He earned a bachelor&rsquo;s degree in military science from the University of Pretoria; joined the Navy; and served a stint in the Marines on Robben Island, site of the prison where Mr. Mandela was held. He transferred to the Army as a lieutenant, rising rapidly, and studied at the United States Army&rsquo;s General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kan., in 1962-63.        

By the early 1970s, General Malan had come to epitomize the sort of modern military technocrat whose influence was rising in South Africa. He was named chief of the South African Army in 1973 and chief of the South African Defense Force in 1976. He was the youngest man to hold both positions.        

Prime Minister P. W. Botha, who had come to rely on General Malan as chief of the defense force, named him his defense minister in 1980. He rose to become chairman of the minister&rsquo;s council in the House of Assembly, the lower house of Parliament.        

But his real power came from being part of the secretive group of military and political commanders that became known as &ldquo;securocrats.&rdquo; He presided over a budget of nearly $4 billion, of which 60 percent was controlled by an inner group of the cabinet. He approved the innocuously named Civil Cooperation Bureau, which became known for assassinations and other covert deeds.        

In his testimony to the truth commission, General Malan said: &ldquo;During these periods we are talking about, 1980 to 1991, we were fighting a war. I had more than 100,000 troops under training or busy with operations. So we were pretty much busy. We had a front approximately as far as London is from Moscow.&rdquo;        

General Malan led the talks that paved the way for Namibia&rsquo;s independence in 1990, ending its status as a colony of South Africa. In July 1991, President F. W. de Klerk removed him from the defense ministry in the wake of embarrassment over secret government financing of a mainly black party that opposed Mr. Mandela&rsquo;s African National Congress. He moved General Malan to the ministry for water affairs and forestry. General Malan retired from Parliament in 1993.        

He is survived by his wife of 49 years, the former Magrietha van der Walt; two sons; a daughter; and nine grandchildren.        
