
NEW DELHI &mdash; At least two prime ministers &mdash; one future and one former &mdash; have spent a few nights behind its high walls. Its current occupants include three members of Parliament, a top bureaucrat and one of India&rsquo;s richest men.        

The accommodations are spartan. There is no air conditioning, for one. But there are daily yoga and meditation classes. It even has room service, after a fashion: hot meals arrive promptly three times a day.        

No, this is not one of the many five-star hotels in the capital of the world&rsquo;s second fastest growing economy &mdash; anyone with adequate bankroll could check in to one of those. Only Delhi&rsquo;s most wanted criminals are invited to spend the night here at Tihar jail.        

In an unprecedented season of scandal and seething public anger over accusations of widespread corruption, a growing number of senior politicians and wealthy businessmen accused of enriching themselves from the public till have ended up in the sprawling Tihar jail complex, which sits on 400 acres in a working-class neighborhood on the western edge of New Delhi.        

They include men like A. Raja, the former telecommunications minister who presided over the sale of valuable cellphone spectrum at rock-bottom prices, costing the Indian treasury as much as $40 billion. He sleeps on the floor of a small cell in Jail 1.        

Suresh Kalmadi, a major figure in the governing Congress Party, is holed up in Jail 4. He was in charge of the shoddy preparations for the Commonwealth Games last year and stands accused of making millions in kickbacks.        

In Jail 3, a handful of telecommunications executives, including Shahid Usman Balwa, part of India&rsquo;s growing class of billionaires, are awaiting trial on charges that they paid bribes to get cheap cellphone spectrum from Mr. Raja.        

Women politicians are here, too. In Jail 6 is Kanimozi, a member of the upper house of Parliament and daughter of one of the most powerful political figures in southern India, accused of taking bribes in the telecommunications scandal.        

In a nation where status, whether from money or political power, buys almost anything, the high and mighty accused of crimes against the public fisc, or treasury, get no special treatment here, their wardens say.        

&ldquo;Nobody bothers about whether they like their tea or not, whether they like their food or not,&rdquo; said Neeraj Kumar, the director general of Tihar jail.        

V.I.P. inmates ask for perks all the time: air-conditioners for their cells; food from home every day. One telecommunications executive went to court to demand access to his iPad. But almost all such requests have been denied, jail officials said.        

None of these accused have yet been convicted; indeed, trials in most of their cases have yet to begin. But all have been denied bail, and must sweat out their wait for trial in the sweltering confines of their cells.        

Tihar was built in 1958, and its design followed the idealism of newly independent India. Its vast campus was intended to look more like a high security college campus than a notorious prison. It had carefully tended lawns and gardens. Each prisoner had his own cell in which to contemplate his rehabilitation.        

But as India grew poorer and more corrupt in the 1960s and 70s, conditions at Tihar jail deteriorated.        

In her book about her time running Tihar jail, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s Always Possible,&rdquo; Kiran Bedi, a former senior police official turned anticorruption crusader, wrote of unspeakably grim conditions.        

During the monsoon, Ms. Bedi wrote, &ldquo;the contents of the clogged sewers would flow back into the barracks, and the stench and filth became internal.&rdquo;        

Criminal gangs controlled the cellblocks, and anything was available for a price &mdash; drugs, sex, even murder.        

The jail had its own officially sanctioned caste system, which put politicians and white-collar prisoners at the top of the hierarchy and common criminals at the bottom. The upper crust ate separately and got better food, enriched by more ghee. They were entitled to more sugar for their tea.        

But in 1997, the system was dismantled by a Supreme Court judgment arguing, in part, that the educated and privileged, far from deserving better treatment, should be doubly sanctioned because they of all people should know better.        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
