
BEIJING &mdash; At least four people died Monday in the troubled Xinjiang region of western China after a group of armed attackers invaded a local police station and took hostages, state-run Chinese news outlets reported. The police station was said to have been set on fire.        

Official reports did not identify the invaders. But Tuesday&rsquo;s Chinese edition of the Communist Party&rsquo;s Global Times newspaper quoted a Xinjiang region spokesman as saying that the attack occurred in a commercial district frequented largely by ethnic Uighurs, the Turkic ethnic group that once made up a majority of Xinjiang&rsquo;s population.&nbsp;        

Several of the attackers were fatally shot as the police retook control of the station, state media reported.        

A Munich-based group representing Uighurs in exile claimedon Monday that the invaders were Uighurs who were angered by a wave of arrests of young Uighur men.        

That report, which the Xinjiang spokesman denied, could not be confirmed. Telephone calls to government authorities in the area on Monday went unanswered.        

Xinjiang has seen periodic violence by the Uighurs, whose culture and Islamic traditions have eroded under decades of restrictions imposed by the Chinese government and a huge influx of settlers belonging to the country&rsquo;s majority ethnic group, the Han. Uighurs, who were once an overwhelming majority in Xinjiang, now make up less than half the region&rsquo;s population.        

Chinese officials say the unrest is caused by a small group of Uighur terrorists who want to split Xinjiang from the rest of China.        

The attack on Monday took place in Hotan, a southwestern desert town of 115,000 about 600 miles north of the Karakoram Mountains that define the border with India and Pakistan, at about noon China Standard Time (midnight Sunday Eastern time). Official accounts said that &ldquo;several thugs&rdquo; invaded the station and took eight hostages.        

&ldquo;It was an organized crime,&rdquo; Global Times quoted the Xinjiang spokesman, Hou Hanmin, as saying. &ldquo;the rioters carried explosive devices and grenades.&rdquo;        

He said that the attackers worked their way to the station&rsquo;s second floor, where they displayed a flag &ldquo;with separatist messages.&rdquo;&nbsp;        

Other police officers stormed the station and rescued six of the hostages, but two hostages died, as did one paramilitary police officer and a guard, the state news agency Xinhua reported, citing the national Ministry of Public Security.        

Dolkun Isa, the secretary general of the World Uyghur Congress, the exile group based in Germany, said in an interview that the assault on the station took place after a crowd of perhaps 100 Uighur protesters massed there to complain about arrests of young men.        

Mr. Isa said that, judging by scattered reports, security officers have been cracking down in the last two weeks, searching Uighur homes and detaining many men and boys. Similar crackdowns, called &ldquo;strike hard&rdquo; exercises by Chinese officials, have been mounted occasionally in recent years to root out people who might foment unrest.        

Supporters of the detained youths gathered at the station and &ldquo;asked for the local government to release their friends and family,&rdquo; Mr. Isa said. &ldquo;But the local government refused to give an answer. The local people got angry and attacked the police station, and some people were killed.&rdquo;        

Xinjiang has been the scene of ethnic violence dating at least to the 1990s. Large parts of the vast region have come under especially strict supervision since mid-2009, when one of the worst episodes of ethnic violence in modern Chinese history left about 200 Han and Uighurs dead in Urumqi, Xinjiang&rsquo;s sprawling capital.        

A year earlier, as Beijing played host to the 2008 Summer Olympics, at least 22 security officers and a civilian died in four separate assaults in Xinjiang. In the worst, a large truck plowed into a group of what the Chinese government said were officers out for a jog in Kashgar, killing 16.        

The government blamed two Uighur men who it said were armed with machetes and bombs for the attack. Some later accounts by witnesses cast doubt on that claim.        
Edy Yin contributed research.
