
LONDON &mdash; In an embarrassing blow to Prime Minister David Cameron&rsquo;s coalition government, Downing Street&rsquo;s communications director, Andy Coulson, resigned on Friday amid continued questions about his possible involvement in the illegal hacking of celebrity telephone messages when he was editor of the tabloid newspaper The News of the World.        

Mr. Coulson left the paper in 2007 after one of its reporters, Clive Goodman, and a private investigator were jailed for intercepting messages left on the cellphones of members of the royal household. Mr. Coulson said he knew nothing about the messages and was hired by Mr. Cameron, then leader of the Conservative opposition.        

But the issue has continued to dog Mr. Coulson and the newspaper. Several prominent figures, including the actress Sienna Miller, have filed suit accusing The News of the World&rsquo;s reporters of hacking into their voice mail when Mr. Coulson was the paper&rsquo;s editor. Others have received large settlements from the paper and agreed not to discuss the matter.        

Last week, following new revelations, British prosecutors said they would conduct a &ldquo;comprehensive reassessment&rdquo; of the material that had been collected by the police.        

In his resignation statement, Mr. Coulson reiterated that he had been unaware of the hacking, but said that the scandal had proved too distracting for him to do his job.        

&ldquo;I stand by what I&rsquo;ve said about those events, but when the spokesman needs a spokesman, it&rsquo;s time to move on,&rdquo; he said.        

Executives at News International, which owns The News of the World and is a subsidiary of Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s News Corporation, have maintained that Mr. Goodman was a &ldquo;rogue reporter&rdquo; who hired the investigator, Glenn Mulcaire, to hack into telephone messages without the approval of his editors. But recent information made public in two court cases connected to the affair have cast doubt on that claim.        

In December, Ian Edmondson, the paper&rsquo;s news editor, was suspended when it emerged that the name &ldquo;Ian&rdquo; had been scribbled across notes written by Mr. Mulcaire that were contained in court papers related to Ms. Miller&rsquo;s lawsuit. Mr. Edmondson has denied doing anything wrong.        

Earlier this week, lawyers for Andy Gray, a television commentator who has filed his own suit, said that notebooks belonging to Mr. Mulcaire showed that he had written &ldquo;Greg&rdquo; in one that had been seized by the police &mdash; next to a record of Mr. Gray&rsquo;s PIN, password and cellphone number. Mr. Gray&rsquo;s lawyers said the name was a reference to Greg Miskiw, The News of the World&rsquo;s former assistant editor for news.        

Mr. Miskiw has also denied any wrongdoing.        

The lawyers said that Mr. Mulcaire had a habit of noting the names of editors involved in hacking jobs.        

Mr. Gray and the actor Steve Coogan are suing in an effort to force Mr. Mulcaire to reveal who ordered him to hack into their phones. Mr. Gray, who works for Sky Sports, has been the subject of a number of embarrassing News of the World stories about his sex life, including one titled &ldquo;Randy Andy&rsquo;s Teeny Weeny Tartan Hanky Spanky With Me.&rdquo;        

The Guardian newspaper, which has written extensively about the scandal, was the first to reveal that the hacking operation was more widespread than had originally been thought and that News International had secretly paid large sums to several of the victims in exchange for their silence.        

An article in The New York Times Magazine last year quoted a former reporter, Sean Hoare, and an unnamed former editor as saying that Mr. Coulson had known about and encouraged the hacking. The article described a newsroom in which reporters used any means possible to get stories, and said the Metropolitan Police had failed to interview editors and reporters at the paper after Mr. Goodman&rsquo;s arrest, limiting the investigation to his and Mr. Mulcaire&rsquo;s behavior.        

Britain&rsquo;s sharp-elbowed tabloids seem to have abandoned some of their more outlandish practices since Mr. Coulson worked at The News of the World. But politicians and many British reporters and editors say that few standards apply in a world where reporters think nothing of concealing their identities when pursuing stories and tabloids routinely pay thousands of dollars to sources willing to provide evidence of celebrities&rsquo; extramarital affairs.        

Tabloid editors are also known to keep close watch over their reporters.        

&ldquo;No one who knows how a newspaper works, let alone a well-run British newspaper, has ever been able to understand for one second why a very effective editor wouldn&rsquo;t have at least asked his royal reporter where a stream of very strong scoops had come from,&rdquo; said an editor at another tabloid who asked not to be quoted by name because he was not authorized to speak publicly to the press.        

Mr. Coulson had talked about quitting Downing Street for some time, according to people familiar with his thinking, but he may have decided to act after the scandal&rsquo;s return to the news.        

&ldquo;Clearly, the drip-drip-drip of new information has caused Andy Coulson to resign, because it&rsquo;s been growing stronger by the day,&rdquo; said Paul Farrelly, a Labour member of Parliament who serves on the Culture, Media and Sport Committee.        

Mr. Farrelly called for an independent review of the matter, saying that both the Crown Prosecution Service and the Metropolitan Police had failed to investigate properly.        

A close and trusted adviser to Mr. Cameron, Mr. Coulson has been especially effective in helping smooth Downing Street&rsquo;s relationship with London&rsquo;s tabloids and with Mr. Murdoch, whose media holdings here include The News of the World, The Sun and The Times of London. Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s endorsement of the Conservative Party was an important factor in its defeat of the Labour Party and its formation, with the Liberal Democrats, of the coalition government.        

Mr. Cameron went out of his way on Friday to praise Mr. Coulson, calling him &ldquo;a brilliant member of my team.&rdquo;        

Tom Watson, another Labour member of the culture committee and a persistent critic of Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s media empire and of Mr. Coulson, said it was &ldquo;not the end&rdquo; of the scandal. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s just the end of the beginning,&rdquo; he said.        
Alan Cowell contributed reporting from Paris, and Don Van Natta Jr. from Florida.
