
BERLIN &mdash; A court in Hungary on Monday acquitted a 97-year-old man accused of taking part in a massacre during World War II, Hungarian news reports said.        

The court found the man, Sandor Kepiro, not guilty of war crimes in connection with the deaths of 36 people in the northern Serbian city of Novi Sad in 1942. Mr. Kepiro had been convicted twice before of taking part in the massacre, known as the Racija, the Serbian word for raid.        

Mr. Kepiro had previously acknowledged to reporters that he took part as a junior police officer in rounding up people before the massacre, but denied killing anyone or giving the order to shoot victims. More than 1,200 civilians, mostly Jews but also Serbs and Roma, were killed, their bodies dumped in Danube River.        

&ldquo;The verdict flies in the face of all the evidence, all logic, and the understanding of events as they occurred,&rdquo; said Efraim Zuroff, the chief Nazi hunter for the Simon Wiesenthal Center, speaking by telephone from Budapest, where he had gone to the courtroom for the reading of the verdict by a three-judge panel.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s an outrage, this verdict; I&rsquo;m in shock,&rdquo; said Mr. Zuroff, adding that extreme-right supporters of Mr. Kepiro broke into applause at the announcement. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a sad day for Hungary. It&rsquo;s a sad day for the victims and for people who understand the importance of bringing such people to justice, even so many years after the crime.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kepiro&rsquo;s cause was taken up by the far-right Jobbik Party after he was charged in February.        

Hungary has undergone a significant shift to the right in recent years. Just five years ago, Jobbik was viewed by political analysts as a fringe movement that could never break through in national elections, but now it holds seats in both the Parliament in Budapest and the European Parliament in Brussels.        

The Wiesenthal Center, which helped reopen the case against Mr. Kepiro in 2006, had declared him the world&rsquo;s most-wanted Nazi war criminal. But the case underscored the difficulty prosecutors have in winning convictions against those accused of war crimes so many years after World War II ended.        

Hungarian forces allied with the Germans occupied Novi Sad after the Nazis conquered Yugoslavia in 1941. Mr. Kepiro was convicted in 1944 for his role in the massacre and sentenced to 10 years in prison, but he was freed by the fascists not long after his trial. He was convicted a second time in absentia by the Communist government in 1946, after he fled to Argentina. He remained there until 1996, when he returned to Hungary.        

Elsewhere, in Germany, prosecutors in the Bavarian town of Weiden said Monday that they had opened a new investigation into John Demjanjuk, a retired Ohio autoworker, this time into allegations that he served as a guard at the Flossenb&uuml;rg concentration camp. Weiden&rsquo;s chief prosecutor, Gerd Sch&auml;fer, said that prosecutors were gathering information in the case. &ldquo;At this stage we are still examining whether criminal charges can be brought,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Demjanjuk was convicted in May of being an accessory to the murder of more than 28,000 Jews after a Munich court determined he had been a guard at the Sobibor death camp in Nazi-occupied Poland in 1943. He is in a nursing home in Germany awaiting the result of an appeal.        
