
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Taliban insurgents have released a video showing them killing 16 Pakistani men who were captured in a raid last month in a restive northwestern province, a spokesman for the Pakistani military said Monday.        

The graphic video shows the 16 men, most of whom appear to be police officers, standing in a line with their hands tied behind their backs. Four insurgents stand in front, holding assault rifles, with their faces covered by scarves.        

One insurgent makes a brief speech in Pashto, the language spoken in the country&rsquo;s northwest, accusing the men of killing six children in the Swat district.        

&ldquo;These are the enemies of Islam who originated from Pakistan,&rdquo; he says, according to a translation of the statement posted by the Long War Journal, a Web site that specializes in reports on militancy. The speaker in the video describes the 16 men as &ldquo;murtards,&rdquo; or those who have abandoned Islam.        

&ldquo;They are the Pakistani police, soldiers and their supporters who recently lined up six kids in Swat and shot them execution-style,&rdquo; the insurgent says. &ldquo;These Pakistanis are now our captives, and we will avenge the death of the children by doing the same to them.&rdquo;        

A quick burst of gunfire follows. The men fall to the ground, and some can be heard moaning. Then an insurgent approaches them one by one and fires rounds at each man who still appears to be alive.        

Another person, holding a video camera, films the execution and walks up and down capturing images of the victims. The video runs 5 minutes, 36 seconds in all.        

No Taliban group had yet publicly claimed responsibility for the video, which was first shown on the LiveLeak video-sharing Web site.        

Pakistani officials said last month that hundreds of Taliban insurgents had crossed into the country from Afghanistan and, on June 1, attacked a police post in Barawal, a village surrounded by rugged mountains and forests in the Shaltalo area of Upper Dir, a district in northwestern Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Province.        

Shaltalo is near the border with Kunar Province, Afghanistan. At least 28 Pakistani paramilitary soldiers were killed in two days of fighting there, while at least 45 Taliban fighters were killed.        

Pakistan lodged a protest with the Afghan government after the attack in Upper Dir.        

As Pakistan battles a bloody Taliban insurgency, videos of summary killings have surfaced from both sides of the conflict.        

Last year, a video on the Internet showed men in Pakistani military uniforms killing six young men, apparently in Swat, where the military had begun an operation to drive out the Taliban. The Pakistani military denied that the video was authentic.        

&ldquo;The killing of the Pakistani policemen underlines the problems with Pakistan&rsquo;s counterinsurgency strategy,&rdquo; Cyril Almeida, a columnist for Dawn, a leading English-language daily newspaper in Pakistan, said Monday. &ldquo;Borrowed wholesale from the American playbook &mdash; including terms like clear, hold, build, etc. &mdash; Pakistan has particularly struggled in the hold-build transition phase.        

&ldquo;Whether this is because high-level militant commanders have more often than not eluded capture or elimination, or because of inherent flaws in the counterinsurgency strategy itself, the bottom line is that militancy inside Pakistan is far from a dying phenomenon.&rdquo;        

Omar R. Quraishi, the opinion editor of The Express Tribune, another Karachi-based English-language daily, said, &ldquo;The surfacing of this video suggests that the Swat operation may have been successful but seems to have driven out many hard-core elements farther northwest &mdash; in the direction of Dir and across the border.&rdquo;        
