
PARIS &mdash; Investigators have questioned the daughter of Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the former head of the International Monetary Fund, as part of an investigation into accusations that he attempted to rape a young writer, Tristane Banon, in 2003, an official at the prosecutor&rsquo;s office said on Tuesday.        

Camille Strauss-Kahn, Mr. Strauss-Kahn&rsquo;s youngest child and a Columbia University graduate student, was presumably called to testify before investigators on Monday because she had been a close friend of Ms. Banon in early 2003, at the time the writer said that Mr. Strauss-Kahn tried to rape her during an interview.        

On Tuesday, Ms. Banon was quoted by Le Figaro as saying that she had met Ms. Strauss-Kahn after the incident in 2003, to tell her about the attempted rape. Ms. Banon is the goddaughter of Ms. Strauss-Kahn&rsquo;s mother, Mr. Strauss-Kahn&rsquo;s former wife.        

&ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t know how to talk to her,&rdquo; Ms. Banon was quoted by Le Figaro as saying. &ldquo;Her father has always been a hero to her.&rdquo;        

Ms. Banon filed a legal complaint for attempted rape against Mr. Strauss-Kahn this month, during the swirl of publicity about his private life after his May 14 arrest in New York on charges of sexual assault against a hotel housekeeper. Mr. Strauss-Kahn has denied the New York charges. Lawyers for Mr. Strauss-Kahn have filed a countercomplaint for slander against Ms. Banon, arguing that her charges were imaginary.        

Besides Ms. Banon and her mother, Anne Mansouret, investigators questioned Ms. Strauss-Kahn&rsquo;s mother, Brigitte Guillemette, on Friday. Ms. Mansouret said that she had discussed the incident with Ms. Guillemette at the time.        

On Monday, the French magazine L&rsquo;Express, citing unnamed police sources, claimed that Ms. Mansouret told police that she herself had a consensual sexual encounter in 2000 with Mr. Strauss-Kahn, though she reportedly described it as unpleasant and &ldquo;clearly brutal.&rdquo; She said that he had been more interested in &ldquo;taking than pleasing.&rdquo;        

Asked if the story was true, Ms. Mansouret at first said to ask the police. She then said she had &ldquo;told the police all the truth and only the truth during six hours of questioning,&rdquo; but she refused to explicitly confirm or deny the L&rsquo;Express article. If true, it adds to the bizarre nature of the reported relationships between Mr. Strauss-Kahn, Ms. Mansouret, her daughter and his former wife.        

According to news reports, investigators also plan to question Fran&ccedil;ois Hollande, a Socialist candidate for the presidency. Ms. Mansouret and Ms. Banon both have said that Mr. Hollande knew about the story of Ms. Banon&rsquo;s attempted rape and even called her afterward.        

&ldquo;I will answer, it&rsquo;s normal,&rdquo; Mr. Hollande told reporters on Tuesday. &ldquo;But I won&rsquo;t accept manipulation and maneuvers as instruments of the political debate.&rdquo;        
