
CARACAS, Venezuela &mdash;Revolutions come and go. Construction frenzies reshape this city&rsquo;s skyline and then go bust, leaving white elephants as testament. Oil prices rise and fall, and rise again. But one thing, at least, endures: the lines.        

In front of government offices, banks, bus stops, cinemas, hospitals, hair salons and grocery stores, there they are: lines spilling out so prolifically onto sidewalks that they might make an Eastern European pencil-pusher chortle with remembrances of decades past.        

&ldquo;Lines for us are like a spouse from time immemorial whom we cannot stand, but without whom we cannot exist,&rdquo; said Jorge Sayegh, a columnist for the newspaper El Universal who wrote this year about Venezuelans&rsquo; acceptance of, even fondness, for lines. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re attracted to lines like flies to honey; we actually love them.&rdquo;        

Love for lines? That is certainly not the case for many here. But for others, who have spent a lifetime withstanding queue after queue without succumbing to despair or blinding rage, something beyond mere resignation and approaching appreciation takes root.        

&ldquo;Why make yourself upset over such a thing?&rdquo; asked Tha&iacute;s Estrada, 62, a retiree waiting in line one recent morning to pay an electric bill at a government-owned utility. &ldquo;Standing in line is a chance to make new friends,&rdquo; she said while chatting with a woman next to her.        

&ldquo;After sharing this experience, we&rsquo;re virtually cousins now,&rdquo; said Ms. Estrada, managing a smile. &ldquo;There are people embittered about standing in lines, but this is our system and we adapt to it.&rdquo;        

Others, naturally, are less sanguine about all the lines for this and all the lines for that. One morning in this city&rsquo;s anarchic downtown, lines stretched out like an octopus&rsquo;s limbs in various directions from government offices, including the Social Security Institute, the Supreme Court and the Foreign Relations Ministry.        

At one tower, housing the National Assembly and various courts, 117 people stood in one slow-moving line in the shadow of a mural of Jos&eacute; Mar&iacute;a Vargas, a 19th-century Venezuelan leader, and his words, &ldquo;The World Is of the Righteous Man.&rdquo;        

Some flipped through newspapers. Others typed into BlackBerrys. Some hummed melodies, or stared into space. Soldiers in fatigues milled about the line, smoking cigarettes. Honking horns, bellowing car alarms and revving motorbikes provided the background music.        

&ldquo;Que ladilla,&rdquo; said an exasperated Paula Espinosa, 42, in line to get a copy of a wedding certificate. Her expression, commonly used here to refer to something or someone annoying, roughly translates as &ldquo;What crab lice.&rdquo;        

Ms. Espinosa explained that the line she was standing in outside was simply to gain access to the building&rsquo;s only working elevator. Other lines, for other purposes, awaited her inside.        

Risks other than boredom lurk for some who stand in Venezuela&rsquo;s lines. Crime pages of newspapers, for instance, run articles describing gunmen assaulting people in line, especially at banks. In one bank robbery, two thieves simply stood in line as if they were there to make a deposit, before proceeding with their heist.        

Economists and other scholars struggle to explain why Venezuela has such an extraordinary line-standing culture, even compared with the rich bureaucratic traditions of some Latin American nations. Some blame it on oil, and the byzantine state bureaucracy that coalesced to manage petroleum revenues.        

Others, as is customary in some circles here, lay the blame on President Hugo Ch&aacute;vez. The president, this argument goes, has put Venezuela&rsquo;s bureaucracy on steroids, nationalizing dozens of private companies and increasing the number of ministries to 27 from 14 when he rose to power in 1999.        

Still, despite all the new opportunities to stand in line at a government building here, a glance into Venezuela&rsquo;s history suggests that the nation&rsquo;s long lines have outlasted one president after another.        

The American writer Erna Fergusson, who came here in the aftermath of the 27-year rule of the dictator Juan Vicente G&oacute;mez, described the series of lines she had to endure just to board a steamer from Maracaibo to Cura&ccedil;ao. Her book, &ldquo;Venezuela,&rdquo; was first published in 1939.        

&ldquo;Venezuela proved to be as difficult to leave as she is to enter,&rdquo; Ms. Fergusson wrote about her agonizing ordeal in five different offices, where she secured stamps, seals and permissions, including a petition from the City Council, allowing her to depart.        

&ldquo;For me,&rdquo; she concluded, &ldquo;it was only a hot and wavering daze.&rdquo;        

All the time spent standing under the Caribbean sun creates opportunities for some enterprising people.        

There is, of course, the profession of the &ldquo;gestor,&rdquo; an expediter who confronts Venezuela&rsquo;s churlish bureaucracy (lines included) on behalf of clients for a hefty fee. Some gestores are so skilled that they command the respect due someone who combines the knowledge of an accountant and a lawyer.        

Lowlier trades persist around Venezuela&rsquo;s lines, too. There are those who simply stand in a line for a price, holding the space for someone else. Gestores disparagingly call these people &ldquo;vende-puestos,&rdquo; or space sellers. (For those familiar with Washington&rsquo;s customs, they resemble the &ldquo;line-standers&rdquo; who wait in line on behalf of lobbyists wanting access to Congressional hearings.)        

Then there are entrepreneurs like Lina Medina. She starts work each morning at 4 a.m. in front of an office handling foreign registrations, renting plastic chairs for about $2 each to people waiting to get inside. Instead of standing in a predawn line for hours, they get to sit.        

&ldquo;The longer the line, the more eager people are to pay for my chairs,&rdquo; said Ms. Medina, 27, an immigrant from Colombia.        

Where some see opportunity, others see inefficiency. Juan Nagel, an economist who is an editor of Caracas Chronicles, a blog on Venezuelan politics, recently composed a screed describing his ultimately unsuccessful two-and-a-half-hour wait, number in hand, to open a bank account.        

&ldquo;Half an hour passes. Three people get lucky,&rdquo; Mr. Nagel wrote, referring to people grasping folders of documents needed to get access to hard currency. &ldquo;They approach the attendants like a serf approaches a lord.&rdquo;        

Mr. Nagel attributes the lines partly to policies like price controls and labor rules that determine how many employees a certain company can hire. These measures also inhibit competition, he argues, making it easier for businesses to mistreat customers.        

Still, some Venezuelans welcome certain policies that create even more lines. Yahaira Reyes, 42, a graphic designer, stood in no fewer than four different lines one day to buy subsidized groceries. She smiled when describing her purchases, including yogurt, smoked bacon and cuts of Brazilian beef.        

Waiting to buy food in such lines has become routine since the authorities asserted state control over the food-distribution industry.        

&ldquo;People who complain about lines are wasting their time,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;When I see a line for good food at low prices, that&rsquo;s where I want to be.&rdquo;        
María Eugenia Díaz contributed reporting.
