
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The United Nations, supported by the United States, the European Union and Canada, released a strong statement late Friday expressing &ldquo;deep concern and surprise&rdquo; at President Hamid Karzai&rsquo;s decision to delay seating a new Parliament on Sunday.        

In a tone that was sober and urgent, the statement urged that the Parliament be inaugurated as quickly as possible. &ldquo;Afghanistan&rsquo;s peaceful future lies in the building up of robust democratic institutions based on the rule of law and clear respect for the separation of powers,&rdquo; it said.        

Mr. Karzai ordered the delay this week so that a special court appointed to investigate electoral fraud in the parliamentary elections could complete its work. In defiance of that order, the newly elected lawmakers announced Thursday that they would convene on Sunday, even if it meant meeting in a hotel or mosque.        

The tensions between Mr. Karzai and his Western backers underscored their competing interests &mdash; not least to their home constituencies &mdash; and their differing visions of how best to satisfy Afghanistan&rsquo;s urgent need for both stability and representative government.        

Western diplomats privately said that they would not be able to defend the enormous expenditure of money on Afghanistan in their countries unless there was at least the framework of a working democracy. If the Parliament were left in limbo for months while a court that appeared to be in the president&rsquo;s pocket investigated the elections, it would look as if the West was backing a country whose leader was, at best, an autocrat.        

&ldquo;It is a signal that we&rsquo;re serious about standing behind democratic institutions in Afghanistan,&rdquo; said a Western official of the United Nations statement.        

A divided government would worsen the already fragile security situation, raising the possibility of violence among rival ethnic groups on top of the Taliban insurgency, said two diplomats, speaking on the condition of anonymity. None of that helps Western efforts to begin to transfer responsibility for security to Afghans over the next three years.        

Yet after a day of frantic discussions and cables fired back and forth between Kabul and Western capitals, the United Nations and NATO countries in the end muted their statement, backing away from demanding the seating of the Parliament on Sunday and trying to leave the door open for a compromise.        

Mr. Karzai, who has been in Russia, invited members of Parliament to lunch on Saturday to discuss the situation, and Western diplomats said they hoped he would use the chance to work out a deal that would allow the Parliament to open, but also would let everyone save face.        

However, it is far from clear what kind of deal is even possible at this point. The appointment of the special court, which was done by the Supreme Court at the request of the attorney general, raised the hopes of scores of losing candidates that the elections would be annulled.        

Conversely, those candidates who have been declared winners by the Independent Election Commission, which is given sole authority over elections in the Constitution, are insistent that they have rightfully won and refuse to back down.        

Even Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s own Pashtun ethnic constituency is divided, with some supporting the special court and others &mdash; primarily those who won seats &mdash; insisting that they want the Parliament to be inaugurated now.        

&ldquo;Some M.P.&rsquo;s fear that Karzai is trying to bring changes in the Parliament and they want to open the new Parliament as soon as possible,&rdquo; said Nadar Khan Katawazi, a Pashtun legislator from Paktika, who won a seat but has been talking to both groups.        

&ldquo;But I personally respect the law and want the Supreme Court to do an investigation into fraud,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;However, the Supreme Court should have assigned more judges to do this investigation so it would have been finished by now. I am not very satisfied with this kind of circumstances, and I feel that we, the people of Afghanistan, are in a very bad situation.&rdquo;        

For Mr. Karzai, who is pulled between powerful Pashtun candidates who lost and Western governments who finance much of his government and are leading the fight against the Taliban, there are no obvious choices that will satisfy all parties.        

Mr. Karzai had hoped that a more friendly Parliament would be elected, and many agree with him that there was serious fraud that was not weeded out by the post-election complaint process. Still, it is unclear if five months after the elections, further delay and rejiggering will do anything but change the people who are angry about the results.        

Sobering for everyone, however, are the questions that loom if there is a split between the Parliament and the presidency. Among them is whether the Parliament would have the backing of the police and the army. If the police and the army either blocked the lawmakers from meeting or refused to protect them, leaving the checkpoints near the Parliament unmanned, that would be an invitation to violence, said a senior lawmaker who asked not to be named because of the delicacy of the issue.        

Another possibility is that the police and the army might divide, some allied with the president and some with the Parliament, because many in both security forces have ties to warlords on different sides and might follow their orders. Such a situation would be catastrophic for the Western armies fighting to bring peace to this country, vastly complicating the battles already going on in most provinces.        

Western diplomats on Friday were beginning to wrestle with such gritty questions as whether to attend the opening of the Parliament if members insisted on convening Sunday without President Karzai. &ldquo;If we want to attend the opening of the Parliament and the president orders the army to stop people, do we drive through roadblocks to get there?&rdquo; wondered a Western diplomat, speaking on the condition of anonymity because the subject is so contentious.        

How many members of Parliament would have to be present for Western diplomats to view it as a reflection of the will of the people &mdash; a quorum or more than that? Would they want ministers to attend the opening? What about the two vice presidents? The unanswered questions underscore the seriousness of the situation and the ways it could fracture the country.        
Rod Nordland and Ruhullah Khapalwak contributed reporting from Kabul, and Michael Schwirtz from Moscow.
