
TEL AVIV &mdash; The tents are lined up on the grassy median of this city&rsquo;s most stylish avenue, scores of them, populated by a downtown mix of characters: the unemployed down-and-out next to the artistic elite; half-naked men in straw hats; women in minidresses. Surrounding them are protest posters (&ldquo;The only place left to live is the cemetery&rdquo;) and designated spots for cooking or getting an Internet connection.        

Six months after Cairo&rsquo;s Tahrir Square became synonymous with the region&rsquo;s transformation, another Middle Eastern city has been hit by Facebook-driven protests with potentially serious political consequences. But here in Israel, where urban tent cities began springing up a week ago and continue multiplying across the country, the issue is not democracy but the plight of the consumer, especially in housing, food and other basic goods.        

And while Israel&rsquo;s Arab neighbors have historically been seen here as the source of the country&rsquo;s woes, now some are calling them an inspiration.        

&ldquo;Religious Jews like to think of us as a light unto nations, meaning that others will learn from us, but this time we have learned from the nations around us that change can come from people power,&rdquo; said Moshe Gant, a 35-year-old business analyst who came here with his baby to support the protesters.        

While economic issues factored into the Arab uprisings as well, the issue preoccupying Israel is fairly specific: the cost and availability of housing. In recent weeks, similar concerns were raised about the price of cottage cheese and gasoline. Taken together, these issues have created an alliance crossing traditional left and right and are being viewed as the first threat to the stable government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.        

The government and Parliament have reacted quickly, promising construction of thousands of new housing units, along with a set of changes to bulldoze bureaucracies and press landlords to expand the market through a mix of carrot and stick (sell and get a bonus; don&rsquo;t sell and face a tax). As elsewhere in the region, various political forces have attached themselves to the movement. It remains unclear whether the promises will satisfy the protesters or feed their indignation.        

&ldquo;This is the first time that instead of fighting against the Arabs we are fighting for something &mdash; our life and that of our children,&rdquo; said Eldad Yaniv, a veteran organizer of the left who came to the Tel Aviv protest a few days after it started and pitched 30 identical tents with other activists. &ldquo;The old right and left are fading. This country needs a new left, its own New Deal.&rdquo;        

Ronen Shoval, the founder and chairman of the far-right group Im Tirzu, was standing not far away and said his group was there because one of its goals was to build a strong, healthy society.        

For Israel&rsquo;s finance minister, the rise of this new consumer protest culture is happening at an odd time, just when the country&rsquo;s macroeconomic data are the best they have ever been and offer a contrast to the woes of much of the world in recent years.        

In an interview in his Jerusalem office &mdash; a few dozen protesters nearly blocking the building&rsquo;s entrance &mdash; the finance minister, Yuval Steinitz of the governing Likud Party, noted that Israel&rsquo;s unemployment rate was 5.8 percent, a 25-year low and about half of that of Europe. Its currency, the shekel, is strong. Its exports outstrip its imports. It is attracting foreign investors, especially in the high-tech sector.        

And an innovation by Mr. Steinitz, a former philosophy professor with little economic experience, seems to be proving its value. Israel now creates its state budget for two years at a time instead of one, the only country in the world to do so.        

The International Monetary Fund recently wrote in a letter to Mr. Steinitz that it viewed the change &ldquo;as integral to the success of the new fiscal rule&rdquo; because it avoids burdensome annual negotiations and allows for more efficient execution. Officials in Europe and in Washington have told Mr. Steinitz they are considering the approach themselves.        

Some economists argue that it is Israel&rsquo;s very success that is feeding the protests, a sense that Israel may be soaring, but most of its citizens are not.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;The Israeli public has the sense that the wonderful growth we are always hearing about does not filter down to most of the people,&rdquo; said Avi Simhon, an economist at Hebrew University in Jerusalem. &ldquo;The more we speak of the success of the Israeli economy, the more we will hear about this. If we had 9 percent unemployment, people wouldn&rsquo;t be worrying about the price of cottage cheese.&rdquo;        

Many Israelis said that for years they accepted the notion of hardship in a young, isolated country struggling to get on its feet. They lived in tiny apartments and made do with basics. But today Israel&rsquo;s gross domestic product per capita is $31,000, comparable to that of Spain and Italy, and the country has been welcomed into the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a club of the nearly three dozen richest countries.        

Yet the gap between rich and poor in Israel is among the greatest of those countries, as is the number of people living below the poverty line. The struggling groups are mostly ultra-Orthodox Jews and Arabs, both with large families and poor employment. Still nearly everyone has been affected by rising rents stemming from a drop in construction, followed by a rush on available housing when mortgage rates dropped.        

The latest protests began with a Facebook page created by a 25-year-old Tel Aviv woman named Daphni Leef, who urged everyone to join her with pitched tents on Rothschild Boulevard in Tel Aviv, a gracious and historic spot facing the country&rsquo;s national theater.        

They came last Thursday and have been multiplying not only there but in other cities. On Tuesday, the front page of the newspaper Yediot Aharonot, one of the country&rsquo;s biggest, was devoted to the phenomenon. &ldquo;Tents Across the Country,&rdquo; said the headline, accompanied by photographs of gatherings in Sderot, Kfar Saba, Beersheba and Ramat Gan, in addition to Tel Aviv.        

Israel&rsquo;s consumer difficulties most likely arise from a range of factors, including its small size, few producers and plethora of regulations and middlemen, economists say. Mr. Steinitz, the finance minister, says he hopes to create competition by encouraging more imports.        

But it also seems clear that protests produce results. After the country was nearly up in arms from a Facebook-led protest over the cost of cottage cheese &mdash; a daily staple &mdash; a few weeks ago, companies slashed the price by 25 percent.        

As Yevgeny Chechel, a participant at the tent city here, said of the finance minister, &ldquo;Tell Steinitz that if he&rsquo;s feeling an earthquake, that&rsquo;s just us.&rdquo;        
