
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The Afghan government officially took control of security in the capital of Helmand Province on Wednesday as part of a sweeping effort to begin to disentangle Western forces from the country.        

Highlighting the risk to Afghan civilians as the transition got under way, however, insurgents struck in one of the provincial capitals that is scheduled to be handed over later this week.        

The attack by a suicide bomber on a bicycle was in the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif, which had been considered largely safe until this spring, when a mob attacked the United Nations compound there, killing seven employees. The attack on Wednesday killed four people and wounded 12.        

Both the Afghan government and its Western allies have made passing control of security to Afghans a centerpiece of the strategy here. For the government, it is a way to assert its sovereignty and prove to its citizens that it is not reliant on foreign forces. For Western countries, the transition will allow them to begin drawing down troops.        

When President Hamid Karzai announced the first seven places &mdash; four cities and most of three provinces &mdash; to make the transition, he made it clear that security and the civilian transition would go hand in hand. Over the last year, he has increasingly emphasized the message of national sovereignty.        

&ldquo;The people of Afghanistan don&rsquo;t want the foreigners to be in charge of security anymore,&rdquo; he told an audience at the Afghan military academy in Kabul in March. &ldquo;Transition means taking responsibility for both security and development.&rdquo;        

However, these first steps, which are being celebrated with ceremonies in each of the places where Afghans take over, test very little about the readiness of the country&rsquo;s forces.        

Two of the provinces that will be transferred, Bamiyan and Panshir, have handled much of their own security during the nearly 10 years that international forces have been in Afghanistan and are strongly anti-Taliban, ethnically homogenous and relatively peaceful.        

Of the four cities being transferred, two of them &mdash; Lashkar Gah, the capital of Helmand Province, and Mehtarlam in Laghman Province &mdash; are islands of relative calm in otherwise still violent and unpredictable provinces. The other two, Mazar-i-Sharif in Balkh Province in the north and Herat in the west, are in provinces that have been less violent than most others. The remaining place where the transfer is planned, Kabul Province, has a large concentration of security forces, both Afghan and Western, making it one of the best patrolled areas of Afghanistan. Not all of Kabul Province will be transferred: Sarobi District will remain under control of French NATO troops a bit longer.        

The announcement in advance of the locations where the transfers would occur has made it relatively easy for insurgents to focus on them for attacks.        

Afghan officials, accompanied by journalists, are visiting the seven areas this week to mark the largely symbolic handovers. Most of the places are fairly peaceful and have long controlled their own security with little help from foreign troops.        

All seven places were chosen by Mr. Karzai in consultation with his advisers and seemed to have been picked with an effort to show improvement throughout the country. Since the surge in American troops last year, the Taliban have been routed from many of their strongholds, particularly in the south, but have managed to continue to attack civilians, leaving a deep sense of insecurity in some places.        

&ldquo;The foreign troops did not pay attention to Helmand until two years ago,&rdquo; said Malika Helmandi, a member of the Helmand provincial council. &ldquo;Now there are some improvements, but now the foreign troops are saying they will leave the province and the people are getting worried.&rdquo;        

The governor of Laghman Province said he was optimistic, although the province has never been entirely free of the Taliban.        

&ldquo;Yes, there are problems,&rdquo; the governor, Mohammed Iqbal Azizi, said. &ldquo;People should not expect Switzerland in the Hindu Kush. The Hindu Kush cannot be transformed in 10 years, because 30 years of war and all the problems. But communities are becoming immune to Taliban radicalization.&rdquo;        

Late Tuesday and early Wednesday, there were two attacks in the southern province of Kandahar. Although Kandahar has been calmer since NATO began a major operation there over the past year, Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s half brother was assassinated there last week.        
Reporting in Afghanistan was contributed by Enayat Najafizada from Mazar-i-Sharif, Sangar Rahimi from Kabul, Ray Rivera from Mehtarlam and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar.
