
MOSCOW &mdash; Where is President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan and what is he doing? His office says he is on vacation, but will not say where. A German newspaper says he is in Hamburg, Germany, recovering from surgery.        

The newspaper, Bild, did not disclose the source for its report on Wednesday, but said that Mr. Nazarbayev, 71, arrived in Hamburg about 10 days ago, underwent a surgical procedure on his prostate last Thursday at University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf and had been recovering at a luxury hotel. A spokeswoman for the hospital said she could neither confirm nor deny the report, citing patient confidentiality.        

Even so, the report elevated concerns about political instability in Kazakhstan, an important oil-exporting nation, and sent a shudder through energy markets.        

Back in Kazakhstan, the only official explanation of Mr. Nazarbayev&rsquo;s absence came in a one-sentence statement published on July 11 saying that the president was &ldquo;on short-term leave.&rdquo; A spokesman for the Kazakh Embassy in Berlin told Reuters that he could not say if Mr. Nazarbayev was in Germany, only that the president &ldquo;is on vacation, and he could be anywhere in the world.&rdquo;        

The Bild report said that &ldquo;the Kazakh president apparently reacted well to the surgery&rdquo; and that he was &ldquo;already back on his feet.&rdquo; German officials declined to discuss the reported medical treatment.        

Stability in Kazakhstan, a vast, arid nation on the steppes between Russia and western China, is important to the United States because of the country&rsquo;s huge crude oil reserves and the potential they hold to help Western nations rely less on the volatile Middle East for energy supplies.        

American oil companies are deeply invested in Kazakhstan, a former Soviet republic. Exxon Mobil, along with an international consortium, is developing the Kashagan field in the Kazakh sector of the Caspian Sea, the largest single oil discovery since Prudhoe Bay in Alaska. Chevron is pumping about 700,000 barrels a day from the nearby Tengiz field.        

Mr. Nazarbayev has ruled the country since the dissolution of the Soviet Union and acts as a guarantor for these deals. He remains popular in Kazakhstan, where living standards have soared on the back of rising oil prices, but the elections that have extended his tenure have never been judged to be free and fair by Western observers, including the one earlier this year.        

The president&rsquo;s son-in-law has been the focus of analysts&rsquo; speculation about his potential successor. Timur Kulibayev, the husband of Mr. Nazarbayev&rsquo;s middle daughter, is considered well positioned for any potential succession struggle. He was as an executive of the national oil company and the head of Kazakhstan&rsquo;s sovereign wealth fund. Oksana N. Makushina, deputy editor of Golos Respubliki, an opposition newspaper, said of the report, &ldquo;For Kazakhs, it&rsquo;s a wake-up call to think about a Kazakhstan without Nazarbayev.&rdquo;        
