
LONDON &mdash; Under pressure in the widening phone hacking scandal, the News Corporation on Wednesday said that it would no longer pay the legal fees for the private investigator at the center of the hacking and partly lifted a confidentiality agreement on one of its law firms to allow the firm to give evidence to Parliament and to the police.        

The two concessions, coming a day after the appearance by Rupert Murdoch and his son James before a fractious parliamentary hearing, may shed further light on the extent of knowledge of the illegal phone hacking among executives inside Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s British newspaper empire and whether some tried to conceal it.        

A parliamentary committee report published separately on Wednesday criticized executives for trying to &ldquo;deliberately thwart&rdquo; a police investigation about phone hacking in 2005 and 2006 that ended with the jailing of the private investigator, Glenn Mulcaire.        

The News Corporation said that it was immediately terminating &ldquo;any arrangement to pay the legal fees of Glenn Mulcaire,&rdquo; who pleaded guilty in 2007 to hacking into the phones of staff members of the royal family while under contract to The News of the World, the News Corporation-owned tabloid shut down by Mr. Murdoch this month.        

The move to end the arrangement raises the question of whether Mr. Mulcaire will break his long silence over the phone hacking scandal that has engulfed the News Corporation.        

After refusing to speak publicly for four years since leaving jail about his role or about what his superiors at The News of the World might have known about his practices, within hours of the announcement he appeared in front of television cameras for the BBC outside his home to suggest he might speak soon.        

&ldquo;As you can appreciate, we are in the middle of a number of inquiries at the moment,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a very fluid and developing situation. Like I said, the developments have been different from day to day, and I have no further comment to make at this stage. However, this may change.&rdquo;        

His trove of detailed private notes, seized from his home by the police in 2006, is at the core of the widening scandal. Names, numbers and details of phone hacking from the notes have come into public view through legal discovery in the courts, and show an array of victims well beyond the royals including celebrities, government officials and most notably a 13-year-old girl who was abducted and killed in 2002. Mr. Mulcaire himself is now a defendant in 37 lawsuits over phone hacking claims, with more suits being prepared and filed every week.        

Mr. Mulcaire employs at least one lawyer full time, and several others part time, according to two lawyers with firsthand knowledge of the arrangements, and there have been questions about how he could afford so costly a defense.        

In the hearing Tuesday, James Murdoch confirmed that the News Corporation was paying Mr. Mulcaire&rsquo;s legal expenses, only for the company to move a day later to end the payments. Mr. Mulcaire could not be reached for further comment.        

Mr. Murdoch also confirmed payment of legal fees for Clive Goodman, the tabloid&rsquo;s royals reporter who was also jailed in 2007, but the News Corporation did not say Wednesday whether it was ending those payments. Mr. Goodman has since been re-arrested in a new police investigation over allegations of police corruption. The Murdochs repeatedly said in their testimony before Parliament on Tuesday that they had not known about the hacking.        

In a separate, qualified concession, the News Corporation also announced that it would release the law firm Harbottle & Lewis from some of its client confidentiality requirements so that it could address questions from police and parliamentary inquiries into phone hacking and police corruption with respect to &ldquo;what they were asked to do.&rdquo;        

The law firm, which has counted the queen among its clients, was embroiled in the scandal because it reviewed The News of the World e-mail that suggested payments to the police. News International, the News Corporation&rsquo;s British newspaper group, did not turn that information over to the police for four years.        

A full waiver could open up those files to victims of hacking who are lining up to sue the company.        
Don Van Natta Jr. contributed reporting.
