
LONDON &mdash; The heroics of Wendi Deng Murdoch drew gasps of awe when she lunged out of her seat in a committee room on Tuesday to protect her husband, Rupert Murdoch, from a protester wielding a shaving cream pie.        

But there was another woman who actually intervened before Mrs. Murdoch did: Janet Nova, the News Corporation&rsquo;s interim group general counsel.        

It may have gone unnoticed in the scuffle and in the media hype that ensued, but Ms. Nova was the first to react to the protester&rsquo;s approach. She leapt to her feet and, clutching her iPad, tried to block the man&rsquo;s reach toward her boss. Mrs. Murdoch followed right behind her, and she appeared to reach over Ms. Nova as she swung her arm in a great arc to deliver a sharp punch.        

Ms. Nova, who is 46 and based in New York, is a graduate of Princeton and Columbia Law School who has been with the company since 1997. She was one of the troupe of lawyers and public-relationship advisers who prepared Mr. Murdoch for his appearance before a parliamentary committee looking into phone hacking by the company&rsquo;s British newspapers.        

Through over two hours of questioning, Ms. Nova, wearing a gray suit, sat patiently a few feet behind and to the left of Mr. Murdoch. When the protester &mdash; identified in British news reports as Jonathan May-Bowles, a comedian who performs under the name Johnnie Marbles &mdash; stormed toward the witness table, Ms. Nova provided the first line of defense and Mrs. Murdoch the second, while James Murdoch, Rupert&rsquo;s 38-year-old son, seemed frozen in surprise.        

It was a curious moment, transforming a hearing that was, for many onlookers, mainly about seeing Rupert Murdoch humbled into one in which he enjoyed at least a little bit of sympathy from the crowd in the room and from the millions of viewers who watched on television.        

While Ms. Nova&rsquo;s role has gone largely unsung, Mrs. Murdoch&rsquo;s actions immediately became a sensation on the Internet, where some people posting on Twitter coined a new verb &mdash; &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll Wendi you!&rdquo; &mdash; and others sought more information about &ldquo;the woman behind the punch.&rdquo;        

Ms. Nova has been in her post for only a short time. Rupert Murdoch wrote in a company e-mail announcing her promotion on June 20 that she &ldquo;has handled a number of major acquisitions for the company over the past several years, in addition to managing our corporate reporting and governance matters.&rdquo;        
