
BERLIN &mdash; The bones of Rudolf Hess, Hitler&rsquo;s deputy, have been exhumed and will be disposed of because his grave in the small Bavarian town of Wunsiedel has become a pilgrimage site for neo-Nazis, the town&rsquo;s mayor said in an interview on Thursday.        

Karl-Willi Beck, 56, who has been mayor of Wunsiedel since 2002, said the cemetery administrators removed Hess&rsquo;s remains and his gravestone early Wednesday. &ldquo;It was the right thing to do,&rdquo; Mr. Beck said.        

He said the bones would be cremated and scattered over an undisclosed location at sea, but he gave no other details.        

Hess was born in 1894 in Alexandria, Egypt, the son of a German importer. He was an infantryman and pilot for the German forces during World War I. Afterward he became caught up in nationalist politics. He joined the National Socialist Party in 1920 and became a confidant of Hitler, who dictated much of his book, &ldquo;Mein Kampf,&rdquo; to Hess when they were both imprisoned.        

After Hitler rose to dictatorial power, Hess became his deputy, but as World War II drew near, his influence declined compared with that of other top Nazis.        

In May 1941, Hess created an international sensation by secretly flying his personal Messerschmitt fighter plane to Britain and parachuting into Scotland, apparently hoping to negotiate a peace between Britain and Germany as the Axis was preparing to invade the Soviet Union. Instead, Hess was disowned by Hitler and imprisoned by the British for the duration of the war.        

At the Nuremberg trials, Hess was given a life sentence, which he served in Spandau Prison in what was West Berlin. He was found hanged on Aug. 17, 1987, at age 93. It was unclear at the time how such an old man, under close guard as the last inmate of Spandau, could have hanged himself.        

Hess requested in his will that he be buried in Wunsiedel, a town of 9,600 people where his family had a vacation home. His parents were also buried there. At the time, the supervisor of the graveyard, the local Lutheran church, did not object and said the wishes of the deceased could not be ignored, according to the newspaper S&uuml;ddeutsche Zeitung.        

Hess was unusual among top Nazis in having a marked grave. Most, including those executed at Nuremberg after the war, were cremated and their ashes scattered.        

Since 1987, Hess&rsquo;s grave has been treated as a shrine by neo-Nazis, who call Hess a martyr. Mr. Beck, the mayor, said that as many as 6,000 to 7,000 neo-Nazis converged on the town each year around the anniversary of Hess&rsquo;s death.        

&ldquo;When I was elected, we organized a resistance against these neo-Nazis,&rdquo; said Mr. Beck, a member of the Christian Social Union, the governing party in Bavaria. &ldquo;The churches and all the political parties and the trade unions and other organizations rallied together to demonstrate against the neo-Nazis, and have them banned from visiting the cemetery each August.&rdquo;        

A court issued an order in 2005 banning the gatherings, but neo-Nazis continued to visit the grave and lay wreaths, so the town obtained an agreement from the church and the family to demolish the grave.        
