
BLANTYRE, Malawi (AP) &mdash; At least 10 people have died during two days of protests in this southern African nation, which has enjoyed relative peace and stability in the past decade but has been recently suffering from fuel shortages and price increases.        

Hospital officials and activists said that the victims had been shot with live ammunition, and that at least 44 others in the northern city of Mzuzu were being treated for gunshot wounds.        

President Bingu wa Mutharika vowed to &ldquo;ensure peace using any measure I can think of.&rdquo; He addressed protesters, saying, &ldquo;If you break shops and banks will you have fuel?&rdquo;        

Britain&rsquo;s minister for Africa, Henry Bellingham, appealed to Mr. Mutharika to rein in security forces and loyalists.        

&ldquo;The ongoing violence and reprisals by elements connected to President Mutharika&rsquo;s Democratic Progressive Party underline the concern that the U.K. has expressed about the state of democratic governance and human rights in Malawi,&rdquo; he said in a statement. &ldquo;The rights of free assembly and expression guaranteed under the Malawian Constitution must be respected. The U.K. utterly condemns the threatening behavior of machete-wielding D.P.P. activists and the violent attacks on demonstrators and the media.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mutharika first came to power in a 2004 election, and he was re-elected in May 2009. But tensions have been growing this year over worsening fuel shortages. High unemployment and a weakening economy also threaten to reverse development gains made in the early years of his presidency.        

On Wednesday, protesters attacked businesses belonging to the president&rsquo;s political allies. Looters in the capital of Lilongwe attacked shops belonging to ruling party officials, witnesses said.        

Amnesty International said eight journalists were beaten by the police during Wednesday&rsquo;s protests, and that a female radio reporter was seriously wounded.        

Simeon Mawanza, a researcher with the human rights group, said the government was becoming increasingly intolerant of dissenting voices and said he worried that the violence could intensify because &ldquo;people died at the hands of police.&rdquo;        

Tim Hughes, a political analyst at the South African Institute of International Affairs, said the unrest was uncharacteristic for Malawi and appeared tied to the decline in the country&rsquo;s economy. &ldquo;Certainly since democracy in 1994, while there&rsquo;s been sporadic outbursts of interparty violence, there&rsquo;s never been a violent protest like this on the streets,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;This form of public protest, taking on the state, expressing this degree of frustration, it&rsquo;s a new phenomenon.&rdquo;        

Britain, the country&rsquo;s former colonial ruler, has indefinitely suspended aid to the country, citing concerns about economic management and a crackdown on human rights.        

Elections are not scheduled again until 2014, and Mr. Mutharika is barred from seeking a third term. A 77-year-old former World Bank economist, Mr. Mutharika had won widespread praise from international institutions and donor governments for pushing through economic reforms and clamping down on corruption. But he has also alienated many former allies including his predecessor, whom he accused of plotting to assassinate him.        

Malawi, which gained independence from Britain in 1964, is among the world&rsquo;s least developed nations, and U.N.AIDS estimates that there are 920,000 people living with H.I.V./AIDS in the country.        
