
SANA, Yemen (AP) &mdash; A senior leader of Yemen&rsquo;s Al Qaeda branch has been killed in fighting in the nearly lawless south of the country, the Defense Ministry said Thursday.        

A ministry statement said that the leader, Ayed al-Shabwani, was killed in fighting on Tuesday near the town of Zinjibar, a provincial capital that has been held by Islamist militants since May.        

The statement said one of the leader&rsquo;s cousins, Awad al-Shabwani, was also killed in the fighting, but it gave no further details.        

Ayed al-Shabwani had been on the government&rsquo;s list of most-wanted Qaeda-linked militants. He survived an attack in January by Yemeni warplanes in the Wadi Adeeda area in Marib Province.        

The government claimed then that the airstrike killed Mr. Shabwani, along with Qassim al-Raimi, the military chief of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, as the Yemeni branch is called, and four other operatives of the group. But Al Qaeda released a statement shortly afterward denying that any of its men were killed in the raid.        

Mr. Shabwani is from the Shabwani tribe in Shabwa Province and was believed to have been protected by his tribe. He was accused of providing sanctuary for top Qaeda figures in the country and was implicated in several fatal attacks on security troops and police officers.        

The Qaeda group has been taking advantage of the turmoil arising from months of antigovernment protests across much of Yemen, seizing and holding territory in the south. Al Qaeda&rsquo;s growing presence in Yemen has been a source of serious concern to the United States and Yemen&rsquo;s wealthy gulf neighbors.        

In its attempt to dislodge the militants from the towns of Zinjibar and Jaar, both in Abyan Province, warplanes and heavy artillery pounded their positions throughout Wednesday night and early Thursday, killing more than 20 militants, military officials said.        

They said at least 13 soldiers were killed and more than 60 were wounded in fighting against militants at the Al Code area, near Zinjibar, during the past 24 hours.        

Soldiers reported seeing the bodies of dozens of militants killed in government shelling of the area, the officials said, speaking on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak to the news media.        

As many as 90,000 people are thought to have fled Abyan Province to the port city of Aden and other nearby cities since the militants seized Zinjibar and Jaar.        

Elsewhere, government troops opened fire on a large antigovernment demonstration in the city of Taiz, killing one protester, said an activist, Mahmoud Taha.        
