
ZUMPAHUAC&Aacute;N, Mexico &mdash;Eyes pop open, mouths contort, a chorus of crisp &ldquo;ahhs&rdquo; rings through the room.        

The mescal, the Mexican firewater best known in the United States for the worm in the bottle, has incinerated the tongue, scorched the back of the throat and begun its lava flow to the stomach.        

No shots here; the drink is sipped and savored, swirled about the mouth like the finest of wines, inducing a chaser of haughty adjectives.        

&ldquo;Citrusy.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Honey-scented.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Woody,&rdquo; come the assessments from the gathering. Far from a college dorm party, it is a group of mostly 20- and 30-something professionals discovering the finer points of the artisanal version of the drink at a recent tasting in this farming village two hours from Mexico City.        

&ldquo;This is clean liquid,&rdquo; Fructuoso Garcia, 84, one of a handful of producers in this region, stood and declared to the group. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t put anything in to beef up the flavor. This is nothing like you get from the factory.&rdquo;        

Mr. Garcia is one of several local producers fighting to share in the boom in Mexican spirits, with mescal, against all odds, taking a star turn.        

It is moving a bit out of the shadow of tequila, the far more popular and, let&rsquo;s face it, smoother spirit that has won fans (and hangovers) around the world.        

Both are derived from agave, a plant native to Mexico, and technically speaking, tequila is a type of mescal (though in Mexico they are regarded as very different drinks, much like champagne and wine). While tequila is made from a specific variety of the plant&rsquo;s fruit and produced mainly in Jalisco State, mescal (or mezcal as it is spelled in Mexico) is made from a broader class and is often viewed as the earthier, country cousin, distilled in a centuries-old process distinct from tequila&rsquo;s and with an alcohol content generally in excess of 45 percent.        

Different regions have their own versions of mescal, but share a common selling point with the popular saying: &ldquo;Mescal for everything bad &mdash; and everything good, too.&rdquo; It is a folk remedy for colds and indigestion. But it is probably best known for the worm in the bottle &mdash; a marketing gimmick for a few brands from Oaxaca State (a few use a scorpion instead.) And, worm or not, it tends to go down like a flick of lightning. Which may be the point.        

Bars and restaurants with mescal, tequila and other traditional drinks as their primary offerings &mdash; including pulque and sotol, also derived from agave &mdash; are springing up all over Mexico City.        

Exports of mescal (up 54 percent last year) and tequila (up 12 percent) have surged, as the trendier precincts of New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and other cities find there is more to Mexican liquor than margaritas.        

Catering to tourists&rsquo; interest, Mexico City in December opened the Museum of Tequila and Mescal at a historic square downtown. And riding the wave of interest, the number of mescal brands has risen sharply in recent years, to 78 from 28 since 2007, according to Mexico&rsquo;s agriculture ministry.        

Part of it is the never-ending cycle of what&rsquo;s old is hip again. But Mexicans, particularly younger ones, are also on a quest to rediscover and affirm their roots in reaction to the surge of American products and stores inundating the country.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s part of our identity, and it&rsquo;s worth preserving,&rdquo; Andrea Bustillos, a 25-year-old art history student, said after sampling several varieties here. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve seen a world of consumerism. Now we don&rsquo;t want everything the same.&rdquo;        

Fernando Llanos, 34, an artist and one of many bar owners and restaurateurs in Mexico City who have organized tastings and pushed mescal to the top of their offerings, said, &ldquo;It is a passion of mine.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This is for my house,&rdquo; said Mr. Llanos, a partner in Lilit, a bar and restaurant in Mexico City, clutching a bottle of artisanal mescal here in Zumpahuac&aacute;n. &ldquo;But I will see if my sommelier is interested in trying it in the bar. If we don&rsquo;t support the people out in the country here, they are going to get involved in other things.&rdquo;        

Cornelio P&eacute;rez, founder of a group called Mezcales Tradicionales, is the pied piper for artisanal mescal: he is even organizing a campaign to have mescal put on Unesco&rsquo;s list of Intangible Cultural Heritage and Humanity, as traditional Mexican food was last fall.        
(Page 2 of 2)
He rails against the commercial variety, which may carry the official stamp of the national regulatory board but, in his view, lacks flavor and authenticity. The board has certified mescal from seven states for export, but the spirit is produced in several other states that grow agave, including here in Mexico State surrounding Mexico City. So to sell their mescal, local producers depend on cultural tour operators that organize tastings here, passers-by and bar owners in the know.        

Mr. P&eacute;rez said that he hoped local producers would not get lost in the mescal craze. The proliferation of tequila brands, he says, has led to a dilution in quality, and he frets the same might happen to mescal.        

&ldquo;We do not want to see the tequila-ization of mescal,&rdquo; he said.        

Or, as the museum put it in its display on artisanal mescal, while certification labels &ldquo;help promote cultural heritage and regional development, they can also exclude and marginalize small traditional producers, putting them at a disadvantage.&rdquo;        

Traditional producers still employ the techniques from centuries ago. Indigenous people had long fermented agave, popularly known as maguey, but the Spanish brought distilling techniques that gave rise to mescal, tequila and other spirits.        

Jos&eacute; Luis Medina, a mescal producer here, said his family had made the liquor for generations. It is a painstaking process of uprooting the large, heavy agave, roasting the heart (known as the pi&ntilde;a, for its resemblance to a pineapple) in deep pits, grinding and fermenting it in wood stills and distilling the vapor. It is the burning &mdash; mescal is the Nahuatl word for &ldquo;cooked maguey&rdquo; &mdash; that imbues the smoky flavor.        

&ldquo;Finding mescal in a house here is like finding tortillas; it is everywhere,&rdquo; said Guadalupe V&aacute;zquez Quir&oacute;s, 23, the fourth generation of a family of mezcaleros, as they are known. He had his first sip at age 8.        

His family and other producers in this region grow corn, beans and other crops to help make ends meet, but find that more city folk are coming out for mescal. Last year, production at the V&aacute;zquez ranch was up 30 percent.        

He even puts a worm (a moth larvae that lives on agave) in some bottles, to satisfy tourists expecting it. But nothing, they say, is more authentic than freshly distilled mescal off the ranch.        

&ldquo;What you find in the store is like drinking water,&rdquo; said Mr. Medina, offering a plastic cup of his product. &ldquo;Taste this. This is really mescal.&rdquo;        
