
Zygmunt Nagorski, a Polish &eacute;migr&eacute; who wrote widely about East-West relations during the cold war and founded an organization that addresses ethics in international business, died on June 26 at a retirement home in Washington. He was 98.        

His death was confirmed by his son, Andrew.        

Mr. Nagorski was president of the Center for International Leadership from the time he founded it in 1986 until his retirement in 2004. The center, in Washington, holds seminars for executives of American and multinational corporations that examine corporate cultures, leadership development and corporate as well as individual ethical values.        

Mr. Nagorski arrived in the United States in 1948 after serving in World War II with Polish forces in exile under British command. By then his command of English made it possible for him to be hired as a copy editor at The Chattanooga Times.        

Over the years his freelance journalism and opinion articles, most of them focused on Polish affairs, were published in The New York Times, The Christian Science Monitor, The Washington Post and The Wall Street Journal, among other newspapers.        

Three years after becoming an American citizen in 1953, Mr. Nagorski was hired by the United States Information Agency, and over the next 10 years he served as an information officer at embassies in Egypt, South Korea and France. In 1966 he left government service to join the Foreign Policy Association, a nonprofit educational organization in New York, as special assistant to its president. He was later program director at the Council on Foreign Relations and then vice president and director of seminars at the Aspen Institute for Humanistic Studies.        

Zygmunt Witold Nagorski Jr. was born in Warsaw on Sept. 27, 1912, one of two sons of Zygmunt and Maria Cederbaum Nagorski.        

After receiving a law degree from Jagiellonian University in Krakow, he was drafted into the Polish Army. By then he had married Marie Bogdaszewska. After the Nazi occupation of Poland, the Nagorskis fled to England by way of France, and joined the rest of his family. Mr. Nagorski became a paratrooper with the Polish forces in exile.        

Besides his wife and son, Mr. Nagorski is survived by two daughters, Terry and Maria Nagorski; six grandchildren; and nine great-grandchildren.        
