
OSLO &mdash; A lone political extremist bombed the government center here on Friday, killing 7 people, the police said, before heading to an island summer camp for young members of the governing Labor Party and killing at least 80 people.        

The police arrested a 32-year-old Norwegian man in connection with both attacks, the deadliest on Norwegian soil since World War II.        

The explosions in Oslo, from one or more bombs, turned the tidy Scandinavian capital into a scene reminiscent of terrorist attacks in Baghdad or Oklahoma City, panicking people and blowing out windows of several government buildings, including one housing the office of the Norwegian prime minister, Jens Stoltenberg, who was unharmed.        

The state television broadcaster, citing the police, said seven people had been killed and at least 15 wounded in the explosions, which they said appeared to be an act of domestic terrorism.        

Even as the police locked down a large area of the city after the blasts, the suspect, dressed as a police officer, entered the youth camp on the island of Utoya, about 19 miles northwest of Oslo, a Norwegian security official said, and opened fire. &ldquo;He said it was a routine check in connection with the terror attack in Oslo,&rdquo; one witness told VG Nett, the Web site of a national newspaper.        

Of the at least 80 people killed on the island, some were as young as 16, the police said on national television early Saturday.        

Terrified youths jumped into the water to escape. &ldquo;Kids have started to swim in a panic, and Utoya is far from the mainland,&rdquo; said Bjorn Jarle Roberg-Larsen, a Labor Party member who spoke by phone with teenagers on the island, which has no bridge to the mainland. &ldquo;Others are hiding. Those I spoke with don&rsquo;t want to talk more. They&rsquo;re scared to death.&rdquo;        

Many could not flee in time.        

&ldquo;He first shot people on the island,&rdquo; a 15-year-old camper named Elise told The Associated Press. &ldquo;Afterward he started shooting people in the water.&rdquo;        

Most of the campers were teenagers but there were also adults on the island, who may have been among the victims.        

After the shooting the police seized a 32-year-old Norwegian man on the island, according to the police and Justice Minister Knut Storberget. He was later identified as Anders Behring Breivik and characterized by officials as a right-wing extremist, citing previous writings including on his Facebook page.        

The acting police chief, Sveinung Sponheim, said the suspect&rsquo;s Internet postings &ldquo;suggest that he has some political traits directed toward the right, and anti-Muslim views, but if that was a motivation for the actual act remains to be seen.&rdquo;        

He said the suspect had also been seen in Oslo before the explosions. The police and other authorities declined to say what the suspect&rsquo;s motivations might have been, but many speculated that the target was Mr. Stoltenberg&rsquo;s liberal government.        

&ldquo;The police have every reason to believe there is a connection between the explosions and what happened at Utoya,&rdquo; the police said. They said they later recovered explosives on the island.        

Mr. Breivik had registered a farm-related business in Rena, in eastern Norway, which the authorities said allowed him to order a large quantity of ammonium nitrate fertilizer, an ingredient that can be used to make explosives. Authorities were investigating whether the chemical may have been used in the bombing.        

A Facebook page matching his name and the photo given out by the police was set up just a few days ago. It listed his religion as Christian, politics as conservative. It said he enjoys hunting, the video games World of Warcraft and Modern Warfare 2, and books including Machiavelli&rsquo;s &ldquo;The Prince&rdquo; and George Orwell&rsquo;s &ldquo;1984.&rdquo;        

There was also a Twitter account apparently belonging to Mr. Breivik. It had one item, posted last Sunday: &ldquo;One person with a belief is equal to the force of 100,000 who have only interests.&rdquo;        

As the investigations continued, the police asked people to leave the center of Oslo, stay indoors and limit their cellphone use. They also said they would initiate border checks.        

The attacks bewildered a nation better known for its active diplomacy and peacekeeping missions than as a target for extremists.        
Elisa Mala reported from Oslo, and J. David Goodman from New York. Reporting was contributed by Souad Mekhennet, Ravi Somaiya and Matthew Saltmarsh from London; Katrin Bennhold from Paris; and Eric Schmitt from Washington.
