
KODINAR, India &mdash; Amit Jethwa had just left his lawyer&rsquo;s office after discussing a lawsuit he had filed to stop an illicit limestone quarry with ties to powerful local politicians. That is when the assassins struck, speeding out of the darkness on  a roaring motorbike,  pistols blazing. He died on the spot, blood pouring from his mouth and nose. He was 38.        



Mr. Jethwa was one of millions of Indians who had embraced the country&rsquo;s five-year-old Right to Information Act, which allows citizens to demand almost any government information. People use the law to stop petty corruption and to solve their most basic problems, like getting access to subsidized food for the poor or a government pension without having to pay a bribe, or determining whether government doctors and teachers are actually showing up for work.        

But activists like Mr. Jethwa who have tried to push such disclosures further &mdash; making pointed inquiries at the dangerous intersection of high-stakes business and power politics &mdash; have paid a heavy price. Perhaps a dozen have been killed since 2005, when the law was enacted, and countless others have been beaten and harassed.        

In many of these cases, the information requested involved allegations of corruption and collusion between politicians and big-money business.        

&ldquo;Now that power people are realizing the power of the right to information, there is a backlash,&rdquo; said Amitabh Thakur, an activist and police official who is writing a book about people killed for demanding information under the law. &ldquo;It has become dangerous.&rdquo;        

India may be the world&rsquo;s largest democracy, but it remains dogged by the twin legacies of feudalism and colonialism, which have often meant that citizens are treated like subjects. Officials who are meant to serve them often act more like feudal lords than representatives of the people.        

The law was intended to be a much-needed leveler between the governors and the governed. In many ways it has worked, giving citizens the power to demand a measure of accountability from bureaucrats and politicians.        

When the law was passed, Mr. Jethwa, a longtime activist who nursed a lifelong grudge against those who abused official power, immediately seized upon it as a powerful new tool.        

His objective was to stop illegal quarries near the Gir National Park, 550 square miles of scrubland and deciduous forest near his hometown, along the southern coast of Gujarat, India&rsquo;s most prosperous state. The preserve is the only remaining habitat of the rare Asiatic lion. The animal is featured on the national emblem of India, and is considered by Hindus to be a sacred incarnation of Lord Vishnu.        

But the forest sits in a mineral-rich area of coastal Gujarat dotted with cement factories that churn out building materials to fuel India&rsquo;s near double-digit economic growth. The limestone that lies just beneath the soil in and around the Gir Forest is an ideal component of cement. By law, the forest and a three-mile boundary around it are off limits to all mining activity. But quarries the size of several football fields have been cut deep into the earth in the protected zone.        

This mining has had serious consequences not only for the forest preserve, but also for water used for drinking and farming. The thirsty limestone is a natural barrier between seawater and fresh groundwater. A recent state government report concluded that limestone mining had allowed seawater to flow into the aquifer, causing an &ldquo;irreversible loss.&rdquo;        

Balu Bhai Socha, an environmental advocate who worked with Mr. Jethwa, said the pace of mining rapidly increased as the local economy boomed.        

&ldquo;The speed with which the illegal mining was going on, we realized, within 10 years they will clean out the whole forest,&rdquo; Mr. Socha said.        

Mr. Jethwa repeatedly filed information requests to unearth the names of those operating the quarries and to see what action had been taken against them. He discovered there were 55 illegal quarries in and around the preserve. One name stood out among the records of land leases, electricity bills and inspection reports: Dinubhai Solanki, a powerful member of Parliament from the Bharatiya Janata Party, which governs Gujarat.        

Mr. Solanki, who had risen from the State Legislature to Parliament, was a local kingmaker and an imperious presence. He had the backing of the local police and bureaucrats, activists here said. Mr. Jethwa and many others suspected that he was the mastermind and principal beneficiary of the illegal mining operation.        

In February 2008, Mr. Jethwa was attacked by a gang of men on motorbikes. He was beaten so badly that he had to be hospitalized. He immediately suspected Mr. Solanki.        

&ldquo;If someone attacks me, or kills me in an accident, if my body is injured &mdash; for these acts the Kodinar MLA Dinu Solanki will be responsible,&rdquo; he wrote in a letter to Gujarat&rsquo;s chief minister, Narendra Modi, after the attack.        

His father begged him to stop.        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
