
TBILISI, Georgia &mdash; Four Georgian photographers accused of spying for Russia were released from custody on Friday as part of a plea bargain agreement, hastily resolving a case that had drawn angry criticism from fellow journalists and media watchdog groups.        

The four photographers &mdash; who included President Mikheil Saakashvili&rsquo;s personal photographer &mdash; were found guilty and received conditional sentences of between six months and three years. Though their lawyers initially said they were not guilty, all four pleaded guilty during questioning and at trial this week. They were released on probation.        

The prosecutor&rsquo;s office said the detainees provided investigators with detailed information, including the identities, tactics and plans of Russian agents operating in Georgia.        

The group made no comment as they left the court on Friday. They included Irakli Gedenidze, Mr. Saakashvili&rsquo;s photographer; his wife, Natia; Zurab Kurtsikidze of the European Pressphoto Agency; and Giorgi Abdaladze, who works on contract with Georgia&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry.        

Groups of journalists have held protests outside the Interior Ministry and the jail since the arrests on July 7. Nino Zuriashvili, a member of Journalism Ethics Charter, said Friday that the plea deal had not blunted her outrage over the prosecution. &ldquo;There was no actual trial; we did not find out what the evidence was,&rdquo; she said.        

The four photographers were arrested before dawn on July 7 and charged with espionage, the latest in a series of prosecutions of Georgians accused of spying for Russia. Police officers searched their homes, seizing evidence that was then classified as secret, and said that three of the four had sold secret documents to agents of Russia&rsquo;s foreign intelligence service.        

On Friday, the prosecutor&rsquo;s office posted part of the evidence on its Web site. Among the documents, which were partly redacted, were transcripts of official meetings between Georgian officials and the foreign minister of Azerbaijan last month. Other items included a description of security measures prepared for a visit of Estonia&rsquo;s president in early July. Also among the documents seized, prosecutors said, was a list of cleaners at the president&rsquo;s offices and a list of Georgian citizens working for international organizations. The authorities also released phone records that they said showed that Mr. Kurtsikidze had placed calls to two Russian intelligence officers.        

Dmitri Tikaradze, an editor at Alia, a newspaper that employed Mr. Abdaladze as a photographer, said he believed that the photographers had been released because of pressure from journalists and the Orthodox patriarchate, among other groups. He called it a &ldquo;partial victory.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I still believe these people are innocent,&rdquo; he said.        
