
CAPE TOWN &mdash; Facing international condemnation for his government&rsquo;s use of force against peaceful demonstrators, Malawi&rsquo;s president defiantly blamed protest organizers and political opponents on Friday for the violence that left 18 people dead this week. And he warned them against a return to the streets.        

&ldquo;This time I&rsquo;ll go after you,&rdquo; President Bingu wa Mutharika said at a police ceremony in the city of Zomba, according to The Associated Press. &ldquo;Even if you hide in holes, I&rsquo;ll smoke you out.&rdquo;        

Rather than reassuring Malawians or the foreign donors who have financed close to half the government&rsquo;s budget, Mr. Mutharika&rsquo;s words are likely to stoke fears that his growing intolerance for dissent could jeopardize the progress Malawi has made in combating hunger, disease and destitution. They may also give those donors reason to consider withholding money from the government.        

The Millennium Challenge Corporation, a United States government agency that recently announced a pact to give Malawi $350 million for its energy sector, released a statement Friday saying it was &ldquo;deeply concerned&rdquo; about this week&rsquo;s events and would closely monitor the government&rsquo;s actions. Its words were a warning. The agency in the past has suspended grants to countries that fail to safeguard human rights and political freedoms.        

Even influential allies who have backed some of Mr. Mutharika&rsquo;s economic policies &mdash; especially government subsidies for small-scale farmers that have helped make Malawi a bread basket for the region &mdash; said they were alarmed by the violent police response to antigovernment protests.        

&ldquo;It puts at grave risk many of the country&rsquo;s recent accomplishments, notably in agriculture and food security,&rdquo; said Jeffrey Sachs, a Columbia University economist who has championed the fertilizer subsidies that have sharply improved corn production. &ldquo;This kind of violent repression and conflict could easily push Malawi back to hunger.&rdquo;        

The protests that started Wednesday in Malawi&rsquo;s major cities had been long planned. They were animated by anger over the government&rsquo;s failure to deal with severe shortages of fuel and foreign exchange, as well as fresh restrictions on press and academic freedoms.        

But many of the demonstrators, who turned up Wednesday morning dressed in red and ready to march, were angered to learn that a court had forbidden the protests the night before. According to activists and others, as lawyers sought to overturn the court order, the police fired tear gas to disperse the peaceful crowd, provoking angry scenes, with some protesters throwing stones.        

The police, in turn, fired on unarmed people, including some looters, according to Undule Mwakasungura, who heads the Human Rights Consultative Committee, which organized the protests.        

&ldquo;The police have no right to kill the people,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Why do they use live bullets?&rdquo;        

Police officials denied that officers killed any peaceful protesters, saying they had used force only against rioters, looters and vandals. &ldquo;The Malawian police service, in the exercise of its constitutional mandate of maintaining law and order, was left with no option but to use all necessary means to restore law and order,&rdquo; said a police spokesman, William Mwaluka.        

After two days of unrest, 130 people had been treated at public hospitals and 18 had died, said Henry Chambali, a Health Ministry spokesman. Mr. Chambali declined to say whether any of the dead &mdash; all of them civilians &mdash; had bullet wounds, saying, &ldquo;We need to do a postmortem with the police to establish the causes of death.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The bodies we saw were heavily beaten and had lost a lot of blood,&rdquo; he said.        

Even before the bloody scenes on Wednesday and Thursday, civic groups and Western diplomats had expressed concern in recent months about growing restrictions on press and academic freedoms in Malawi, including a law that empowered the minister of information to shut down newspapers.        

Academics in Malawi and abroad were outraged that the police had interrogated a lecturer at Chancellor College, in Zomba, part of the University of Malawi, after he told students in a public policy course that Malawi&rsquo;s government could eventually face an uprising like the ones in Egypt and Tunisia if it did not ease the shortages of fuel.        

The lecturer, Blessings Chinsinga, and three colleagues who were also union activists, were fired, and the college, with a student body of about 5,000, was closed for months, only partially reopening last week, said Wiseman Chirwa, a professor of social history there.        

&ldquo;Mutharika is arrogant and unrepentant,&rdquo; Professor Chirwa said after listening to the president on Friday. &ldquo;He has surrounded himself with opportunistic politicians, mostly from his own ethnic group, and he has a very unprofessional police force.&rdquo;        

Such views about the president are increasingly commonplace. A leaked diplomatic cable, published in a Malawian newspaper, quoted the British ambassador describing Mr. Mutharika as becoming more autocratic and unwilling to brook dissent.        

As if to confirm the ambassador&rsquo;s view, the government, angered by the cable, promptly expelled him from the country. But it has proved to be a costly decision. Britain, long one of Malawi&rsquo;s biggest donors, announced on July 14 that it was indefinitely suspending contributions to support Malawi&rsquo;s budget.        

It cited Malawi&rsquo;s economic mismanagement, as well as the suppression of demonstrations, intimidation of civil society groups and the passage of a bill that will make it easier to restrict opponents without legal challenge &mdash; all before this week&rsquo;s events. &ldquo;Poor people in Malawi and British taxpayers alike have been let down,&rdquo; Andrew Mitchell, Britain&rsquo;s secretary of state for international development, said in a statement released at the time.        
