
LONDON &mdash; After a week in Irish politics that some in the press have described as a &ldquo;circus,&rdquo; Ireland&rsquo;s prime minister, Brian Cowen, announced Saturday that he was abandoning his fight for political survival and resigning as leader of the governing Fianna Fail party. But he coupled his move with a pledge to remain as prime minister until after an election in March.        

Mr. Cowen, 51, has been on borrowed time politically since reversing course late last year and accepting a $114 billion economic bailout for the Irish economy that was conditioned on a harsh and deeply unpopular multiyear austerity program.        

Critics within the party have expressed fear that Mr. Cowen has become a political liability. While acknowledging that the party was almost certainly doomed to defeat in the March 11 election, the dissenters made it plain they thought the scope of the defeat would be far greater with Mr. Cowen still in charge.        

Many have seen his fate as a harbinger of what may befall other European political leaders forced into stringent cost-cutting plans that impose widespread hardships on their electorates.        

But even Mr. Cowen&rsquo;s pledge to bow out after the election appeared not to have succeeded in setting the stage for the &ldquo;civilized&rdquo; transition he spoke of as he quit his party&rsquo;s leadership. Within hours, the opposition Fine Gael Party, which is widely expected to win the election in partnership with the Labour Party, moved to hasten the election.        

Fine Gael said that it would drop calls for a parliamentary confidence vote &mdash; but only if the prime minister moved up the date of the election. If the government were to fall in a confidence vote, a finance bill that contains critical austerity measures would be left in limbo, raising the specter of increased economic turmoil.        

The move by Fine Gael appeared to have been prompted by the desire to deny Fianna Fail the time to regroup after Mr. Cowen&rsquo;s announcement.        

Acceptance of the financial bailout, led by the International Monetary Fund and the European Central Bank, was followed by weeks of internal wrangling within Fianna Fail. At first, Mr. Cowen hinted that he would see the austerity package through Parliament, then quit. But by the time a cabinet revolt broke out in the past week, he had dug in, saying he would also stay on to lead the party into the election, called a year before the government&rsquo;s five-year mandate was to expire.        

That decision, made on Thursday, lasted barely 48 hours.        

Mr. Cowen had won a confidence vote from the party&rsquo;s parliamentary bloc on Tuesday, but a third of the votes went against him, and 6 of 15 Fianna Fail cabinet ministers quit their posts.        

Then, on Saturday, Mr. Cowen shifted again, calling a news conference in Dublin to say that he would quit as party leader after all &mdash; but vowing to remain as the head of government until after the election.        

Even Mr. Cowen conceded that this was a novel  arrangement, since the prime minister&rsquo;s post has always gone to the leader of the largest party on the government benches. That would suggest that his successor, who could be named as early as this week, would immediately step in to run the government.        

But Mr. Cowen said he  believed he was needed to help push the austerity program he helped devise through Parliament.        

Mr. Cowen waved off reporters who asked what had changed his mind, saying only that he had spent time with his family on Friday evening, made a fresh assessment  and concluded that quitting as party leader and remaining as caretaker prime minister was &ldquo;the sensible thing to do.&rdquo;        

He said his energies in the seven weeks before the election would be focused on passing the legislation authorizing the austerity measures promised to Ireland&rsquo;s international lenders. These  include sharp cuts in government pensions and the minimum wage, as well as the elimination of about 10 percent of Ireland&rsquo;s public service jobs.        

Mr. Cowen conceded that recent political wrangling  had gotten out of hand, saying at the news conference, &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve got to get away from personality politics, and the depiction of politics as some kind of a circus.&rdquo;  Mr. Cowen  was pushed closer to the political edge in the past month by a report that became the stock of pub banter, the revelation that he played golf in 2008 at a course called Druid&rsquo;s Glen, one of scores of luxury golf clubs that are the legacy of the debt-fueled property boom whose collapse almost drove  the country to  bankruptcy. His principal partner in the game was one of the bankers who, within weeks, were negotiating  for a government bailout that cost taxpayers tens of billions of dollars.        
