
PARIS        

TO some, she is a frail, tormented young woman who was preyed upon by an influential politician and well-known womanizer. To others, she is a publicity-seeking fantasist. To still others, she is a skillful manipulator who helped foment a plot against the Socialist Party.        

Whether fairly or not, Tristane Banon, the 32-year-old writer who contends that Dominique Strauss-Kahn tried to rape her in 2003, has become one of France&rsquo;s most polarizing figures, even to some of her colleagues and friends.        

She was widely criticized this month when she filed a lawsuit against Mr. Strauss-Kahn accusing him of attempted rape, eight years after she says he attacked her and four days after he was freed from house arrest in New York on charges of trying to rape a hotel maid. His lawyers immediately filed a counter-complaint here for slander, insisting that Ms. Banon&rsquo;s charges were imaginary.        

For Ms. Banon herself, the complaint brought an end to years of indecision and turmoil. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s liberation,&rdquo; she said in a phone interview. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the most liberating and violent thing I&rsquo;ve ever done in my life.&rdquo;        

Ms. Banon, who is often shown in magazines here looking like a pale, skinny adolescent and wearing ripped jeans, sounded mature, self-confident and determined. If French prosecutors decide there is not enough evidence to bring her case against Mr. Strauss-Kahn, she said, &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll have to live with this, but I&rsquo;ll live badly.&rdquo;        

In early 2003, she was a 23-year-old journalist, working as an intern for the magazine Paris Match when she interviewed Mr. Strauss-Kahn, a leading Socialist, for a book she was researching about the mistakes of powerful people.        

In various settings since 2007, and most recently in the French weekly magazine L&rsquo;Express, she has described what she says happened &mdash; how Mr. Strauss-Kahn, who arranged to meet her in a sparsely furnished apartment, had tried to rape her, undoing her bra and jeans and putting his hand in her underwear.        

But for eight years, advised by her mother and her friends to keep silent, Ms. Banon said she did not find the courage to bring a criminal complaint against Mr. Strauss-Kahn, whose second wife was her godmother. &ldquo;I was too young and fearful at the time,&rdquo; she said.        

In the interview, Ms. Banon said the episode destroyed her self-confidence, affected her relationships with men and hurt her chances to find work in journalism.        

&ldquo;I never understood why some people destroyed my career, my life, insulted me while I was the victim,&rdquo; she said. In 2006, she married a restaurant owner whose father was a cattle breeder in Normandy, but the marriage ended after several years.        

The Strauss-Kahn episode continued to trouble her, and even before he was arrested in New York, she hired a media-savvy lawyer, David Koubbi, who has handled cases for well-known personalities. Ms. Banon insists that she and Mr. Koubbi have proof to back up her accusation of attempted rape, but she said she could not provide details because the case was continuing.        

Manhattan prosecutors will likely place a request with French authorities to interview Ms. Banon, a person briefed on the investigation said.        

After the episode, she said she immediately informed a close friend as well as her mother, Anne Mansouret. Four years later, in the odd setting of an entertainment show, she spoke about it on television, though Mr. Strauss-Kahn&rsquo;s name was removed; then a year later, she revealed his name. She also fictionalized the event in a novel, &ldquo;Trap&eacute;ziste.&rdquo;        

But in the absence of a legal complaint, few journalists pursued her accusations.        

MS. Banon grew up in Paris&rsquo;s Eighth Arrondissement, near the Champs-&Eacute;lys&eacute;es. But she had to cope with solitude and misfortune at an early age. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve never had a family structure,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m not an unbalanced person, but I was more fragile than others.&rdquo;        

Her father, Gabriel Banon, a Franco-Moroccan businessman and former financial adviser to Yasser Arafat, the late founder of the Palestine Liberation Organization, was married to a woman not her mother. He recognized his paternity of Ms. Banon, but disappeared soon after she was born.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Ms. Banon has called her mother &ldquo;my adored lie,&rdquo; and described her as &ldquo;a beautiful manipulator&rdquo; who never left her house uncoiffed and came home with many different men. In a 2008 interview on France 3 television, Ms. Mansouret admitted, in front of her daughter, that she never loved children. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve never managed to express affection,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;My daughter and I are more friends than family.&rdquo;        

More recently, Ms. Mansouret told police officers that she had had a consensual, though &ldquo;brutal,&rdquo; sexual encounter with Mr. Strauss-Kahn in 2000, the French news media reported. The statements emerged after the police questioned Ms. Mansouret as part of the investigation into her daughter&rsquo;s accusations. Ms. Banon told the newspaper Le Figaro that she had known nothing about the encounter, but that it made Mr. Strauss-Kahn appear even more &ldquo;unbearable&rdquo; to her.        

Ms. Banon&rsquo;s first novel, &ldquo;J&rsquo;ai Oubli&eacute; de la Tuer,&rdquo; or &ldquo;I Forgot to Kill Her,&rdquo; &mdash; one of several semi-autobiographical novels, as she calls them &mdash; was published in 2004 to good reviews. In it, Ms. Banon recounted how she was beaten by an alcoholic Moroccan nanny and how the nanny introduced her to a man who later groped her.        

Ms. Banon left home at 14 to be a nanny herself. She later graduated from journalism school and interned at major newspapers and magazines, including Le Figaro.        

Harold Cobert, a writer and a close friend of Ms. Banon, described her as a smart, fearless woman who has absorbed life&rsquo;s blows with humor and cheer.        

&ldquo;She thinks one should never dwell on the past,&rdquo; Mr. Cobert said.        

BUT after the episode with Mr. Strauss-Kahn, she says she was branded with a reputation. Many in the French media world knew about her accusations against Mr. Strauss-Kahn and feared them, she said. She implied that she was a marked person. &ldquo;I was hired at a radio station and then a month later, my boss would tell me abruptly that he couldn&rsquo;t keep me anymore,&rdquo; she said.        

Like many young French journalists, she set out to make powerful contacts and conquests. She befriended well-known personalities in the media world, including Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Beigbeder, a popular writer and journalist, and Patrick Poivre d&rsquo;Arvor, then a famous television anchorman.        

A recent article in Paris Match said she frequented the rich and trendy Parisian intelligentsia and literary circles of Saint-Germain des Pr&eacute;s, &ldquo;where sexy blondes who look like Lolitas are always welcome.&rdquo;        

Ms. Banon turned to literature, saying she was &ldquo;disappointed with journalism&rdquo; and that &ldquo;I felt freer in novels than in articles.&rdquo;        

In 2009, she started working in publishing as a freelance editor for Le Cherche-Midi, a well-known publishing house, but was fired that September. She then filed a wrongful-dismissal lawsuit against her former boss, Philippe H&eacute;racl&egrave;s. The case is scheduled to be heard beginning in late October.        

Some of her former colleagues described her as unpredictable, and a one-time friend, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that Ms. Banon was at times seductive and good-tempered but at others, anxious and eager for revenge.        

&ldquo;She is soft and charming,&rdquo; the friend said, but she &ldquo;is also tough&rdquo; and can be difficult. &ldquo;In her case with Mr. Strauss-Kahn, she turned everybody against her, including those who worked with her,&rdquo; the friend said.        

Some Socialists have suggested that Ms. Banon was manipulated to stage a plot against Mr. Strauss-Kahn, who recently resigned as head of the International Monetary Fund, and embarrass the party. They point to her unpaid position at the City Hall of Boulogne, near Paris, where the mayor is a member of President Nicolas Sarkozy&rsquo;s party, and her intermittent writing for a Web site close to the party, Atlantico.fr. But Ms. Banon has written little that could be considered political.        

Since Mr. Strauss-Kahn&rsquo;s arrest, Ms. Banon has been living at friends&rsquo; apartments in Paris, with just a red suitcase and her dog Flaubert, a Weimaraner. She has a motto, tattooed around her wrist: &ldquo;Never look back, never think twice.&rdquo;        
