
OSLO &mdash; The Norwegian man charged Saturday with a pair of attacks in Oslo that killed at least 92 people left behind a detailed manifesto outlining his preparations and calling for a Christian war to defend Europe against the threat of Muslim domination, according to Norwegian and American officials familiar with the investigation.        

As stunned Norwegians grappled with the deadliest attack in the country since World War II, a portrait began to emerge of the suspect, Anders Behring Breivik, 32. The police identified him as a right-wing fundamentalist Christian, while acquaintances described him as a gun-loving Norwegian obsessed with what he saw as the threats of multiculturalism and Muslim immigration.        

&ldquo;We are not sure whether he was alone or had help,&rdquo; a police official, Roger Andresen, said at a televised news conference. &ldquo;What we know is that he is right wing and a Christian fundamentalist.&rdquo;        

In the 1,500-page manifesto, posted on the Web hours before the attacks, Mr. Breivik recorded a day-by-day diary of months of planning for the attacks, and claimed to be part of a small group that intended to &ldquo;seize political and military control of Western European countries and implement a cultural conservative political agenda.&rdquo;        

He predicted a conflagration that would kill or injure more than a million people, adding, &ldquo;The time for dialogue is over. We gave peace a chance. The time for armed resistance has come.&rdquo;        

The manifesto was signed Andrew Berwick, an Anglicized version of his name. A former American government official briefed on the case said investigators believed the manifesto was Mr. Breivik&rsquo;s work.        

The manifesto, entitled &ldquo;2083: A European Declaration of Independence,&rdquo; equates liberalism and multiculturalism with &ldquo;cultural Marxism,&rdquo; which the document says is destroying European Christian civilization.        

The document also describes a secret meeting in London in April 2002 to reconstitute the Knights Templar, a Crusader military order. It says the meeting was attended by nine representatives of eight European countries, evidently including Mr. Breivik, with an additional three members unable to attend, including a &ldquo;European-American.&rdquo;        

The document does not name the attendees or say whether they were aware of Mr. Breivik&rsquo;s planned attacks, though investigators presumably will now try to determine if the people exist and what their connection is to Mr. Breivik.        

Thomas Hegghammer, a terrorism specialist at the Norwegian Defense Research Establishment, said the manifesto bears an eerie resemblance to those of Osama bin Laden and other Al Qaeda leaders, though from a Christian rather than a Muslim point of view. Like Mr. Breivik&rsquo;s manuscript, the major Qaeda declarations have detailed accounts of the Crusades, a pronounced sense of historical grievance and calls for apocalyptic warfare to defeat the religious and cultural enemy.        

&ldquo;It seems to be an attempt to mirror Al Qaeda, exactly in reverse,&rdquo; Mr. Hegghammer said.        

Mr. Breivik was also believed to have posted a video on Friday summarizing his arguments. In its closing moments, the video depicts Mr. Breivik in military uniform, holding assault weapons. Rarely has a mass murder suspect left so detailed an account of his activities. The manifesto describes in detail his purchase of chemicals, his sometimes ham-handed experiments making explosives and his first successful test detonation of a bomb in a remote location on June 13.        

He intersperses the account of bomb-making with details of his television-watching, including the Eurovision music contest and the American police drama &ldquo;The Shield.&rdquo;        

The manifesto ends with a chilling signoff: &ldquo;I believe this will be my last entry. It is now Fri July 22nd, 12.51.&rdquo;        

Indeed, the operation appeared to have been extremely well planned.        

According to the police, Mr. Breivik first drew security services to central Oslo when he exploded a car bomb outside a 17-story government office building, killing at least seven people.        

Then he took a public ferry to Utoya Island, where he carried out a remarkably meticulous attack on Norway&rsquo;s current and future political elite. Dressed as a police officer, he announced that he had come to check on the security of the young people who were attending a political summer camp there, many of them the children of members of the governing Labor Party.        

He gathered the campers together and for some 90 hellish minutes he coolly and methodically shot them, hunting down those who fled. At least 85 people, some as young as 16, were killed.        

The police said Saturday evening that they expected the death toll to climb. There were still bodies in the bombed government buildings in Oslo, and at least four people missing on Utoya.        

The police also said that unexploded munitions were still in some downtown Oslo buildings, and they had not ruled out the possibility that Mr. Breivik had accomplices.        
Steven Erlanger reported from Oslo, and Scott Shane from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Elisa Mala, Michael Schwirtz and Matthew Saltmarsh from Oslo, David Jolly from Paris, Nicholas Kulish from Berlin and Christina Anderson from Stockholm .
