
JAFFNA, Sri Lanka (Reuters) &mdash; Citizens in Sri Lanka&rsquo;s former war zone voted for local leaders for the first time in at least a dozen years on Saturday in a poll marked by intimidation, vote-buying and skepticism by the mostly Tamil electorate that there will be any real political change.        

Soldiers remained on the streets across the north, as they have since the May 2009 end of a 26-year war between the government and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, who fought for a separate state for Sri Lanka&rsquo;s Tamil minority.        

The election is for local councils. But it has assumed wider significance with President Mahinda Rajapaksa under pressure to prove to India, an ally, and to the West that he is serious about reconciliation amid calls for an international investigation into war crimes accusations stemming from the conflict&rsquo;s final phase.        

A government victory would allow Mr. Rajapaksa, who is from the Sinhalese ethnic majority, to demonstrate that he has Tamil political support. He has campaigned aggressively, mainly on a platform of development projects that have received mixed reception.        

Around 350,000 people were registered, and turnout was 46 percent in Jaffna and 65 percent in the other major cities of Mullaittivu and Kilinochchi. The figures are robust despite the intimidation and violence, but low by the standards of voters who are used to wartime voting seasons in which defying the Tamil Tigers could lead to death.        

&ldquo;For the people, it is an election that has come after a long time,&rdquo; said a retired principal, K. Shanmuganathan, from Jaffna. &ldquo;So it is very important. People have their own political aspirations, and they should be allowed to express them freely without any force.&rdquo;        

Election observers said a supporter of the ruling United Peoples Freedom Alliance was killed in the Anuradhapura District in an intraparty dispute. In at least 20 villages, uniformed men offered 1,000 Sri Lanka rupees, about $9.15, for people to sell their voting cards, and beat those who refused, an observer group said.        
