
OSLO &mdash; Sunday was a day of remembrance and self-examination for Norway, a small country shaken by the massacre of at least 93 of its people, many of them children, by one of its own.        

The royal family and average citizens alike, some traveling long distances, came to a memorial service for the dead in the Oslo Cathedral. Long lines of people of all ages and colors waited patiently and quietly, some of them crying, to lay flowers or light candles at the spreading blanket of bouquets in front of the cathedral. Someone propped up a radio on a post so those waiting could listen to the service inside.        

At the same time, the Norwegian police and security services faced numerous questions about their slow response to the reports of shooting on the island of Utoya, where the country&rsquo;s governing Labor Party was holding its annual political summer camp, considered Norway&rsquo;s nursery school for future leaders. The police took an hour to arrive on the island after the first reports, and officials said that it was hard to find boats and that their helicopters were only capable of surveillance, not of shooting down the killer.        

Anders Behring Breivik, 32, the only suspect arrested, admits to the shootings on Utoya and the fatal bombing of government offices in Oslo, his lawyer, Geir Lippestad, told Norwegian news media, but rejects &ldquo;criminal responsibility.&rdquo; Mr. Lippestad said that Mr. Breivik insists that he acted alone, and alone wrote his mammoth manifesto &mdash; rambling from a hostile historical look at Islam to recipes (and price lists) for bomb manufacture to his family&rsquo;s pressure on him to date.        

&ldquo;He has said that he believed the actions were atrocious, but that in his head they were necessary,&rdquo; the lawyer said. &ldquo;He wanted a change in society and, from his perspective, he needed to force through a revolution. He wished to attack society and the structure of society.&rdquo;        

He also clearly wants to leave a legacy and thinks he will create some kind of mass following, said Tore Bjorgo, one of Norway&rsquo;s most respected scholars of right-wing extremism. &ldquo;He had this strange idea that he will provoke a mass following, despite the violence, which is why I put it in a Christian frame,&rdquo; said Mr. Bjorgo, a professor at the Norwegian Police University College.        

Mr. Breivik, who has cooperated with the police, has asked for an open hearing in the City Court of Oslo on Monday morning, when the police will seek to detain him for another four weeks on suspicion of terrorism &mdash; longer if necessary for the investigation &mdash; before the prosecution brings formal charges.        

Some speculated that Mr. Breivik is seeking another public platform for his anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim ideas, which center around the conservation of cultural and Christian values in the face of what he sees as a continuing effort by Islam to conquer Europe since the Ottomans were stopped at the gates of Vienna in 1683. His manifesto, called &ldquo;2083 &mdash; A European Declaration of Independence,&rdquo; seemed intended to reflect the 400th anniversary of the siege.        

Mr. Breivik was said by analysts to have been an occasional commenter on a blog, Gates of Vienna, which is topped by these words: &ldquo;At the siege of Vienna in 1683 Islam seemed poised to overrun Christian Europe. We are in a new phase of a very old war.&rdquo;        

According to the police, when he surrendered, Mr. Breivik was carrying an automatic rifle and a pistol and he still retained &ldquo;a considerable amount of ammunition.&rdquo; Doctors have said that he was apparently using dumdum bullets, expanding rounds designed to inflict the deadliest wounds possible in unarmored victims.        

With no death penalty and the longest prison term possible in Norway set at 21 years, some Norwegians wondered how best to punish Mr. Breivik.        

Hedda Felin, a political scientist and human resources manager, said that giving Mr. Breivik an open platform &ldquo;was more of a reward than a punishment.&rdquo; He said in his manifesto that he considered killing Norway&rsquo;s top journalists at their yearly meeting, she said, for not listening to him and his arguments.        

&ldquo;He wants an open trial to be listened to, so journalists will now write about his ideas,&rdquo; Ms. Felin said. &ldquo;A real punishment would be not to write about him at all.&rdquo;        
Elisa Mala contributed reporting.
