
CHITWAN, Nepal &mdash; In a major step forward in Nepal&rsquo;s tortured peace process, Maoist political leaders on Saturday formally relinquished control of their 19,000-member army to a special governmental committee.        

At a ceremony held about 110 miles from the capital, Katmandu, Pushpa Kamal Dahal, chairman of the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) signed a statement with the country&rsquo;s caretaker interim prime minister, Madhav Kumar Nepal. Then the prime minister raised the national flag over a gathering of former Maoist fighters.        

&ldquo;It is a positive development,&rdquo; said Tamrat Samuel, a senior United Nations official. &ldquo;It shows the parties are keen to move forward and take responsibility.&rdquo;        

The unresolved status of the Maoist combatants had been a constant concern since Maoist leaders signed an agreement in 2006 ending their decade-old guerrilla war and allowing the Maoists to form a political party that would participate in writing a new constitution.        

But Maoist leaders and Nepal&rsquo;s other political parties bickered for almost five years over how to reintegrate the fighters, essentially leaving the Maoist army intact and outside the government&rsquo;s authority.        

Their presence has deadlocked the broader effort to write the new constitution. And for the past six months, Nepal has had a caretaker government as the parties have been unable to agree on a prime minister. Even with the handover complete, the terms of how the fighters will be returned to society or blended into security forces are still being negotiated. The government has a deadline to finish that work, choose a new prime minister and complete a constitution by the end of May.        

&ldquo;I want the integration and rehabilitation of all the Maoist combatants to happen as soon as possible,&rdquo; said one of the fighters, Sarjan Bk, 27. &ldquo;We have been staying here for more than four years.&rdquo;        
Kiran Chapagain reported from Chitwan, and Jim Yardley from New Delhi.
