
SANA, Yemen &mdash; A suicide bomber attacked a convoy of military vehicles in the Yemeni port city of Aden on Sunday, killing at least six soldiers and wounding more than a dozen others, the latest in a string of attacks in the increasingly volatile city.        

&ldquo;This attack killed at least a half-dozen soldiers,&rdquo; said a government spokesman, Mohammed Albasha. &ldquo;The number of fatalities will most likely rise.&rdquo;        

Doctors at a local hospital said that 10 people had been killed in the bombing, including the attacker.        

Just outside a military base on the northern outskirts of the city, the bomber drove his car into a convoy of soldiers who were on their way to Zinjibar, the provincial capital of nearby Abyan Province, to battle Islamic militants. A statement on a state-run news Web site accused Al Qaeda of carrying out the attack and said that the explosion was quite large and &ldquo;shattered into pieces&rdquo; the body of the attacker.        

&ldquo;This attack was a treacherous and cowardly act,&rdquo; the statement said. &ldquo;It will not deter the heroes of the armed forces and security to continue to fulfill their national duty in responding to terrorist elements of Al Qaeda.&rdquo;        

Sunday&rsquo;s suicide attack comes just days after a Briton working for a shipping company was killed in Aden by a bomb that was placed under his car. A few weeks earlier, two army officers were killed by car bombs in the city.        

The security breakdown in Aden has increased as Islamic militants linked to Al Qaeda maintain control of Zinjibar, about 50 miles away. The militants have been able to expand their territory in southern Yemen since March, partly because the government has been overwhelmed by the antigovernment protest movement, leaving a security vacuum.        

Tamam Bashraheel, the publisher of the city&rsquo;s prominent opposition newspaper, Al Ayyam, said that although Aden was a bastion of antigovernment sentiment, the recent acts of violence &mdash; especially Sunday&rsquo;s suicide attack and the killing of a foreigner &mdash; were not typical of the tactics of Aden&rsquo;s more established opposition movements, like the southern separatists.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t have such things here in Aden,&rdquo; Mr. Bashraheel said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not normal.&rdquo;        

Though security forces are posted at major traffic circles in the city or stationed at bases, inside the city&rsquo;s neighborhoods there is no official security presence, and armed men serve as an informal neighborhood watch group, sometimes setting up impromptu checkpoints.        

&ldquo;The security situation is very scary in the city,&rdquo; said Abdullah Khadiri, a mathematics teacher in Aden. &ldquo;People are afraid to even go out shopping for fear of a stray bullet. The situation did not used to be like this in Aden.&rdquo;        

Residents have expressed concerns that the Islamic militants in Zinjibar would try to move into Aden, a strategically important city. However, their fear of the militants in southern Yemen is also mixed with deep distrust for the central government. Some residents say they suspect the government is behind the Islamic militancy and terrorist activity in the south.        

Aden&rsquo;s residents &ldquo;think it is a sort of pressure on the United States and the West, that Al Qaeda is in Aden now,&rdquo; Mr. Bashraheel said.        

Mr. Khadiri, the math teacher, said he had some doubts about the official reports of Sunday&rsquo;s events. He said the authorities blamed Al Qaeda for the attack, &ldquo;but it&rsquo;s questionable how that many bombs were able to penetrate all of the security barriers and be near to a military base.&rdquo;        
Yasser Alarami reported from Sana, and Laura Kasinof from Washington.
