
KANDAHAR, Afghanistan &mdash;Kidnappers believed to be Taliban abducted the 8-year-old son of a police officer in southern Afghanistan, strangled him with a man&rsquo;s shawl and dumped his body into a stream during the weekend, in apparent retaliation for the father&rsquo;s refusal to give them his police truck.        

The boy&rsquo;s killing was confirmed by local police and government officials, as well as the head of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, who called it part of a pattern of Taliban killings of children who have glancing or even suspected connections to Afghan security forces or the contingents of NATO troops in the country. The Taliban denied responsibility.        

&ldquo;There are many other examples of these gruesome acts of violence,&rdquo; said Nader Nadery, a human-rights advocate. &ldquo;It looks to be widespread and systematic.&rdquo;        

The boy&rsquo;s father, Mohammed Daoud, 36, is a driver for the local police commander in the Gereshk District in Helmand Province. The job gave him access to the force&rsquo;s green pickup truck, and made him a target for militants, who have stolen police vehicles and used security uniforms to deceive checkpoint guards and carry out attacks.        

Mr. Daoud said he had received an anonymous phone call on Thursday afternoon demanding that he hand over his police truck. Tired and irritable, Mr. Daoud said he dismissed the call as a prank, even when the callers warned they had taken his son, Mohammed Ibrahim, and threatened to kill the boy.        

&ldquo;I became angry,&rdquo; Mr. Daoud said. &ldquo;I used bad words and told him, &lsquo;cut off his head.&rsquo; &rdquo;        

When Mr. Daoud returned home, he said, he found his wife and daughters in tears. Someone had taken Mohammed Ibrahim, they told him.        

Now frantic, Mr. Daoud said he tried to reach the kidnappers, but their phone had been switched off. The family waited until Sunday morning, when the police called. They had found the boy. He had been choked with a traditional Afghan shawl called a patoo, which men use as a scarf, lap blanket or prayer rug.        

&ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t think that they would kill my son,&rdquo; Mr. Daoud said. &ldquo;They claim that they are religious people and wage jihad against evildoers.&rdquo;        

NATO troops have waged a fierce offensive to deny the Taliban refuge in many corners of Helmand, and security responsibility in the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah, was turned over to Afghans last week. But violence still flares outside the capital, and the Taliban stalk rural areas like the one where the boy was taken.        

Qari Yousuf Ahmadi, a Taliban spokesman, said in response to the killing that the government had slandered the Taliban with a false accusation.        

The United Nations recently reported that the Taliban and other antigovernment groups are responsible for about 80 percent of civilian deaths in Afghanistan.        

Mr. Daoud was defiant, saying he would not quit the police force and that &ldquo;from now on, I will stand against them.&rdquo;        

But he has been getting more phone calls since burying his son. The Taliban called him on Sunday with new demands for the police truck. But they offered an incentive, he said: If Mr. Daoud delivered the vehicle, the callers promised they would bring his son&rsquo;s killers to justice.        
Taimoor Shah reported from Kandahar, Afghanistan, and Jack Healy from Kabul.
