
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Syria&rsquo;s cabinet has passed a draft law allowing the formation of political parties to work alongside the ruling Baath Party of President Bashar al-Assad, a step in a series of promised changes that antigovernment protesters have dismissed as superficial and useless.        

The draft law, approved late Sunday night but not yet completed, followed several other steps that the government has portrayed as concessions in response to the four-month-old uprising in Syria.        

Activists and protesters said the draft law, like previous steps, was largely symbolic and had come too late.        

&ldquo;Our struggle with the authorities is not over laws. It is a struggle over freedoms,&rdquo; said Louay Hussein, a prominent opposition figure in Damascus. &ldquo;A new law is not going to stop the government from violating our personal and political freedoms. So that law does not really have any significance.&rdquo;        

Mr. Assad&rsquo;s arrival in power in 2000 was met with broad popular expectations of reform. He carried out some steps to overhaul the economy, but retained at least the framework of the authoritarian state built by his father, who had ruled Syria for three decades. There was another burst of optimism in 2005, when intellectuals and activists tried, unsuccessfully, to organize in Damascus and elsewhere.        

In mid-March, inspired by uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia that toppled the autocratic governments there, Syrians took to the streets, many of their demands mirroring long-promised reforms, among them a new law on formation of political parties. As the weeks passed, their demands hardened, a familiar sequence in the evolution of other Arab revolts: As repression continues, protesters&rsquo; demands continue to grow.        

Rights activists said that at least 1,600 people have been killed since the demonstrations started and that hundreds of protesters are in jail, most without being charged.        

Under the draft law on party formation, which still needs to be approved by Parliament, any political party can be established, provided it is not based on religious, tribal or ethnic beliefs and does not discriminate against gender or race, according to SANA, the state-run news agency.        

&ldquo;The establishment of any party has to be based on a commitment to the Constitution, democratic principles, the rule of law and a respect for freedom and basic rights,&rdquo; SANA said.        

Syria Report, an economic newsletter based in Damascus, said that the law had been designed in a way that would limit the formation of Kurdish and Islamic parties, &ldquo;the two constituencies that are traditionally believed to be the best organized and committed.&rdquo;        

The Baath Party, which calls for &ldquo;unity, freedom and socialism,&rdquo; came to power in 1963 after a military coup. One of the protesters&rsquo; main demands is abolishing Article 8 from the Syrian Constitution, which stipulates that the Baath Party is the leader of the state and society.        

Mr. Assad&rsquo;s other steps, described by the government as concessions since the uprising began, included issuing several pardons, lifting the decades-old emergency rule and granting thousands of Kurds, a minority group, Syrian nationality.        

But these steps have not only failed to mollify the protesters, but given them new justification to expand their protests, because they see the steps as meaningless. Mr. Hussein said the opposition would start trusting the government authorities only when they end the crackdown against the protesters and release the thousands of people detained in the past four months under the emergency rule that Mr. Assad claims has been disbanded.        
