
LONDON &mdash; It was the political scoop of the year, a damning, serialized expos&eacute; in The Daily Telegraph about how British politicians were abusing their parliamentary expense accounts to pay for things like moat-cleaning and wisteria-trimming.        

The articles, in May 2009, shook up Parliament and shamed lawmakers. They also irritated Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of the News Corporation, for the simple reason that two of his own newspapers, The Times of London and The Sun, had been offered the chance to buy the information that led to the expos&eacute;, but had turned it down.        

&ldquo;There was anger wafting across the Atlantic,&rdquo; said a former reporter for one of Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s papers here.        

At News International, Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s British newspaper arm, executives scrambled to deflect responsibility. The blame fell largely on an in-house lawyer who had cautioned against paying some $450,000 for a stolen disc containing the parliamentary expense records. (A few months later, the lawyer was asked to leave News International, where he had worked for 33 years, apparently after another disagreement over advice.)        

While it is not clear whether Mr. Murdoch played a direct role in the matter, there is little question that The Telegraph&rsquo;s scoop remained a sore point for him and that his feelings seeped down through various layers of his company. Soon afterward, The Wall Street Journal, his flagship American newspaper, did its own investigation of American lawmakers&rsquo; expenses.        

And the editor of the rival Telegraph who got the scoop, William Lewis, a former business editor at The Sunday Times of London, was then rehired by Mr. Murdoch as News International&rsquo;s group general manager, in charge of all the company&rsquo;s print publications in Britain. The expenses story was still on Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s mind two years later: it was the one big British story he mentioned by name at last week&rsquo;s parliamentary hearing on phone hacking.        

In that appearance before the House of Commons Select Committee on Culture, Media and Sport, Mr. Murdoch sought to distance himself from the hacking scandal, explaining that because he employs &ldquo;53,000 people around the world&rdquo; he cannot be expected to know everything everyone is doing at The News of the World.        

He may have come across at the hearing as vague, detached and unfocused &mdash; as an old man who was at times not quite all there. Investors in the News Corporation have been pressing for years for the company to arrange a clear succession plan for Mr. Murdoch, who is 80 years old, and speculation about his future is rife now that the company has suffered a significant blow to its reputation.        

But Mr. Murdoch, who every morning reads avidly from what one former editor referred to as &ldquo;the best clippings service I have ever seen,&rdquo; has never been a disengaged boss, especially from his newspapers.        

&ldquo;I really didn&rsquo;t buy that, to be honest,&rdquo; said Roy Greenslade, a former Murdoch editor who is now a professor of journalism at City University London. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure he&rsquo;s not as interfering as he was 20 years ago, but you can see through the way The Sun and The News of the World operate that his word remains law.&rdquo;        

Indeed, in January, as the phone hacking scandal began to gain traction and Andy Coulson, a former News of the World editor, quit his job as the government&rsquo;s top spokesman (he has since been arrested on suspicion of phone hacking and bribing the police), Mr. Murdoch postponed his trip to the World Economic Forum and swept into London to take charge.        

Surrounded by the editors of The Sun and The Times of London; his son James; and Rebekah Brooks, then chief executive of News International (she has also since been arrested on the same suspicions as in Mr. Coulson&rsquo;s case), Mr. Murdoch ate lunch in the News International staff cafeteria. He then appeared at The Times&rsquo;s editorial conference, where he weighed in on one of the day&rsquo;s big stories: the decision by Sky News to fire the host of a sports program who had made lewd remarks to his co-host, a woman, including suggesting that she tuck her microphone in his pants.        

To make matters more complicated, Sky is part of the media conglomerate British Sky Broadcasting, or BSkyB, which is controlled by the News Corporation, and the co-host in question, Andy Gray, had recently sued The News of the World, claiming his phone had been hacked. Taking all this in at the news conference, Mr. Murdoch said, according to accounts at the time, &ldquo;This country has lost its sense of humor.&rdquo;        

Mr. Murdoch began his career when he inherited his father&rsquo;s small newspaper business in Australia. He remains at his core a hard-nosed businessman with the instincts of a tabloid reporter, said many former and current employees, who all spoke on the condition of anonymity because they did not want to make Mr. Murdoch angry.        

&ldquo;He vicariously lives through his papers in many ways,&rdquo; said a former editor at one of News Corporation&rsquo;s major papers. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s a news junkie. He&rsquo;s interested in what&rsquo;s driving the sales, what&rsquo;s on the front page. He&rsquo;s always talking to his editors.&rdquo;        
Tim Arango contributed reporting from Baghdad, and William K. Rashbaum from New York.
