
MEXICO CITY &mdash; A 15-year-old whom the authorities had accused of beheading four men as a hired killer for a drug cartel, highlighting the pull of young people into organized crime, was convicted on Tuesday and sentenced to three years in prison.        

The arrest in December of the teenager, Edgar Jim&eacute;nez Lugo, who went by the nickname &ldquo;El Ponchis,&rdquo; a reference to his pudgy build as a younger child, shocked the nation because of the gruesome nature of the crimes and his youth. He was 14 when the murders occurred.        

Televised images after his arrest showed a wary-looking, curly-haired boy in a black sweatshirt dwarfed by heavily armed soldiers presenting him to reporters, as is the custom here for major arrests. He began to kill when he was 11, he said in a soft voice. He said that he earned $200 a week and that he did it because he was drugged and under threat.        

The authorities said he confessed to killing the men, whose bodies were found last August hanging from a bridge in Cuernavaca, a weekend getaway near Mexico City.        

A judge heard testimony from 42 witnesses behind closed doors before convicting Mr. Lugo of the murders and drug and weapons charges and imposing the sentence, the maximum allowed under the law for juveniles in Morelos State, where the case was heard.        

Born in San Diego but raised in Mexico, Mr. Lugo was arrested as he and his sister, whom the police also accused of participating in organized crime, boarded a plane for Tijuana, on the California border.        

The case underscored the lure of organized crime for juveniles. They have long served as lookouts and couriers for drug gangs, but the authorities have said they are increasingly serving as enforcers and hired killers.        

Of the more than 35,000 people killed in organized-crime-related violence since President Felipe Calder&oacute;n began a crackdown in 2006, an estimated 5 percent have been minors.        

The Mexico attorney general&rsquo;s office, in an October report, said the number of minors charged with drug-related crimes had increased to 810 in 2009 from 482 in 2006, a period in which thousands of federal police officers and soldiers swarmed several states to reduce crime.        

As a child, Mr. Lugo lived a turbulent life of poverty and distant or absent parents and guardians, according to news reports, and fell into the drug underworld in small-town Jiutepec, near Cuernavaca.        
