
JERUSALEM &mdash; Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu announced a series of measures on Tuesday meant to alleviate the shortage of affordable housing in Israel, in a bid to quell nearly two weeks of popular protests that have spread across the country and undermined his popularity.        

The protests began with a tent city that sprang up on one of Tel Aviv&rsquo;s most stylish boulevards, attracting disparate groups from across Israel&rsquo;s social structure and political spectrum. Tent camps have sprouted up in other cities, and the protest peaked with a march estimated at up to 30,000 people in Tel Aviv on Saturday night. Scattered protests continued in Jerusalem and other cities on Sunday, with small groups of demonstrators blocking roads.        

The wave of discontent poses a challenge to Mr. Netanyahu&rsquo;s governing coalition, which has proved unusually stable in a country used to political crises.        

Having delayed a trip to Poland to deal with the burgeoning protest movement, Mr. Netanyahu called a news conference for Tuesday morning that was televised live. &ldquo;The housing crisis in Israel is a real crisis,&rdquo; Mr. Netanyahu began, saying that the problem was not only genuine but also getting worse.        

Flanked by his ministers of finance and housing, Mr. Netanyahu went on to outline government plans to address some of the major factors in a housing shortage that has driven up prices. The plans include accelerating reform of the Israel Lands Administration, a government monopoly that controls the majority of the land available for building, and of the country&rsquo;s cumbersome planning bureaucracy.        

Mr. Netanyahu, who partly blamed what he called the problems on &ldquo;misguided decisions&rdquo; of previous governments, also promised to offer incentives to contractors to build cheaper housing for sale and for long-term rental, with preference to be given to young couples, discharged soldiers and those who have performed civilian national service.        

In addition, the government said it would enable the construction of 10,000 new dormitory units for students for rental at reduced rates, and would offer discounts on public transportation to students living outside city centers.        

In initial reactions, leaders of the Tel Aviv tent camp dismissed Mr. Netanyahu&rsquo;s promises as insufficient and accused him of trying to bribe the students in order to split the protest movement. Student leaders said that the offer made to them was significant, but that they would not abandon the wider social struggle.        

&ldquo;When I am arrested, when I am fighting, when I am demonstrating in the streets, there are people to my right and left who are not students,&rdquo; said Itzik Shmuli, the chairman of the National Union of Students.        

Israel&rsquo;s middle class and the poorer sectors of society have been squeezed by sharp increases in prices of basics like food, water and gasoline in recent years. Israel&rsquo;s doctors also declared a labor dispute and have been protesting their conditions for more than four months.        
