
Hosni Mubarak, the deposed president of Egypt who is facing trial next week on charges that could carry the death penalty, is refusing to eat solid food and is suffering &ldquo;weakness and severe infirmity,&rdquo; the official Egyptian news agency MENA reported Tuesday. The report intensified speculation that Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s court date would be postponed.        

The report left it unclear whether his refusal to eat reflected a psychological reaction, a deteriorating health condition, or a form of hunger strike.        

MENA quoted Mohamed Fathallah, the head of the hospital in the Red Sea resort town of Sharm el Sheik, as saying Mr. Mubarak consumes only liquids and has lost weight. The MENA report also quoted an unidentified medical source as saying a decision would be made soon over whether to feed Mr. Mubarak intravenously.        

Mr. Mubarak, 83, the once untouchable autocrat whose downfall on Feb. 11 in a popular uprising transfixed the Arab world, has been in the hospital in Sharm el Sheik, near his summer home, since he complained of heart pains when first interrogated in mid-April.        

Mr. Mubarak is scheduled to go on trial next Wednesday on charges of corruption and ordering the killing of protesters who demonstrated against him during the height of the 18-day revolution that deposed him. The Egypt Health Ministry has said more than 800 people were killed during the uprising.        

Many Egyptians are increasingly angry at the slow pace of change by the interim military government that took over when Mr. Mubarak was forced to step down. Convinced that the military is reluctant to humiliate him further, many say prosecutors are looking for an excuse to postpone the trial.        

Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s lawyer, Farid el-Deeb, also appears to have exaggerated concerns about his client&rsquo;s health. He told news outlets first that Mr. Mubarak had cancer, and later that he had suffered a stroke after a coma, but in Egyptian state media his doctors contradicted both reports.        

Mr. Deeb was not immediately available to comment on the MENA report, which quoted Mr. Fathallah as saying the former president &ldquo;is completely refusing to eat food but consumes some liquids and juice only.&rdquo; The report also quoted Mr. Fathallah as saying &ldquo;he lost a lot of weight and suffers weakness and severe infirmity.&rdquo;        

If the current trial date proceeds, it would happen during Ramadan, the Islamic holy month when much of ordinary life grinds to a halt in Egypt.        
