
BERLIN &mdash; Two violent episodes this week along Kosovo&rsquo;s northern border with Serbia &mdash; the latest being Wednesday&rsquo;s firebombing of a customs post by a group of about 200 Serbs &mdash; have shed new light on the increase in tensions in the area between ethnic Serbs and Albanians.        

No one was hurt in the firebombing, according to The Associated Press. It occurred hours after Kosovo&rsquo;s special police withdrew from the area after seizing a border post on Monday night and trying to take control of a second one. A Kosovo police officer was killed in the police action.        

The Kosovo government had said it was exercising its right as a sovereign country to take control of its own borders, but the action took the European Union and NATO by surprise and stirred fears of a new cycle of ethnic unrest in Kosovo, a country of 1.7 million people.        

Despite the presence of more than 5,000 NATO troops and 3,200 European Union officials, the area remains volatile, and the episode prompted Serbia to request an urgent session of the United Nations Security Council. A closed meeting of the 15-member Council was set for Thursday so it could be briefed by the peacekeeping department. Diplomats said they needed to learn more information about the situation in Kosovo before deciding whether it needed to be addressed in a larger, open session.        

American and European officials called on President Boris Tadic of Serbia and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci of Kosovo to ease the crisis.        

&ldquo;Unilateral actions by one side or the other are not helpful,&rdquo; said Nicholas Hawton, a spokesman for the European Union&rsquo;s Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, known as Eulex, which has been responsible for the border crossings between Kosovo and Serbia since 2008. Ethnic Serbs living in these enclaves and border towns depend on financial, economic and social assistance from Serbia.        

Mr. Tadic urged an immediate end to the violence. &ldquo;Hooligans who cause violence are not defending Serbia or the Serbian citizens,&rdquo; he said in a statement. He also called on Serbs in Kosovo to remain calm.        

Mr. Tadic, who won widespread praise for handing over Ratko Mladic, the former Bosnian Serb commander and war crimes suspect, to the Hague tribunal on the former Yugoslavia, also tried to calm the situation by sending top officials to Kosovo to negotiate with NATO. &ldquo;We do not want any war,&rdquo; Mr. Tadic said, according to Tanjug, the Serbian news agency.        

In an effort to defuse the situation, NATO opened talks between all parties, a move that was praised by the United States.        

Northern Kosovo&rsquo;s border area, which is populated mainly by ethnic Serbs, has been a source of tension since Kosovo declared independence in early 2008, a move that was recognized by the United States and all but five European Union countries but not by Serbia or Russia. Kosovo owes its independence to NATO, which intervened in 1999 to stop the ethnic cleansing being carried out by Serbian forces.        

Serbia has imposed a unilateral embargo on Kosovo goods, and last week Kosovo retaliated with a similar ban on Serbian products. In addition, Serbs sending goods to Kosovo have refused to accept on their customs declaration forms the stamp with the Republic of Kosovo insignia. Serbian commercial vehicles, however, are still allowed to cross into Kosovo as the European Union continues to try to negotiate some kind of compromise.        
Neil MacFarquhar contributed reporting from the United Nations.
