
WASHINGTON &mdash; With Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi showing no signs, so far, of yielding to Western demands, diplomats from the United States, Britain and France have adopted a new tactic in recent days: offering the besieged leader the opportunity to remain in Libya if he dissolves the government and steps aside.        

But the offer, conveyed by American diplomats to Libyan government officials during a July 16 meeting in Tunis, came with a huge caveat: rebels based in eastern Libya would have to agree. The rebels have expressed mixed views on that possibility, and they seemed to reject it on Wednesday. Reuters reported that Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, the rebel leader, told reporters in Benghazi, Libya: &ldquo;This offer is no longer valid.&rdquo;        

Beyond getting the rebels to sign on, American and European diplomats would have to find a way around the war crimes indictment hanging over Colonel Qaddafi at the International Criminal Court at The Hague.        

And finally, Colonel Qaddafi himself would have to be persuaded that he would not end up in the same boat as his neighbor to the east, Hosni Mubarak, the deposed president of Egypt, who is facing trial on charges that could carry the death penalty.        

But the offer reflects the muddled state of the Western offensive in Libya, and the failure, so far, of Libyan rebels to successfully press the advantage they received when the NATO bombing campaign began four months ago. Colonel Qaddafi has vowed that he will die on Libyan soil, rebuffing demands from the West to leave.        

What happens to Colonel Qaddafi is &ldquo;ultimately a question for the Libyan people to decide,&rdquo; a senior Obama administration official said Wednesday.        

Jeffrey D. Feltman, the assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs, met in Tunis with members of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government to deliver that message, the official said.        

State Department officials initially described the meeting as an effort to deliver a &ldquo;simple and unambiguous message&rdquo; that &ldquo;Qaddafi must leave power so that a new political process can begin that reflects the will and aspirations of the Libyan people.&rdquo;        

But on Wednesday American and European officials said there was also discussion during the meeting on July 16 of the possibility that Colonel Qaddafi could remain in Libya, providing he stepped down.        

Mr. Feltman&rsquo;s message &ldquo;was a dual message,&rdquo; said Robert Malley, program director for the Middle East and North Africa with the International Crisis Group. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s got to go. And we&rsquo;re open to when he goes and where he goes. The wiggle room is he doesn&rsquo;t have to leave Libya.&rdquo;        

Britain has now joined the United States and France in suggesting that Colonel Qaddafi could be allowed to remain in Libya in return for giving up power in a broader deal that included a cease-fire. In talks in London late Monday, the British foreign secretary, William Hague, met his French counterpart, Alain Jupp&eacute;, who said last week that &ldquo;one of the scenarios&rdquo; to resolve the conflict in Libya &ldquo;is that he stays in Libya on one condition, which I repeat: that he very clearly steps aside from Libyan political life.&rdquo;        

Previously, Britain had insisted that Colonel Qaddafi had to leave the country as part of a settlement. That could expose him to arrest under a warrant on war crimes charges. But, adopting the State Department&rsquo;s new formula, Mr. Hague said Tuesday that &ldquo;what happens to Qaddafi is ultimately a question for the Libyans.&rdquo;        

Critics of any deal that allowed Colonel Qaddafi to remain in Libya have noted that he has long asserted that he holds no political office, only the informal title of &ldquo;guide&rdquo; and &ldquo;leader&rdquo; that he took when he did away with all formal government offices in 1972.        

The fear has been that a peace settlement that did not involve Colonel Qaddafi going into exile would destabilize any new government by leaving him as the shadowy, all-powerful figure he has been for nearly 40 years.        

Britain is extending formal diplomatic recognition to Libya&rsquo;s rebels, Mr. Hague said Wednesday, and it will expel all remaining Libyan diplomats loyal to Colonel Qaddafi. The British government had ordered the Libyan ambassador to leave the country in May.        

Mr. Hague also expressed dismay&nbsp;at a recording from Libyan television showing the presence among tribal chiefs at a pro-Qaddafi rally on Tuesday of Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi, the former Libyan intelligence officer convicted of masterminding the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jet over Lockerbie, Scotland, that killed 270 people.&nbsp;        

Mr. Megrahi was released on compassionate grounds from a Scottish jail and allowed to return to Tripoli in August 2009. At that time, his lawyers cited medical evidence to say he was close to death from prostate cancer was likely to have less than three months to live. Mr. Hague said that Mr. Megrahi&rsquo;s appearance, in a wheelchair, was likely to &ldquo;increase the anger and outrage&rdquo; that many of the Lockerbie victims&rsquo; families feel over the Scottish government&rsquo;s decision to release him.        

Britain is the latest in a long line of countries to shift diplomatic relations to the Libyan rebels. France was the first to recognize the Transitional National Council, the rebels&rsquo; organization based in Benghazi, accepting its legitimacy in March.        

Two weeks ago, the United States and around 30 other countries followed suit, and the Americans allowed the rebel government access to $30 billion in Libyan assets held in the United States. Mr. Hague said Wednesday that Britain would unfreeze roughly $150 million in Libyan oil assets for use by the council.        
Helene Cooper reported from Washington, and John F. Burns from London. Alan Cowell contributed reporting from Paris.
