
KANDAHAR, Afghanistan &mdash; An insurgent suicide bomber hiding explosives in his turban assassinated the mayor of Kandahar on Wednesday, the third killing of a high-profile official in the country this month. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack on the mayor, who held dual citizenship in Afghanistan and the United States.        

The killing came two weeks after a suicide bomber used the same disguise to attack senior mullahs at a memorial for the former provincial chairman of Kandahar, Ahmed Wali Karzai, who was also assassinated, heightening concerns that the tenuous security gains in the violent south are faltering despite months of intensified fighting by NATO and Afghan forces.        

The mayor, Ghulam Haider Hamidi was killed outside his office in central Kandahar when the bomber blew himself up, and one other person was wounded, said Zalmay Ayoubi, the spokesman for the provincial governor, Tooryalai Wesa.        

The Taliban said the attack was retaliation for the mayor&rsquo;s campaign to force squatters to leave government land.        

Ahmed Wali Karzai, who was a half brother of President Hamid Karzai, was assassinated in his compound by an associate on July 12. Five days later, a senior adviser to President Karzai was killed. The adviser, Jan Mohammed Khan, was a power broker from Oruzgan Province in southern Afghanistan.        

The American ambassador, Ryan C. Crocker, said that he deplored the spate of assassinations. But, he said, they reflected the Taliban&rsquo;s desperation because of the success of the NATO military campaign, which had made it all but impossible for Taliban fighters to secure safe havens in the south of the country. &ldquo;Clearly these are horrific attacks, but they can be signs of weakness,&rdquo; Mr. Crocker said.        

Nonetheless, the Taliban have still shown a keen ability to conduct sophisticated attacks, like the one on the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul a month ago, which involved at least eight suicide bombers and was ended only after several hours of fighting by Afghan troops and NATO aircraft.        

Mayor Hamidi had been mentioned as a possible successor to Ahmed Wali Karzai as factions jostled to replace him. Although the two were close, many Kandahar residents were suspicious of the mayor, in part because of his closeness to the Americans from his years living in the United States, but also because he lacked the tribal connections needed in Kandahar to gather power.        

Perhaps the most immediate factor leading to his assassination was that Mr. Hamidi had begun a contentious campaign to destroy what he considered illegal buildings in northern Kandahar. That area has been penetrated by the Taliban and their extended families, and they saw it as an attack, security officials said.        

The campaign faced strong resistance as well because land is a major business in Kandahar, so if a person can claim to own land and then sell it, he can profit enormously.        

On Tuesday, the mayor sent several bulldozers to the northern Kandahar neighborhood where he was trying to reclaim what he regarded as government land. The bulldozers had begun to raze buildings deemed illegal, including one that was occupied.        

&ldquo;Accidently yesterday, one of the bulldozer&rsquo;s brakes failed, and it smashed one of the homes where two children were killed,&rdquo; Governor Wesa said at a news conference. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t believe the place was a home, we think someone just brought children there in order to save the house from destruction.&rdquo;        

Mayor Hamidi was &ldquo;so sad&rdquo; and &ldquo;felt guilty&rdquo; and offered to allow the case to be heard in a court, the governor said.        

Soon after the accident &mdash; three children and a woman were killed, according to some reports &mdash; people complained to Shah Wali Karzai, the new leader of President Karzai&rsquo;s Popalzai tribe, which is powerful in Kandahar. The mayor agreed to meet with the protesters on Wednesday and was preparing to do so when he was killed.        

The bomber entered the mayor&rsquo;s compound with the protesters&rsquo; delegation, said the governor&rsquo;s spokesman.        

&ldquo;Mayor Ghulam Haider Hamidi was a real person who was loyal to his people and country,&rdquo; the governor said. &ldquo;He knew how to do his job and dedicated his life to the service of the people. He was trying to rebuild Kandahar.&rdquo;        
Taimoor Shah reported from Kandahar, and Alissa J. Rubin from Kabul, Afghanistan. Alan Cowell contributed reporting from Paris.
