
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; An Asiana Airlines cargo plane crashed into waters off the southern coast of South Korea on Thursday after reporting a fire in its cargo compartments, government officials said.        

The maritime police were searching for any sign of plane&rsquo;s two pilots about 70 miles west of Jeju, the southernmost island off South Korea, in an area where a seat, a wing tip and other pieces of wreckage were recovered.        

The Boeing 747-400F took off from the Incheon airport west of Seoul at 3:05 a.m. on Thursday, bound for Pudong, China. It was carrying 58 tons of electronic and machine parts, including lithium batteries, paint and other chemicals considered flammable, &nbsp;the Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs said in a statement. In the pilots&rsquo; last communication with the Shanghai air traffic control center at 4:03 a.m., they reported the fire,&nbsp;Kim Han-young, a senior ministry official in charges of air transport policy, said at a news briefing. The jet is believed to have crashed nine minutes later, as it turned around and headed for an emergency landing at the Jeju airport, Mr. Kim said.        

It was the worst accident for Asiana since one of its domestic passenger jets slammed into a hill in southwestern South Korea in 1993, killing 68 people.        

The Boeing 747-400 entered service in 1988 and was the largest commercial aircraft in the skies until the Airbus A380 entered service in 2007. It is the most recent version of the 747 in service.        

Boeing&rsquo;s 747 family of aircraft has a strong safety record, with only 42 accidents since the jumbo jet was introduced in 1969, according to the Aviation Safety Network, which maintains a database of air accidents. The most recent involved a freighter version of the plane operated by United Parcel Service, which reported heavy smoke in the cockpit shortly after takeoff from Dubai airport in September 2010, killing the two pilots aboard. The cause of that crash remains under investigation, although the plane was known to have been carrying several shipments of lithium ion battery packs, which are considered hazardous material.        
Nicola Clark contributed reporting from Paris.
