
BAGHDAD &mdash; At a roadside station here, where buses bound for Syria leave dozens of times a week, the space between two troubled nations is measured by notions of prosperity and security.        

&ldquo;Here it is very hot and Ramadan is coming,&rdquo; said Majid Shamis, a middle-aged Iraqi who was headed with his wife and two children, ages 4 and 5, for a two-month summer vacation in Syria. &ldquo;Electricity is better there. Even the security situation is better.&rdquo;        

People around the world read daily headlines about violence and unrest in Syria, where the government has undertaken a brutal crackdown on its people in response to the latest popular challenge to its power. But in Iraq, Syria still represents something of an oasis. Iraqis began to flee there years ago to escape the American-led war and the sectarian bloodletting that followed. During the war, Syria has taken in nearly 300,000 Iraqi refugees &mdash; more than any country in the region, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.        

Now, even as Syria faces its own turmoil, few Iraqis are returning home. In fact, the number of Iraqis leaving for Syria is far greater than the number coming back, said Brian C. Vaughan, assistant representative at the United Nations office. When balanced against Iraq&rsquo;s continuing violence, its sporadic electricity that will only get less reliable as summer creeps on and an economy dominated by a corrupt public sector, Syria is seen as a better place to live.        

&ldquo;You can relax there,&rdquo; said Ali Mohammed, a barber, who left the Iraqi city of Najaf for Syria in 2005 after he was threatened again and again for cutting hair in a style that offended the version of Islam adhered to by the Mahdi Army, the militia that answers to the militant cleric Moktada al-Sadr.        

&ldquo;You don&rsquo;t need to worry about electricity, the heat&rdquo; in Syria, Mr. Mohammed, wearing a skintight T-shirt and wraparound sunglasses, explained as he prepared to return to his adopted country after a visit with his family in Iraq.        

His friend Yasir Rashid, 21, was going along for a vacation. &ldquo;Life is beautiful there, women are beautiful there,&rdquo; Mr. Rashid said. &ldquo;That is the important thing. Freedom and security, everything.&rdquo;        

Four or five buses leave each day for Syria from this station. A ticket costs about $25, and business seems to be booming. &ldquo;The number of people leaving Iraq for Syria has increased because of the summer holiday,&rdquo; said a bus company manager, Abu Muhammad. &ldquo;Families are going there to escape the summer heat, and for tourism.&rdquo;        

Bus drivers complain that the Syrian border guards often demand bribes, usually cash or gasoline, but they say that the political upheaval has not hampered business.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s stable, very normal,&rdquo; said Farras Ali, a driver who makes the trip to Syria three times a week. &ldquo;The media is making it look larger than it is.&rdquo;        

Of course, many Iraqis traveling from Baghdad go straight to Damascus, the capital, not to regions north of Damascus that are the sites of many protests and the violent crackdown that has left nearly 1,500 people dead.        

But if prosperity and quality of life are measured in relative terms, that could explain why migrant workers from Bangladesh handle the luggage at the bus station here &mdash; searching for bombs before loading the bags into cargo holds &mdash; and serve chai to visitors. They came to Iraq, of all places, to seek a better life. One of them, Mamun Kalegagus, 25, said he had been working at the station, and living at its rudimentary quarters for immigrant workers, for two years. He is paid $12 to $15 a day, more than the $100 a month he earned cooking Chinese food back home.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s better here,&rdquo; he said, but far from perfect. &ldquo;In Bangladesh there is no boom,&rdquo; he added, referring to the still-frequent explosions heard in many Baghdad neighborhoods.        

The relationship between Syria and Iraq has had a winding history. After World War I, Syria came under France&rsquo;s colonial empire, while the British gained dominion over Iraq. The two countries later established rival Baathist governments, and during the Persian Gulf war of 1991, Syria supported the coalition that drove Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s forces out of Kuwait.        

Earlier in the current war, Iraq accused Syria of being a source of, or a transit point for, extremists traveling here to become suicide bombers. Syria&rsquo;s decision to provide a haven for former members of Mr. Hussein&rsquo;s Baath Party also inflamed tensions between the countries.        

But as violence has ebbed in Iraq, so has the number of foreign fighters arriving from Syria, which has allowed tensions to ease. Now, with Syria&rsquo;s leadership threatened by mass protests, Iraq has reached out, serving as host to delegations of Syrian business owners. Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq has called publicly for closer ties between the countries.        

For Iraqis, Syria&rsquo;s attraction is a measure of the continuing fragility of their own country.        

&ldquo;For me Syria is better,&rdquo; said Hussain Ridah, 20, as he left for Syria to visit his father and brother, who are there for medical treatment. &ldquo;They say it&rsquo;s bad on TV, but when I call my family they say it&rsquo;s O.K.&rdquo;        

As Iraqis experience their own slow struggle for democracy and witness similar ones in Syria and other countries across the region, some have been inspired to nourish their own protest movement. Nearly every Friday, groups of demonstrators gather in Baghdad&rsquo;s Tahrir Square.        

Other Iraqis, though, especially those travelers here at the bus station, are fatigued from their country&rsquo;s years of war and failed promises of democracy.        

Mr. Mohammed, the barber from Najaf, said of the Arab uprisings: &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t care about what&rsquo;s happening. As a displaced Iraqi, I just want security.&rdquo;        
Duraid Adnan and Yasir Ghazi contributed reporting.
