
BEIJING &mdash; China broke days of stony silence on Thursday about the cause of a deadly crash on its new high-speed rail system, as officials acknowledged a serious design flaw in signaling equipment and the prime minister visited the crash site and promised to prosecute those responsible for an accident that has infuriated the Chinese public.        

&ldquo;I believe related departments will seriously learn a lesson from this incident,&rdquo; the prime minister, Wen Jiabao, said after inspecting the scene of the Saturday crash near the eastern city of Wenzhou, which killed 40 people and injured 191. &ldquo;We must get to the bottom of this.&rdquo;        

Mr. Wen spoke at an extraordinary hourlong news conference streamed live on the Web site of Xinhua, the official news agency, in what appeared to be part of an urgent public relations effort by China&rsquo;s leadership to show that it was aggressively policing flaws in a new rail system that lies at the heart of the country&rsquo;s breakneck effort to modernize.        

China&rsquo;s high-speed rail system is one of the world&rsquo;s largest and most costly public works projects. High-speed rail has an excellent safety record elsewhere, especially in Japan, which has never had a fatality.        

In the first detailed explanation of the accident, a high-ranking railway official said that after a lightning strike, a signaling device at the Wenzhou South Station in Zhejiang Province had malfunctioned and failed to turn from green to red. He also said that inadequately trained workers had failed to notice. The accident occurred when a high-speed train rear-ended another train that had left the station roughly 10 minutes earlier but had stalled on the tracks.        

The government&rsquo;s account raised fresh questions about how such an accident could have happened.        

Chinese residents have flooded microblogging sites with furious complaints about breakneck development without heed to safety, and fears of a cover-up.        

On Wednesday, more than 100 relatives of victims protested at the Wenzhou South Station, demanding answers, according to Global Times, an English-language newspaper affiliated with the Communist Party. They held up a giant banner that read: &ldquo;Disclose the true reason behind the July 23 train crash and respect the dignity of victims.&rdquo;        

At his news conference, Mr. Wen promised that investigators would undercover the truth, &ldquo;whether it was an equipment problem, a management problem, or a production problem.&rdquo; He added: &ldquo;If there is any corruption exposed in the investigation, we will handle it according to the law, and the consequences will be severe.&rdquo;        

Mr. Wen, 68, said he had only now arrived in Wenzhou because &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve been ill recently, on a sickbed for 11 days.&rdquo; Asked why the accident site was so hastily cleaned up, Mr. Wen said the government&rsquo;s first priority was to rescue victims.        

Although news conferences by top leaders are typically broadcast live, China&rsquo;s central television network, CCTV, skipped the event, prompting some Chinese to question whether the network was censoring the prime minister. But Phoenix Television, based in Hong Kong, broadcast the conference live, and Xinhua&rsquo;s Web site ran simultaneous video.        

Viewers kept up a running commentary on the Chinese equivalents of Twitter. One person questioned how Mr. Wen could have been sick for 11 days when Chinese news media reports showed that during that time he had met with several foreign officials and hosted two sessions of the State Council, China&rsquo;s cabinet.        

Others were sympathetic. &ldquo;His job is not easy, with everyone below him being completely incompetent,&rdquo; read one post.        

The government&rsquo;s initial explanation for the crash was terse and vague: equipment failure caused by a lightning strike. On Thursday, An Lusheng, chief of the Shanghai Railway Bureau, faulted the quality of equipment, personnel and on-site controls. He described safeguards as &ldquo;still quite weak.&rdquo;        

The Beijing National Railway Research and Design Institute of Signals and Communication said it would &ldquo;shoulder responsibility&rdquo; for the design flaw in the signal device.        

He Jinliang, director of the China Standardization Association of Lightning Protection Technology, said that proper equipment would have averted the tragedy. While it might not be cost-effective to make rail equipment &ldquo;100 percent lightning-proof,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;you can definitely prevent this kind of serious accident.&rdquo;        
Li Bibo, Adam Century, Li Mia and Edy Yin contributed research.
