
MUMBAI, India &mdash; The top political leader of an important southern state agreed to resign Thursday, one day after anticorruption investigators implicated him in a $3.5 billion scandal involving the illegal mining of iron ore.        

The resignation announcement from the chief minister of Karnataka State, B. S. Yeddyurappa, came after he lost the support of his party, the Bharatiya Janata Party, which is the main opposition at the federal level. A report by an anticorruption panel released Wednesday accused Mr. Yeddyurappa and his family of receiving $2 million in illicit payments from a mining company and selling a piece of land at an inflated price.        

Mr. Yeddyurappa is the most senior member of the party to be forced out of office in a series of recent corruption scandals involving government licensing, natural resources and public projects. Several senior leaders from the coalition government, led by the Congress Party, have already lost their positions and some are in jail awaiting trial.        

Rajiv Pratap Rudy, a spokesman for the Bharatiya Janata Party, said Mr. Yeddyurappa, 68, was hoping to stay in office until Sunday. The spokesman said party leaders would meet with him on Friday to persuade him to leave earlier. His resignation announcement came on the same day that the cabinet approved a bill to create a new ombudsman&rsquo;s office to investigate corruption. But a group of activists who used a hunger strike to push for the creation of such a position dismissed the proposed measure as &ldquo;toothless&rdquo; because the office would not be able to investigate the prime minister and, they said, would not have enough independence.        

The Bharatiya Janata Party, which had supported Mr. Yeddyurappa before the anticorruption panel&rsquo;s report was released, changed its stand on Thursday morning, saying that it had advised the leader to resign after considering the panel&rsquo;s report.        

The report was prepared by a Karnataka State ombudsman, Santosh Hegde, and included 25,000 pages of supporting documents. In addition to Mr. Yeddyurappa, Mr. Hegde also accused other state leaders and corporations of wrongdoing, including illegally mining iron ore, which has surged in recent years. Other officials implicated in the report did not offer their resignations on Thursday.        

Mr. Yeddyurappa spent much of the day considering his options and meeting with allies and party leaders in Bangalore, the capital of Karnataka. He announced his resignation in the afternoon but did not make a public statement.        

The Bharatiya Janata Party had resisted calls for Mr. Yeddyurappa&rsquo;s resignation, critics say, in part because the party was worried about losing its hold on Karnataka, the only southern Indian state where it controls the government. Indian chief ministers are the equivalent of American governors.        

But it became increasingly difficult for the Bharatiya Janata Party, a Hindu nationalist party, to defend him while it was calling for the federal government to fire and prosecute members of the Congress Party and its allied parties who had also been accused of corruption.        
