
LONDON &mdash; Britain was awash in a new surge of outrage over the phone hacking scandal on Thursday as news emerged that Scotland Yard had added to the list of probable victims a woman whose 8-year-old daughter was murdered by a repeat sex offender in 2000.        

The tabloid at the center of the scandal, The News of the World, aggressively championed the campaign of the grieving mother, Sara Payne, for a law warning parents if child sex offenders lived nearby. Mrs. Payne had written warmly of the paper in its final issue, calling it &ldquo;an old friend.&rdquo;&nbsp;        

A statement released on behalf of Mrs. Payne by &nbsp;the Phoenix Foundation, a children&rsquo;s charity she founded, &nbsp;described her as devastated and disappointed.        

&ldquo;Today is a very sad dark day for us,&rdquo; the charity added in a posting on Facebook. &ldquo;Our faith in good people has taken a real battering.&rdquo; Other postings noted that she was struggling in light of the &nbsp;July 1 anniversary of her daughter&rsquo;s abduction and from the effects of a stroke she suffered 19 months ago, which paralyzed her left side.        

The Guardian was the first to report Scotland Yard&rsquo;s alert to Mrs. Payne, but the e-mail newsletter Popbitch suggested earlier this month that Mrs. Payne&rsquo;s voice mail had been hacked and that the phone in question might have been provided to her by Rebekah Brooks, then the editor of The News of the World.        

In a statement, Ms. Brooks confirmed that The News of the World had provided Mrs. Payne with a cellphone &ldquo;for the last 11 years&rdquo; as part of the campaign for the law, but said that &ldquo;it was not a personal gift.&rdquo; She said that she found the allegations that Mrs. Payne&rsquo;s voice mail had been hacked &ldquo;abhorrent and particularly upsetting, as Sara Payne is a dear friend.&rdquo; In recent testimony on the scandal in Parliament, Ms. Brooks cited the measure named after Mrs. Payne&rsquo;s daughter, Sarah&rsquo;s Law, as evidence of the good she had done in her years at the tabloid&rsquo;s helm.        

Ms. Brooks was The News of the World&rsquo;s editor during periods when hacking appeared to have been widespread, but has maintained she knew nothing of it. She stepped down July 15 from her executive role at News International, the British arm of Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s News Corporation and the owner of The News of the World, and was later arrested on suspicion of phone hacking and payments to the police.        

The company issued a brief statement on Thursday that said:&nbsp; &ldquo;News International takes this matter very seriously and is deeply concerned like everyone.&nbsp;As the facts are established, the Company and the independent Management and Standards Committee will take all appropriate actions, including cooperating fully with any potential criminal enquiries or civil proceedings which may arise.&rdquo;        

Scotland Yard officers told Mrs. Payne that details about her were among the papers held by the private investigator Glenn Mulcaire, according to the Phoenix Foundation statement. Mr. Mulcaire, who had an exclusive contract with the tabloid, had a list of about 4,000 potential targets and was convicted on hacking charges related to the paper five years ago.        

The hacking scandal had been smoldering for years, but ignited in recent weeks after assertions that hacking on behalf of The News of the World had interfered with the investigation into the 2002 murder of a 13-year-old girl, Milly Dowler. The man eventually convicted of her killing committed two more murders before he was caught.        

More revelations appear imminent. Members of Parliament&rsquo;s Culture, Media and Sport Committee said Thursday that they would gather this week to discuss whether to call further witnesses in their inquiries into the scandal and an alleged cover-up by News International. On Aug. 8, previously unseen documents relating to hacking from News International as well as a portion of Mr. Mulcaire&rsquo;s documents held by the police will be released to those who have filed lawsuits.        

On Aug. 10, the News Corporation &mdash; which has been bolstering its stock price with buybacks &mdash; will announce its quarterly results.        

In central London on Thursday, the British judge leading the inquiry into the scandal held a news conference, saying that the panel planned to hold its first public hearings in September and that it would have the power to compel witnesses to testify.        

An initial phase will focus on press regulation and the relationship between the press and the public, said the judge, Lord Justice Leveson. A second, which will begin after the current police investigation is finished, will focus on specific allegations of phone hacking and other journalistic malfeasance.        

Justice Leveson was appointed by Prime Minister David Cameron after it became clear that hacking at The News of the World extended not only to public figures like celebrities and politicians, but also to Milly Dowler and possibly to the families of those killed in terrorist attacks. Mr. Cameron, a Conservative, initially resisted setting up an immediate inquiry, but changed his mind in response to widespread public disgust and growing political pressure from the opposition Labour Party.        

One of the issues the judge will consider is the coziness of the ties between politicians and the news media &mdash; particularly the relationship between lawmakers and editors and executives at News International.        

In another sign of how far in British public life News International&rsquo;s influence extends &mdash; or has extended, until now &mdash; it emerged last week that Justice Leveson himself attended two parties last year at the home of Elisabeth Murdoch, a daughter of Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s, and her husband, Matthew Freud, a powerful public relations executive.        

Justice Leveson said that because he and the rest of the inquiry panel &mdash; which includes former journalists and a former high-ranking police officer, among others &mdash; had been chosen for their experience, it was inevitable that &ldquo;there are such contacts or links, and there should be no apology for this.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;Had I had the slightest doubt about my own position, I would not have accepted the appointment, and I also make it clear that I am satisfied that what the panelists have said creates no conflict of interest for them or me.&rdquo;        

In another development that might spell trouble for News International, Tim Godwin, the temporary chief of Scotland Yard, told a committee of lawmakers at City Hall that a new inquiry would most likely be opened into the 1987 ax murder of a private investigator.        

The case has become newly relevant in light of revelations that Scotland Yard told Ms. Brooks in 2003 that it had evidence that one of her editors at The News of the World had hired people to conduct surveillance of the lead investigating police officer in the case. She was told that there was evidence that the surveillance was ordered as a favor to the chief suspects, Jonathan Rees and Sidney Fillary, investigators who had worked for the tabloid. Efforts to bring them to trial have fallen apart repeatedly.        
Sarah Lyall contributed reporting.
