
SERANG, Indonesia &mdash; Twelve members of a mob that set upon adherents of an Islamic sect, killing three of them, received sentences of three to six months in jail on Thursday. Rights advocates criticized the ruling as an example of growing impunity for violence against religious minorities in Indonesia.        

In a heavily guarded court in Banten Province in western Java, the 12 defendants were found guilty of taking part in a clash between a crowd of more than 1,000 villagers and a handful of members of Ahmadiyya, an Islamic sect that mainstream Muslim clerics here say is heretical. The attack took place in Cikeusik, a remote village, in February.        

A video of the attack that was posted online afterward provoked outrage in Indonesia and abroad. It showed police officers standing by as the villagers descended on a house where a number of Ahmadis were staying, beating several men and mutilating the bodies of the dead.        

Human rights groups have been critical of the apparent reluctance of law enforcement officials to punish members of the mob. Prosecutors did not pursue murder charges, instead charging the 12 with crimes like incitement, assault and torture. They sought sentences of five to seven months, and the judges in the case chose even lighter sentences, saying that the Ahmadiyya adherents had caused the episode.        

By contrast, one of the Ahmadis is being prosecuted on charges of provoking the violence and could face a sentence of six years; prosecutors have not yet said whether they would seek the maximum sentence.        

Andreas Harsono, the Indonesia consultant for Human Rights Watch, said he was not surprised by the verdict in the villagers&rsquo; trial. &ldquo;This is happening over and over again: people who are attacking minorities, they don&rsquo;t get serious punishments.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;This kind of lenient sentence will send the wrong kind of message to the militants, to the people in Indonesia, that you can do violence, you can destroy churches, you can bomb churches, you can destroy Ahmadiyya properties. There are hundreds of Ahmadiyya properties that have been burned down in the last three years &mdash; and you can get just a slap on the wrist.&rdquo;        

Indonesia has been struggling with a rise in violence against religious minorities in recent years. An increasing number of Christian churches have been attacked, while Ahmadiyya has come under steady pressure because many mainstream Muslim clerics accuse it of violating a central tenet of Islam, that Muhammad was the final prophet.        

Most Indonesians subscribe to a moderate form of Islam, but more conservative strains have grown in popularity in recent years. The government of President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono has come under sustained pressure from conservative Islamists to outlaw the Ahmadiyya sect; a compromise law enacted in 2008 forbade the sect from proselytizing. A lawyer for the defendants said the Ahmadis in Cikeusik had ignored that ban.        
