
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The Taliban launched one of their most audacious surprise attacks on Thursday, sending a squad of at least seven suicide bombers into the capital of a relatively stable southern province with the aim of assassinating the provincial governor and an influential powerbroker. Neither was killed, but security and health officials said at least 21 civilians had died in the collateral mayhem, half of them children.        

The Taliban attack in the capital of Oruzgan Province, Tirin Kot, appeared to be carefully coordinated. It struck at the heart of Afghanistan&rsquo;s south just as the American-led NATO command is in the process of gradually handing over security responsibility to the Afghan government after nearly 10 years of war, and it raised new alarms about the government&rsquo;s capabilities when the foreign forces eventually leave.        

The attack came one day after a Taliban suicide bomber&rsquo;s assassination of the mayor of Kandahar, which followed the assassinations of other high-level Afghans, including a powerful half brother of President Hamid Karzai, earlier this month.        

Like other recent suicide bombings, the attack in Tirin Kot was aimed at power brokers in or from southern Afghanistan. Earlier in the year, a similar series of suicide bombings was directed at senior figures aligned with the government in Afghanistan&rsquo;s north.        

&ldquo;Today was a day of catastrophe for the people of Oruzgan,&rdquo; said Fazal Ahmad Shirzad, the provincial police chief.        

The Taliban said its Tirin Kot attackers, who sought to storm the governor&rsquo;s compound, the local television broadcast station and the heavily guarded home of Matiullah Khan, a regional strongman, had not intended to kill civilians but were aiming for the rich and powerful. The goal of the attack on Tirin Kot, said Qari Yusuf Ahmadi, the Taliban spokesman for the south and west of the country, was &ldquo;to make the government collapse.&rdquo;        

Tribal elders in Oruzgan said they believed the Taliban would attack Tirin Kot again because many people in Oruzgan are opposed to Mr. Khan, who has a lucrative contract to protect NATO convoys that bring supplies to the NATO base in the province.        

&ldquo;The reason for today&rsquo;s attacks are clear: people are against Matiullah Khan and his family,&rdquo; said an elder in the province who asked not to be identified by name because he feared Mr. Khan might take revenge.        

The elder said Mr. Khan&rsquo;s business relationships and influence meant &ldquo;there are many tribes who are deprived of power and business.&rdquo;        

The list of the those killed in Taliban assassinations in the north and the south overwhelmingly include men who were both powerful and corrupt, but they also include officials responsible for local governance and security. While their deaths are certainly not destabilizing enough to cause a government collapse, the effects are extremely disruptive because it takes time to choose replacements.        

Besides President Karzai&rsquo;s half brother and the Kandahar mayor, the list of important assassinated figures this year includes three police chiefs from the north of Afghanistan, a senior adviser to the president from southern Afghanistan and the head of the Muslim religious leadership for Kandahar.        

At least two of the seven suicide attackers in Tirin Kot tried to bomb the governor&rsquo;s compound, the Interior Ministry said. One drove a vehicle close to the gate, but it was not clear if he managed to enter. At least one and possibly two other attackers entered the governor&rsquo;s compound and went into a building used by the deputy governor. They were killed by the police before they could blow themselves up, officials said.        

The vehicle driver detonated his explosives close to the wall that the governor&rsquo;s compound shares with the provincial hospital next door, said Khan Agha Miakhail, the provincial public health director. The force of the blast collapsed the wall and killed women and children in the maternity wing.        

Another explosion hit the radio and television compound, where the attackers killed a police guard and a reporter for the BBC&rsquo;s Pashto service. Mr. Khan said the attackers had tried to enter the compound used by his forces moments before, and when they were prevented by police, they went to the radio and television center nearby.        

Mr. Khan, who was at home at the time, has his own private force of about 300 armed men. They wear police uniforms but primarily answer to Mr. Khan, not the police chief.        

Mr. Khan has been a controversial figure with ties both to the Americans through his protection contracts for convoys and to the Taliban, whom he has both fought and paid off to protect the NATO convoys.        

For the last two to three years, Oruzgan has been relatively quiet. Although the Taliban occupy more remote districts of the province, they have not been a major presence in Tirin Kot since 2006.        

That was well before the surge in both NATO and Afghan forces. Now, with a large American base in Tirin Kot and more police officers in the province, the Taliban have been choosing targets more selectively.        

NATO leaders and diplomats have said the recent spate of assassinations are a sign of the Taliban&rsquo;s weakness and desperation in the nearly decade-old Afghanistan war.        
Alissa J. Rubin reported from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar, Afghanistan.
