
BAGHDAD &mdash; Two explosions struck outside a bank in Tikrit, Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s hometown, on Thursday, just as soldiers were lining up to cash their paychecks. The first report on casualties indicated that 12 people died and 28 were wounded, a local official said.        

The first blast was a car bomb, which exploded in a parking area adjacent to the bank. As people rushed to the scene, the second blast came when a man in military uniform detonated his explosives-laden vest. While the attack appeared to be aimed at the soldiers lining up at the bank, most of the casualties were civilians, according to an official.        

&ldquo;We didn&rsquo;t expect this to happen here, because most of the people were just ordinary citizens,&rdquo; said Majeed Mohammed, 47, a farmer who suffered shrapnel wounds. He said that he was in the front of the bank line, and that most of those who were killed had been standing farther back in the line. &ldquo;Even we didn&rsquo;t know that this is where the army receives their salaries.&rdquo;        

The attack punctured weeks of relative calm here as Ramadan approaches. Over the last several months, the main security threat in Baghdad has been the assassinations of government officials and military officers, many by silenced weapons. The northern city of Kirkuk has seen a spate of kidnappings for ransom lately; several doctors have been among those seized.        

No group claimed immediate responsibility for Thursday&rsquo;s attacks, though they appeared to be in the style of previous attacks by Al Qaeda in Iraq. As violence has diminished across Iraq relative to a few years ago, it is still one of the most dangerous countries in the world, and mass casualty attacks of the sort that occurred Thursday are still frequent, especially in Tikrit, a Sunni-dominated city north of Baghdad.        

&ldquo;These terrorists all have the same strategy,&rdquo; said Hussain al-Shutub, a member of the Salahuddin Provincial Council. &ldquo;They just want to kill everyone.&rdquo;        

Some of the highest-profile attacks in Iraq this year have occurred in Tikrit, including a brazen assault on the provincial council building this year that left nearly 60 people dead and more than 90 wounded. An attack on police recruits in January killed close to 50 people. More recently, in June, an attack on a mosque in a fortified section of the city where many government officials live killed 19 people and wounded at least 49. A second explosion struck later that day at a hospital, where many of the wounded were being treated.        

On Thursday in Kirkuk, the police said they had arrested 15 people who were believed to be involved in a kidnapping ring. The police said some of those in the ring were soldiers in the Iraqi Army and had committed crimes while in uniform. Even as they announced the arrests, the police reported another kidnapping, this one of a 76-year-old man who was taken by men wearing military uniforms.        
An employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Salahuddin Province.
