
MOSCOW &mdash; American intelligence officials have concluded in a classified report that a Russian intelligence officer may have been behind a string of bombings in the nation of Georgia last year, including an explosion near the United States Embassy, but that there is no evidence of a plot to attack American installations, an American official said Thursday.        

&ldquo;The assessment seems to be that the bombings have more to do with Russia&rsquo;s relationship with Georgia than Russia&rsquo;s relationship with the United States,&rdquo; said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the intelligence assessment on the bombings is classified.        

The official said the assessment implicating the Russian officer draws upon information from several intelligence and law enforcement agencies, including Georgian ones. The official cautioned that it was &ldquo;not a rock-solid assessment&rdquo; and reached no definite conclusion about whether the bombings were ordered by officials in Moscow. Its thrust, the official said, was that the bombing near the American Embassy likely &ldquo;was an attempt to poke the Georgians in the eye, not the U.S.&rdquo;        

The existence of the report was first reported by The Washington Times. The intelligence community has apparently been unable to reach a clear consensus about who is responsible for the bombings, which has revived old differences in Washington about what the United States relationship with Russia should be.        

An explosion early Sept. 22 occurred in a vacant lot roughly 200 feet outside the embassy&rsquo;s wall. Apparently caused by a candy box packed with hexogen, it did not cause any injuries or damage to the embassy, the Georgian police said. A second device in the same place was defused.        

The blast was one of a string of similar explosions over several months, mostly in sparsely populated places. One person was killed. Georgian officials investigating the explosions identified 12 bombing plots &mdash; some of which were not executed &mdash; and linked them to Russian agents.        

The Georgian police traced the blast at the embassy to Maj. Yevgeny Borisov, an officer for Russia&rsquo;s military intelligence service, who is stationed in the breakaway Georgian territory of Abkhazia. In December, when Georgia arrested six people in the bombings, the police said Major Borisov had supplied the explosive devices, offered detailed instructions on their use and paid two of the suspects following detonations. The American intelligence report appears to offer the first independent corroboration of those findings. A Russian official, asked on Thursday about The Washington Times report, said discussion of the embassy bombing was being revived for political reasons.        

&ldquo;It looks like the aim of the publication is to prompt a second propaganda wave around issues that have already been discussed, both with the American and Georgian representatives at the beginning of this year,&rdquo; said the official, Grigory B. Karasin, Russia&rsquo;s deputy foreign minister. &ldquo;Such issues should be examined seriously and without any propagandistic racket. However, apparently, this does not accord with the goals of those who have organized this campaign.&rdquo;        

Russia and Georgia have remained hostile since going to war in 2008 over the breakaway Georgian territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Russia has kept thousands of troops in the territories.        

This week, five United States senators &mdash; the Republicans John Kyl and John McCain of Arizona, Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Mark Steven Kirk of Illinois, and Joseph I. Lieberman, the Connecticut independent &mdash; requested a briefing from the State Department, the National Security Council and intelligence agencies on the explosion at the embassy. On Thursday, Mr. Kyl said in a statement that until the explosion in Georgia &mdash; which he called an &ldquo;attempted bombing of the U.S. Embassy&rdquo; &mdash; was resolved, efforts to reset relations with Russia should be halted.        
Ellen Barry reported from Moscow, and Mark Mazzetti from Washington. Charlie Savage contributed reporting from Washington.
