
In what appeared to be his first video message since succeeding Osama bin Laden as the leader of Al Qaeda, Ayman al-Zawahri expressed strong support for antigovernment protesters in Syria, claiming that their movement to topple the country&rsquo;s authoritarian leader was rooted in a wider regional conflict with the United States and Israel.        

The seven-minute video was posted online Wednesday by As Sahab, the media branch of Al Qaeda, and recorded sometime in the past month, according to the SITE Intelligence Group, which tracks jihadist communications and translated the video. Al Qaeda announced in mid-June that Mr. Zawahri had been chosen to lead the group.        

The video shows Mr. Zawahri seated with a black background and wagging a finger at the camera as he issued a sustained rebuke of the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, whom he called &ldquo;the leader of the criminal gang, descendant of the treacherous ones.&rdquo;        

Addressing the protesters who for more than four months have faced a crackdown by Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government, Mr. Zawahri tried to link his network to their popular movement, and Mr. Assad to the United States. &ldquo;America, which cooperated with Bashar al-Assad during his entire regime, claims today that it is standing with you when it saw him on the ground due to the earthquake of your fury,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;You are giving examples and explaining lessons to your Arab and Muslim Ummah in sacrifice, steadfastness and fighting oppression,&rdquo; he added, using the word for the global community of Muslims.        

Such belated declarations of support, which Al Qaeda has made previously, have been viewed by security experts as evidence that the pro-democracy uprisings have left Al Qaeda largely a bystander to recent world-changing events. The group&rsquo;s leaders, first Bin Laden and now Mr. Zawahri, have struggled to address young demonstrators who appear to have little use for their ideology. In Egypt, the ouster of Hosni Mubarak, a central goal of Mr. Zawahri&rsquo;s career, was carried out without him and by methods he had long denounced.        

Mr. Zawahri, a 60-year-old Egyptian, had previously issued a video eulogy for Bin Laden, but at that time the organization had yet to name him as Bin Laden&rsquo;s successor.        

In that earlier video, Mr. Zawahri also tried to rhetorically connect Al Qaeda to the protests that spread through North Africa and the Middle East this year, saying that Al Qaeda supported the people in Yemen, Syria and Libya in their uprisings.        

Bin Laden was killed May 2 in a raid by members of the Navy Seals at his compound in Pakistan. In the video, Mr. Zawahri did not mention Bin Laden by name and did not directly mention his own new role.        
Scott Shane contributed reporting from Washington.
