
BEIJING &mdash; President Hu Jintao of China returned home this weekend after a trip intended to repair relations with the United States. But the next time the White House marches out the honor guard and polishes the crystal for a Chinese leader, it is unlikely to be for Mr. Hu.        

Following a secretive succession plan sketched out years ago, Mr. Hu has already begun preparing for his departure from power, passing the baton to his presumed successor, a former provincial leader named Xi Jinping, now China&rsquo;s vice president. While Mr. Xi is expected to formally take the reins next year in China, the world&rsquo;s second-largest economy and fastest-modernizing military power, he remains a cipher to most people, even in China.        

But an extended look at Mr. Xi&rsquo;s past, taken from wide-ranging interviews and official Chinese publications, shows that his rise has been built on a combination of political acumen, family connections and ideological dexterity. Like the country he will run, he has nimbly maintained the primacy of the Communist Party, while making economic growth the party&rsquo;s main business.        

There is little in his record to suggest that he intends to steer China in a sharply different direction. But some political observers also say  that he may have broader support within the party than Mr. Hu, which could give him more leeway to experiment with new ideas. At the same time, there is uncertainty about how he may wield authority in a system where power has grown increasingly diffuse. Mr. Xi also has deeper military ties than his two predecessors, Mr. Hu and Jiang Zemin, had when they took the helm.        

For much of his career, Mr. Xi, 57, presided over booming areas on the east coast that have been at the forefront of China&rsquo;s experimentation with market authoritarianism, which has included attracting foreign investment, putting party cells in private companies and expanding government support for model entrepreneurs. This has given Mr. Xi the kind of political and economic experience that Mr. Hu lacked when he ascended to the top leadership position.        

He is less of a dour mandarin than Mr. Hu is. The tall, stocky Mr. Xi is a so-called princeling &mdash; a descendant of a member of the revolutionary party elite &mdash; and his second marriage is to a celebrity folk singer and army major general, Peng Liyuan.        

Unlike the robotic Mr. Hu, Mr. Xi has dropped memorable barbs against the West into a couple of recent speeches: he once warned critics of China&rsquo;s rise to &ldquo;stop pointing fingers at us.&rdquo; But he has  enrolled his daughter in Harvard, under a pseudonym.        

The Climb Up the Ladder        

Mr. Xi (his full name is pronounced Shee Jin-ping) climbed the ladder by building support among top party officials, particularly those in Mr. Jiang&rsquo;s clique, all while cultivating an image of humility and self-reliance despite his prominent family ties, say officials and other party members who have known him.        

His subtle and pragmatic style was seen in the way he handled a landmark power project teetering on the edge of failure in 2002, when he was governor of Fujian, a coastal province. The American company Bechtel and other foreign investors had poured in nearly $700 million. But the investors became mired in a dispute with planning officials.        

After ducking foreign executives&rsquo; repeated requests for a meeting, Mr. Xi agreed to chat one night in the governor&rsquo;s compound with an American business consultant on the project whose father had befriended Mr. Xi&rsquo;s father in the 1940s.        

Mr. Xi explained that he could not interfere in a dispute involving other powerful officials. But he showed that he knew the project intimately and supported it, promising to meet the investors &ldquo;after the two sides have reached an agreement.&rdquo; That spurred a compromise that allowed the power plant  to begin operating.        

&ldquo;I thought, &lsquo;This person is a brilliant politician,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said the consultant, Sidney Rittenberg Jr.        

Mr. Xi&rsquo;s political skills paid their greatest dividend last October, when he was appointed vice chairman of the Central Military Commission, a move that means he will almost certainly succeed Mr. Hu as party secretary in late 2012 and as president in 2013. Mr. Hu, the commission&rsquo;s chairman, could retain his military post for another few years.        

Over the years, Mr. Xi built his appeal on &ldquo;the way he carried himself in political affairs,&rdquo; said Zhang Xiaojin, a political scientist at Tsinghua University.        

&ldquo;On economic reforms and development, he proved rather effective,&rdquo; Mr. Zhang said. &ldquo;On political reforms, he didn&rsquo;t take any risks that would catch flak.&rdquo;        

Mr. Xi also emerged as a convenient accommodation to two competing wings of the party:  those loyal to Mr. Hu and those allied with Mr. Jiang, who in China&rsquo;s collective leadership had an important role in naming Mr. Hu&rsquo;s successor.        

Mr. Xi&rsquo;s elite lineage and career along the prosperous coast have aligned him more closely with Mr. Jiang. But like Mr. Hu, Mr. Xi also spent formative years in the provincial hinterlands. Mr. Hu was once close to Mr. Xi&rsquo;s father, a top Communist leader during the Chinese civil war.        

The father, Xi Zhongxun, was one of the more liberal party leaders and was purged several times under Mao. He was a mastermind in the early 1980s of China&rsquo;s first special economic zone in Shenzhen. Behind closed party doors, he supported the liberal-leaning leader Hu Yaobang, who was dismissed in 1987, and condemned the military crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protesters in 1989.        
Li Bibo and Benjamin Haas contributed research.
