
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The Syrian government said Friday that an oil pipeline had been hit by a bomb in what the authorities called a terrorist attack, as the country&rsquo;s uprising continued with the Friday protests that have become a ritual there. Security forces killed nine people at the demonstrations, protesters and activists said.        

Security forces also killed at least seven people in overnight raids in towns near the Iraqi border, activists said. Government forces had stayed out of the towns for weeks, fearing that an assault would ignite tribal tensions.        

The attack on the pipeline could cause new troubles for Syria&rsquo;s economy. Oil revenue has become increasingly important as tourism as fallen off during months of upheaval.        

A report on Syrian television said that the pipeline was near the town of Tal Kalakh as well as the Tal Hosh dam. The explosion left a 33-foot-deep crater.        

The report also said that Friday&rsquo;s &ldquo;attack sought to cause oil to leak into the dam&rsquo;s waters in order to damage agricultural crops in the area.&rdquo; The report did not mention casualties or what kind of damage the explosion caused.        

Numeir Makhlouf, chairman of the state-owned Syrian Company for Oil Transport, told the state-run SANA news agency that oil had leaked into a lake that supplies the vast agricultural western area with irrigation water.        

Tal Kalakh was the site of a fierce military operation in May that followed large antigovernment demonstrations. At least 35 people died, activists and residents said.        

The bombing was the second to single out an oil pipeline since the popular uprising against President Bashar al-Assad began in mid-March. The pipeline that was hit Friday carries crude from fields in the oil-rich eastern town of Deir al-Zour to a refinery in Baniyas, the main point of export for Syrian oil.        

The protests on Friday started after noon prayers and were dubbed &ldquo;Your silence is killing us,&rdquo; in the hopes of attracting sections of the Syrian population yet to take part in demonstrations. That includes minorities and the business elite in Damascus and Syria&rsquo;s other largest city, Aleppo.        

The protests came just days before Ramadan. Activists have promised to escalate their campaign during the holy month, hoping to gather people each night after evening prayers at mosques.        

The Local Coordination Committees, an umbrella group that helps organize and document protests, said four protesters died in Deir al-Zour, three in the southern town of Dara&rsquo;a, one in the central city of Homs and one in Latakia, along the northern coast.        

The raids near the Iraqi border were in Deir al-Zour and Alboukamal, towns where large demonstrations have been held in recent weeks.        

Nawaf al-Bashir, an activist from Deir al-Zour, said security forces opened fire at protesters who were setting up roadblocks to prevent them from entering the town to carry out arrests. Mr. Bashir said that at least 60 people had been arrested since Thursday evening and that 30 soldiers had defected. His account could not be independently confirmed because Syria has barred foreign journalists from entering the country.        

The government has been especially wary of going into the towns because the tribes there carry influence in the region and enjoy close ties with tribes in Anbar, the Iraqi province across the border that witnessed some of the worst violence during the height of the insurgency in Iraq.        
