
DAKAR, Senegal &mdash; President Obama hosted four recently elected West African presidents on Friday in a gesture of support for the continent&rsquo;s nascent democracies. Given what they are wrestling with, they could certainly use it.        

Three of the four had reason to cast anxious looks toward home as they entered the White House: a fresh assassination attempt in one case; reports of coup plotting in a second; and a marauding soldiery in a third.        

The presidents &mdash; of Guinea, Niger, Ivory Coast and Benin &mdash; may be democratic exemplars in Washington, but these heroes of the ballot box maintain shaky holds on power, pointing to the tenuousness of democracy in parts of the continent.        

Washington&rsquo;s window for welcoming these leaders, all from former French colonies, could be strictly limited. Restive soldiers continue to plot and grumble all around them. Only President Boni Yayi of Benin, re-elected to a second term in March, appears unmenaced by rogue forces.        

President Alpha Cond&eacute; of Guinea narrowly survived an assassination attempt by soldiers last week. President Mahamadou Issoufou&rsquo;s government in Niger arrested coup-plotting soldiers over the last week, according to a government official. Security forces and militia fighters allied with President Alassane Ouattara of Ivory Coast are intimidating and killing members of ethnic groups perceived to be against him, said a report Amnesty International released this week.        

The source of the instability is a familiar one: armies that operate as laws unto themselves. The soldiers have rarely been put in check by civilian institutions that remain chronically weak, so politicians often depend on the good graces, or otherwise, of the men who carry the guns.        

The new presidents of Guinea and Niger owe their positions to unusual decisions in the last year by high-ranking officers in their respective countries to relinquish power after seizing it through military coups. In Ivory Coast, Mr. Ouattara was installed in April through a combination of strikes by United Nations and French helicopters, along with an undisciplined &mdash; and in some circumstances deadly &mdash; home-grown army.        

Mr. Ouattara won an election last November, but the incumbent, Laurent Gbagbo, refused to step down. Mr. Ouattara allied himself with commanders who had led a previous rebellion against Mr. Gbagbo in the north, and was bolstered by militia fighters in the west.        

The partnership proved militarily successful, but it has led to a climate of insecurity in the country denounced this week by Amnesty International. Mr. Ouattara has repeatedly denounced abuses against civilians and vowed to hold anyone, including his own forces, accountable.        

But what the West African military gives, it can take away.        

In Guinea, mutinous soldiers last week aimed bazookas and rocket-propelled grenades at the bedroom of Mr. Cond&eacute;, the country&rsquo;s first democratically elected president. He escaped only because, as a precaution, he happened not to be sleeping there. Nearly 40 people have been arrested since.        

Mr. Cond&eacute; was elected in November after a lifetime dodging the country&rsquo;s founding dictators, but after taking office he quickly angered the uniforms that have long controlled Guinea.        

&ldquo;Sure, there were officers who got used to pulling $40,000, $60,000 a month,&rdquo; Mr. Cond&eacute; told Radio France Internationale after the attack. &ldquo;There was a bizarre $2 million fund I canceled. Obviously, there are some who are unhappy. But you can&rsquo;t keep on killing the country.&rdquo;        

On Monday, his national communications council banned any media discussion of the attack on the president, a decision quickly denounced by Guinea&rsquo;s press unions as crude censorship in a country with newfound democratic aspirations. The council&rsquo;s president, Martine Cond&eacute; (no relation to the president), said the ban was intended to promote &ldquo;serenity&rdquo; in a &ldquo;country that is 70 percent illiterate,&rdquo; but it was withdrawn Thursday after criticism at home and abroad.        

In Niger, the new government of Mr. Issoufou, elected in February, made several arrests last week in connection with a coup plot, said a government official who was not authorized to speak publicly on the matter.        

&ldquo;There are still elements inside the army that think they can do a coup d&rsquo;&eacute;tat and promise democracy, then fill up their pockets and go,&rdquo; said the government official, dismissing the episode as &ldquo;really minor.&rdquo; He said that &ldquo;documents&rdquo; were discovered in connection with the coup plot, &ldquo;a plan, the form of government.&rdquo;        

As in Guinea, the source of the trouble was disgruntled soldiers, the Niger government official said.        

Another government official in Niger confirmed that the issue was &ldquo;under investigation.&rdquo;        

Power has changed hands through coup plots multiple times since Niger&rsquo;s independence in 1960, and the country was returned to democracy most recently by a 2010 coup leader whose subordinates boasted that the military was the country&rsquo;s sole guarantor of democracy.        

In Niger, &ldquo;the military has been the self-anointed referee of politics for 20 years,&rdquo; said Pierre Englebert, a specialist in African politics at Pomona College.        

In Ivory Coast, Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s control over the forces that helped oust Mr. Gbagbo is unclear. He is trying to shape them into a new national army. But their origins as rebels who for nearly 10 years milked fiefs in the north of the country through extortion have not been erased.        

In all three countries &mdash; Guinea, Niger and Ivory Coast &mdash; democracy has no chance of establishing itself without profound changes in the nations&rsquo; respective armies, analysts say.        

&ldquo;To help this country, you have to help it reform its army,&rdquo; said Kalifa Gassama Diaby, president of the National Observatory of Democracy in Guinea, a good-governance group there, referring to his own country.        

&ldquo;It is not possible for the country to construct democracy unless the army is under control,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve started something here. We organized a democratic election in a country that isn&rsquo;t completely democratic.&rdquo;        
