
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; The leadership of the Libyan rebels acknowledged late Friday that a group of their own soldiers had killed their top military commander, contradicting statements made a day earlier as the rebels scrambled to avoid tribal revenge attacks that could divide their ranks.        

The death of the commander, Gen. Abdul Fattah Younes, has shaken both the rebel leaders trying to oust Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and their Western supporters by revealing divisions and intrigue within the rebel forces. The shifting and elliptical accounts of General Younes&rsquo;s death have raised new questions about the rebel leaders&rsquo; credibility.        

Even before a member of the rebels&rsquo; governing council, Ali Tarhouni, told a group of reporters Friday night that General Younes had died at the hands of rebel soldiers, many in the general&rsquo;s powerful tribe, the Obeidi, were accusing the council of playing some role in his death.        

General Younes&rsquo;s death also removed the rebels&rsquo; top military commander just as they were struggling to restart their stalled drive toward Tripoli before the expiration in late September of the United Nations resolution authorizing NATO&rsquo;s actions against Colonel Qaddafi.        

General Younes, a former chief of security under Colonel Qaddafi, was responsible for the detention and torture of untold numbers of Libyan dissidents, and had long been a controversial figure among the rebels because of his close ties to their nemesis in Tripoli. Shortly before his death the rebels issued a subpoena for the general to return from the front lines for questioning by a panel of judges, reportedly about charges of treason.        

But instead of relying on a legal process, a group of rebel soldiers sent to retrieve him killed him along with two guards, then dumped their bodies outside the city, Mr. Tarhouni told reporters Friday night. He said the officer commanding the soldiers had admitted that they executed General Younes, but the troops remained at large.        

&ldquo;Everything is under control,&rdquo; Mr. Tarhouni said, according to The Associated Press. &ldquo;This is just a rough stage we are going through.&rdquo;        

His comments contradicted a palpably fearful statement delivered the night before by the rebels&rsquo; top leader, Mustapha Abdul Jalil, who suggested to reporters that General Younes had been killed by an &ldquo;armed gang.&rdquo; Mr. Jalil said General Younes was killed after leaving his questioning session, not before. And he said that his body had not been found, though it appeared in a coffin Friday morning before midday prayers.        

After the rebels issued their second account of the killing, some rebel supporters here speculated that Mr. Jalil might have sought to paper over the details of General Younes&rsquo;s death until after the emotional and potentially volatile funeral on Friday, when thousands of mourners from the Obeidi tribe &mdash; but no one from the governing council &mdash; gathered to bury him. Some rebels said Mr. Jalil might have lied about not finding the body to discourage angry members of the tribe from storming the morgue to remove the body.        

Flashes of violence by angry members of the tribe occurred Thursday night. A group fired guns at the hotel where the death was announced, apparently in the belief that General Younes had been questioned there before his death and that the judges might still be inside, other tribe members said Friday. One tribe member barged through the front door with his Kalashnikov rifle as though looking for someone, only to race back out a short time later.        

Another group of tribe members, including a nephew of General Younes, fired a rocket-propelled grenade into the city&rsquo;s empty courthouse and engaged in a gunfight with rebel security, leaving a tribe member hospitalized, said Hazma al-Menefi, a rebel fighter involved. He said tribal elders arrived to calm the situation.        

In interviews Friday, several Obeidi tribe members said they thought the rebel council had played a role in his death, in part because it had issued the subpoena for him. &ldquo;On the basis of what happened, the purpose of the subpoena was only luring him out,&rdquo; said Erhain Khamis, 43, a rebel military officer who is also an Obeidi tribe member and the brother of one of the general&rsquo;s personal guards who was killed.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;The paper was signed by the council, so it is only natural that we put them in doubt,&rdquo; Mr. Khamis said. &ldquo;They have full responsibility for this because it is their negligence.&rdquo; He said tribe members and soldiers loyal to the general were awaiting the results of the council&rsquo;s investigation before deciding how to respond.        

Another army officer who is a cousin of General Younes, agreed. &ldquo;Definitely we blame the National Transitional Council because they issued the subpoena,&rdquo; the officer said Friday night, standing under a mourning tent. &ldquo;What their role was in the betrayal, I can&rsquo;t say for sure yet.&rdquo; He spoke on the condition of anonymity because of military rules against interviews.        

Other tribal leaders around the mourning tent said they were working hard to avoid a tribal backlash over the killing because it could undermine the rebels&rsquo; unity. &ldquo;Fortunately for the revolution and for Libya,&rdquo; said El Sanussi Ali, 52, &ldquo;this happened to an ancient tribe with good roots, and this tribe will never retaliate in a heinous way.&rdquo;        

Any action against the killers, Mr. Ali said, should come through the legal system set up by the rebel council, not by rough tribal justice. &ldquo;We sent about 40 vehicles to the front last night to show that we will only retaliate against the tyrant,&rdquo; he said.        

In Washington, a State Department spokesman urged the rebels not to let the discord over General Younes&rsquo;s death divide them. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s important is that they work both diligently and transparently to ensure the unity of the Libyan opposition,&rdquo; said the spokesman, Mark Toner.        

In Tripoli, officials of Mr. Qaddafi&rsquo;s government were unexpectedly reluctant to talk about the death of General Younes, a former ally who joined the rebels. The deputy foreign minister, Khalid Kaim, called for a careful forensic investigation of General Younes&rsquo;s remains. Although a &ldquo;traitor,&rdquo; Mr. Kaim said, General Younes was still &ldquo;a Libyan citizen.&rdquo;        

At least one person in General Younes&rsquo;s family had kind words for the general&rsquo;s former boss. Breaking down in tears at the burial, General Younes&rsquo;s son Ashraf began calling out for Colonel Qaddafi and his distinctive banner. &ldquo;We want Muammar to come back!&rdquo; he cried, according to The Associated Press. &ldquo;We want the green flag back!&rdquo;        
