
NESODDEN, Norway &mdash; While her friends saved for iPads, Bano Rashid worked at an amusement park last summer to buy a bunad, the ornate and expensive national costume of Norway. Though she was an Iraqi Kurd who came here as a child, Ms. Rashid wanted to stretch the limits of the country&rsquo;s blond and blue-eyed identity, to help redefine what it means to be Norwegian.        

It was a mission that an anti-immigrant extremist sought to thwart when he killed Ms. Rashid, 18, and at least 76 others a week ago in attacks on the government headquarters and at an isolated camp that were meant to turn Norway upon itself.        

But the challenge from the extremist, identified by the police as Anders Behring Breivik, has been met with defiance on many fronts, nowhere more so than at Ms. Rashid&rsquo;s funeral here on Friday, where mourners channeled their grief into a powerful display of unity.        

A Muslim imam and female Christian minister presided over a ceremony that drew hundreds of mourners to a small 12th-century church in Ms. Rashid&rsquo;s hometown, about 25 miles from Oslo, the capital. Her coffin was draped with the red, white and green Kurdish flag, as well as Norway&rsquo;s red, white and blue.        

On a hill overlooking the waters of the Oslo fjord, Norwegians, Kurds and others vowed to honor her life by defying the man responsible for her death.        

&ldquo;We would rather strengthen our trust and love rather than fall victim to his degeneration,&rdquo; said Roland E. Goksoyr, 18, a friend of Ms. Rashid&rsquo;s. &ldquo;We will punish him, not by killing him or torturing him, but by defying his every wish.&rdquo;        

Even so, mourners said, it will be some time before Norway can come to terms with the scope of the tragedy.        

Not since World War II, when the country was occupied by the Nazis, has Norway suffered such losses from violence. That many of the victims were young has compounded the anguish.        

Mr. Breivik, a self-described Christian crusader, has claimed responsibility for bombing the government headquarters in Oslo on July 22 and then carrying out a massacre at a youth camp not far away on the island of Utoya.        

On Friday, the police raised the death toll by one, bringing the total to 77. They said all the missing had been identified, though it was unclear if this was the final toll.        

In a 1,500-page manifesto, Mr. Breivik wrote that the attacks were necessary to spark a war that would cleanse Europe of its Muslim immigrants, who he argued were destroying the continent&rsquo;s Christian heritage and culture. Though most Europeans consider his methods abominable, his anti-immigrant ideas, while extreme, are in tune with a growing current of xenophobia in Europe.        

Ms. Rashid spent much of her brief life fighting against these sentiments. She was the leader of the Nesodden branch of the liberal Labor Party&rsquo;s youth wing, a major political force in Norway. Members of the party&rsquo;s youth wing typically go on to high-ranking government positions.        

In articles and speeches at political events she denounced racism and discrimination against immigrants in Norway, whose integration into society she contended was both possible and vital.        

&ldquo;There is no doubt that Oslo would grind to a halt if it went one day without the work of immigrants,&rdquo; Ms. Rashid wrote last year in the Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten. &ldquo;Let Norway use the resources of its immigrants. Give us time to integrate, preferably without discrimination.&rdquo;        

Ms. Rashid&rsquo;s family came to Norway in 1996 after fleeing Iraq amid mounting violence against Kurds by the government of Saddam Hussein. An outspoken young woman with big brown eyes and a contagious laugh, Ms. Rashid dreamed of becoming Norway&rsquo;s prime minister one day. She was planning to run in her first election for a seat on Nesodden&rsquo;s City Council in September.        

&ldquo;She was a light in my life,&rdquo; said Nina Sandberg, a Labor Party politician who intends to run for mayor here. &ldquo;She once sat down on a bus with me and said, &lsquo;Hey, I notice you&rsquo;re a local politician. I&rsquo;m going to be one as well.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        
Elisa Mala and Henrik Pryser Libell contributed reporting from Oslo.
