
BERLIN &mdash; A Polish government report on Friday blamed the poor training of a Polish flight crew, as well as Russian air traffic controllers, for the 2010 crash in Russia that killed President Lech Kaczynski, his wife and 94 others. The report had the immediate effect of forcing out Poland&rsquo;s defense minister, whose office was responsible for training the pilots.        

Prime Minister Donald Tusk said at a news conference in Warsaw on Friday that the defense minister, Bogdan Klich, had resigned on Thursday night in anticipation of the report, which singled out serious organizational failings in the Polish military.        

The 300-page report said the Polish &ldquo;aircraft commander, co-pilot and navigator had been trained hastily, haphazardly and in violation of the respective training regulations.&rdquo;        

But it also said that the Russian air traffic controllers had erroneously confirmed to the pilots that the jet was well positioned for landing at the Smolensk North Airport. That &ldquo;might have affirmed the crew&rsquo;s belief that the approach was proceeding correctly although the airplane was actually outside the permissible deviation margin,&rdquo; it said.        

But the major focus of the report was the role played by the Polish crew, and in Warsaw the fallout was swift. Mr. Tusk said that Mr. Klich had made the decision to leave.        

&ldquo;He felt his further presence in the Defense Ministry would hamper implementation of recommendations made in the report,&rdquo; Mr. Tusk said. Those recommendations include an overhaul of crew training procedures, new safety guidelines and a review of crew qualifications.        

The crash occurred as Polish officials were on their way to a ceremony commemorating the 70th anniversary of the Katyn massacre, in which Stalin&rsquo;s secret police killed thousands of Polish officers in World War II. Until the early 1990s, the Kremlin had blamed the Nazis for the killings.        

The long-awaited investigation followed a report by Russian officials in January. It had placed the blame squarely on the Poles, saying that the crew was under pressure, perhaps by the president himself, to land the plane despite dense fog, and that it ignored warnings by Russian air traffic controllers. That report had led to angry denials in Poland, straining the relationship between the nations, which had been improving.        

The Polish report found that while Mr. Kaczynski&rsquo;s aide entered the cockpit to learn about the prospects for landing at Smolensk, there was no order from the president to land.        

The pilots, it noted, &ldquo;had little experience&rdquo; flying in difficult weather or using the type of landing systems necessary at Smolensk, about 230 miles west of Moscow, where conditions were relatively primitive. The pilots were not given the weather report from Smolensk before takeoff, it said, and only one member of the crew spoke some Russian.        

The most immediate cause of the crash, the report found, was the crew&rsquo;s &ldquo;failure to monitor altitude by means of a pressure altimeter during a nonprecision approach&rdquo; &mdash; they descended too far below the fog without realizing it &mdash; and then it failed to heed an automated warning to pull up.        

The findings were seized upon immediately by the nationalist Law and Justice Party led by Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the president&rsquo;s twin brother.        

&ldquo;Anyone reading the report would think that Poland alone was responsible for the death of its president, and it makes little mention of failures by Russia in the events that led to the tragedy,&rdquo; Antoni Macierewicz, a leading member of Law and Justice, told Polish Radio on Friday.        

Russian officials were also unhappy with the report, since it, unlike their inquiry, placed part of the blame on the Russians.        

&ldquo;The results were compiled with a nod to the political situation in order to show that Russians were to blame for at least something,&rdquo; Andrei Klimov, deputy chairman of the foreign affairs committee in the Russian Parliament&rsquo;s lower house, was quoted as saying by The Associated Press.        

Since the crash, Jaroslaw Kaczynski has repeatedly accused the Russians of a cover-up. But analysts said the findings by the Polish side were balanced.        

&ldquo;It seems that the Polish side tried to take a low-key approach, avoiding anything that could be politically inflammatory,&rdquo; said Jacek Kucharczyk, director of the Institute of Public Affairs, a research group in Warsaw. &ldquo;Indeed, it was very balanced, unlike the Russian report.&rdquo;        

Since becoming prime minister in 2007, Mr. Tusk and his foreign minister, Radek Sikorski, have embarked on an ambitious foreign policy initiative aimed at overcoming decades of enmity between Poland and Russia.        

&ldquo;The Poles as much as the Russians want better relations, which is why this report is important for the relationship,&rdquo; said Andrew A. Michta, director of the Warsaw office of the German Marshall Fund of the United States. &ldquo;The report has stuck to the facts available,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;The report does not deflect responsibility from the crew or the Russian side.&rdquo;        
Judy Dempsey reported from Berlin, and David Jolly from Paris.
