
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; North Korea must suspend all activities at its nuclear complexes and allow United Nations inspectors to verify a freeze before the six-nation negotiations can resume on economic and other rewards for the country in exchange for ending its nuclear weapons programs, the chief South Korean nuclear negotiator said Friday.        

&ldquo;North Korea should take these presteps to improve six-party talks and make them more effective when they are resumed,&rdquo; said Wi Sung-lac, who met his North Korean counterpart, Ri Yong-ho, last week in Indonesia, referring to previous rounds of negotiations that included the two nations as well as the United States, Japan, Russia and China. &ldquo;The North Korean reaction was not positive.&rdquo;        

The United States pressed the same demands during two days of talks with North Korean officials in New York that ended inconclusively on Friday. The meetings between Stephen W. Bosworth, the special American envoy on North Korean affairs, and Kim Kye-gwan, the first vice foreign minister of North Korea, were the first between the two sides since Mr. Bosworth visited North Korea in December 2009.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton invited Mr. Kim to New York for what officials called &ldquo;exploratory talks&rdquo; to gauge whether North Korea was serious about living up to past commitments to nuclear disarmament agreements. Previous negotiations ended abruptly in 2008, and since then, North Korea has detonated a nuclear device, tested a long-range rocket that may one day be able to carry nuclear warheads and revealed an industrial-scale uranium enrichment plant.        

In a statement on Friday, the State Department called the discussions in New York &ldquo;constructive and businesslike&rdquo; but announced no progress, saying the United States would decide what to do next after consulting with South Korea and others.        

&ldquo;The United States reiterated that the path is open to North Korea towards the resumption of talks, improved relations with the United States, and greater regional stability if North Korea demonstrates through actions that it supports the resumption of the six-party process as a committed and constructive partner,&rdquo; the statement said.        

The Americans and their allies have made it clear that they want North Korea to take what Mr. Wi called &ldquo;presteps&rdquo; as evidence of its sincerity. The stance reflects a deep suspicion that North Korea was seeking talks simply to extract badly needed economic aid and to buy time to build a nuclear arsenal.        

Sin Son-ho, the North Korean representative to the United Nations, said during a United Nations conference on nuclear disarmament that the United States sought &ldquo;absolute nuclear superiority&rdquo; and had no &ldquo;moral justifications&rdquo; to lecture other countries about proliferation, according to North Korea&rsquo;s state media. Mr. Sin said an agreement with the United States formally ending the 1950-53 Korean War could become a &ldquo;first step&rdquo; to peace on the Korean peninsula and denuclearization.        

Mr. Wi said the talks in New York and his meeting with Mr. Ri last week signaled that South Korea and the United States were adding a &ldquo;new path of dialogue&rdquo; to the current focus on sanctions.        
Choe Sang-Hun reported from Seoul, Korea, and Steven Lee Myers from Washington.
