
SANTANDER, Spain &mdash; Prime Minister Jos&eacute; Luis Rodr&iacute;guez Zapatero said Friday that he would call an early general election for Nov. 20, bowing to pressure from opposition politicians and business leaders after the governing Socialist Party suffered severe losses in regional and municipal elections two months ago.        

Mr. Zapatero decided in April that he would not seek a third term. Instead, Alfredo P&eacute;rez Rubalcaba, 60, a Socialist Party veteran who was until recently the interior minister, will be the party&rsquo;s candidate for prime minister.        

Although Spain&rsquo;s next general election was scheduled for March 2012, Mr. Zapatero said he had moved the date &ldquo;to project economic and political certainty.&rdquo;        

The defeat of the Socialists in regional and local elections in May left Spain with a weakened government at a time of renewed concern about the country&rsquo;s public finances. There is also broader uncertainty about the euro and efforts to rescue Greece and other ailing economies among the 17 countries that use the euro.        

Mr. Zapatero&rsquo;s decision was welcomed by Mariano Rajoy, the leader of the Popular Party, the main center-right opposition. Mr. Rajoy said it was &ldquo;what most Spaniards had wanted for a long time.&rdquo;        

Mr. Rajoy, 56, was defeated by Mr. Zapatero in 2004 and 2008. While Mr. Rajoy&rsquo;s own popularity has remained below that of his party, he is still expected to win in November after his party&rsquo;s victories in the May elections. The Popular Party started overtaking the Socialists in opinion polls as Spain&rsquo;s economic problems deepened early last year, after the collapse of its construction sector and amid a surge in the unemployment rate to 21 percent.        

Business leaders also applauded the decision. Francisco Gonz&aacute;lez, chairman of BBVA, one of Spain&rsquo;s two international banks, called the election announcement good news. &ldquo;Spain needs a strong government that takes decisions that place it again at the level of the most important countries in Europe,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Zapatero said at a news conference that &ldquo;the fundamentals have been set for a new period of growth.&rdquo; But he also called for greater fiscal discipline, in particular among regional governments, to cut Spain&rsquo;s budget deficit to 6 percent of gross domestic product this year, from 9.2 percent in 2010.        

Underlining concerns about Spain&rsquo;s economy, the debt rating agency Moody&rsquo;s Investors Service said Friday that it might cut the country&rsquo;s government debt rating because of its high financing costs and risks that European debt holders might have to participate in future bailouts.        

Moody&rsquo;s said that it would consider cutting Spain&rsquo;s long-term rating of Aa2 by one level. The bailout package for Greece could put an additional burden on owners of Spanish debt, Moody&rsquo;s said. Javier D&iacute;az-Gim&eacute;nez, an economics professor at the IESE Business School, warned that, whoever wins in November, the new government would not be able to afford to relax efforts to control public spending. He also said it &ldquo;must implement concrete measures to respond to the slow growth of the economy and the most recent unemployment data.&rdquo;        
Julia Werdigier contributed reporting from London. 
Julia Werdigier contributed reporting from London.
