
ISTANBUL &mdash; Turkey&rsquo;s top military commanders resigned en masse on Friday, a move without precedent in Turkish history that many analysts saw as a failed effort by a beleaguered institution to exert what is left of its dwindling political power.        

In the surprising series of events, Turkey&rsquo;s top commander, Gen. Isik Kosaner, together with the leaders of the navy, army and air force, simultaneously resigned in protest over the sweeping arrests of dozens of generals as suspects in conspiracy investigations that many people in Turkey have come to see as a witch hunt.        

Hours later, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan accepted the resignations and elevated his own choice to become the senior military commander: Gen. Necdet Ozel, who was until Friday the commander of the military police. The decision stamped Mr. Erdogan&rsquo;s civilian authority on the country&rsquo;s military, which has long regarded itself as a protector of Turkey&rsquo;s secular traditions.        

The news stunned Turkey and left many people wondering whether they were witnessing the end of the power the military has long exercised over the nation&rsquo;s political system.        

&ldquo;This is effectively the end of the military&rsquo;s role in Turkish democracy,&rdquo; said Asli Aydintasbas, a columnist for the Turkish daily newspaper Milliyet. &ldquo;This is the symbolic moment where the first Turkish republic ends and the second republic begins.&rdquo;        

Mr. Erdogan has rolled back the military&rsquo;s political power substantially since he took office in 2002, in part through legal reforms that assert civilian control. But the single biggest blow to the military&rsquo;s clout has been a sprawling series of investigations and trials in which a number of senior military commanders, as well as journalists and others, were charged with conspiring to overthrow Mr. Erdogan&rsquo;s government.        

The resignations were the culmination of a year of frustrations, in which more than 40 generals &mdash; approximately a tenth of the senior military command &mdash; were taken into custody, an assault that has infuriated the military but left it essentially helpless to fight back.        

A more immediate spark may have come in the form of new arrest warrants for 22 more people, among them two top generals, which were issued Friday, the semiofficial Anatolian News Agency reported.        

&ldquo;This is the first time in the history of the republic that we are seeing something like this,&rdquo; said Gursel Tekin, vice president of the main opposition political party, who was speaking in the seaside city of Canakkale. &ldquo;Honestly, this situation is not good.&rdquo;        

Historically, the military has wielded immense power in Turkey. The modern nation was founded in 1923 by Gen. Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, and the military remained involved in politics after the country went to a multiparty political system in the 1950s.        

Military leaders have deposed elected governments four times in Turkish history, beginning in 1960, when they went so far as to execute the country&rsquo;s first democratically elected prime minister, Adnan Menderes. But the Turkish political system has gone through profound changes in recent years, and many analysts argued that resigning was the only weapon left in the military&rsquo;s arsenal. Few people interviewed on Friday thought that a coup was likely, both because Turkey&rsquo;s democracy now has deep roots and because the military appeared diminished.        

&ldquo;Besides this one act, the military doesn&rsquo;t really have that much left in the tank,&rdquo; said Steven Cook, an expert at the Council on Foreign Relations in Washington. Mr. Cook argued that the resignations also said a great deal about Turkey as a democracy, because its citizens &mdash; even those who dislike Mr. Erdogan&rsquo;s increasingly powerful Justice and Development Party &mdash; were no longer willing to accept military rule.        

&ldquo;Turkey has grown out of that,&rdquo; he said.        

One of the sticking points between the military and the government has been that the military wants to promote some of the officers who have been languishing as suspects in the conspiracy cases, but cannot because the officers have remained in custody. An important meeting of the military that would determine appointments is scheduled for Monday.        
Gul Tuysuz reported from Istanbul, and Sabrina Tavernise from Washington. J. David Goodman contributed reporting from New York, and Landon Thomas Jr. from Spain.
