
LONDON &mdash; Scotland Yard will expand its investigation of The News of the World and its parent company, police officials said Saturday, adding a new inquiry into possible instances of computer intrusion to the current accusations of phone hacking and payments to police officers.        

The new investigation was opened after an examination of &ldquo;a number of allegations regarding breach of privacy&rdquo; received since the Metropolitan Police, also known as Scotland Yard, reopened inquiries in January into possible crimes by newspaper employees, a statement said.        

A police spokesman declined to answer further questions. But a former British Army intelligence officer, Ian Hurst, said in a statement that he had been contacted by investigators over allegations that he had made &ldquo;in regards to my family&rsquo;s computer being illegally accessed over a sustained period during 2006.&rdquo; Mr. Hurst had worked in Northern Ireland, running undercover operations. The BBC reported this year that his computer had been hacked and sensitive e-mail had been provided to The News of the World. A spokeswoman for News International refused to comment on the new inquiry.        

The investigation opens a new front for News International, the British arm of Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s media empire, already shaken by a scandal that has seen the 168-year-old News of the World shuttered on a few days&rsquo; notice and the resignations of two of Britain&rsquo;s top police officers.        

Dozens of civil lawsuits have been filed over allegations of phone hacking. And 10 former News of the World employees, including the newspaper&rsquo;s former editor, Andy Coulson, and the former News International chief executive, Rebekah Brooks, have been arrested in relation to two criminal investigations into the hacking and payments to police officers for information. The United States Department of Justice and the F.B.I. have also announced preliminary investigations into whether the wrongdoing had tainted Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s American interests.        

On Friday, John Whittingdale, chairman of a parliamentary investigative panel, said it was likely that James Murdoch, the heir-apparent to his father&rsquo;s businesses, would be recalled to testify because of allegations that he had previously misled Parliament. Mr. Murdoch told the committee this month that he had no knowledge of more widespread wrongdoing at The News of the World when he approved a $1.1 million legal settlement, with a confidentiality agreement, in the first lawsuit brought over phone hacking in 2007. Senior colleagues have since disputed that account.        
