
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; NATO said Saturday that it had disabled three Libyan state television transmission dishes in Tripoli with airstrikes overnight, as the alliance took steps to remove the main instrument of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s propaganda from the airwaves.        

Although the broadcasts continued on Saturday, silencing state television would be a psychological blow to Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces as well as a boon to his opponents. The rebels challenging his rule have urged NATO for months to take out the channel, and both NATO and the rebels now face a deadline in September, when a NATO resolution authorizing the airstrikes expires.        

The strikes are also the latest reminder of how far NATO has stretched its United Nations mandate to protect civilians, removing a purely political tool that only directly threatened civilians perhaps by boring them. A campaign initially billed as the imposition of a no-fly zone now consists mainly of providing air support for the rebels, who with NATO&rsquo;s help have expanded from their base in the east to control the coastal city of Misurata and the western mountains while operating an underground resistance within Tripoli, the capital.        

In a statement justifying the strikes, NATO said: &ldquo;Our intervention was necessary as TV was being used as an integral component of the regime apparatus designed to systematically oppress and threaten civilians and to incite attacks against them. Qaddafi&rsquo;s increasing practice of inflammatory broadcasts illustrates his regime&rsquo;s policy to instill hatred amongst Libyans, to mobilize its supporters against civilians and to trigger bloodshed.&rdquo;        

In recent weeks, recorded addresses by Colonel Qaddafi on state television and radio have urged Libyans to resist NATO and march against the rebels. Colonel Qaddafi himself has gone underground, speaking from undisclosed locations as he moves from place to place in an effort to dodge potential airstrikes. The addresses remind Libyans that he is alive and in charge.        
