
PARIS &mdash; Dr. David Servan-Schreiber, a psychiatrist and best-selling author whose cancer diagnosis at the age of 31 compelled him to explore and then popularize the use of natural and holistic methods in dealing with cancer and depression, died on July 24 in a hospital near F&eacute;camp, France. He was 50.        

The cause was brain cancer, which had recurred last year, his brother Franklin said.        

Trained as a neuroscientist, Dr. Servan-Schreiber imbued his books with his story of surviving cancer for almost 19 years, through diagnosis, surgery, remission, relapse and redemption.        

At age 31, he was enjoying a successful research career in psychiatry and neuroscience at the University of Pittsburgh, spinning around the city on his motorcycle, when, by happenstance, he underwent an M.R.I. brain scan for a research project after the intended subject failed to show up. The results showed a tumor the size of a walnut.        

He underwent surgery, but the tumor recurred five years later. He went through a second operation as well as chemotherapy and radiotherapy. In the course of that treatment he became a convert to natural remedies.        

The experience formed the background to his book &ldquo;Anticancer: A New Way of Life&rdquo; (2007), in which he examined the benefits of a healthy diet and a balanced lifestyle &mdash; nutrition, exercise, emotional well-being and environmental awareness &mdash; in preventing and combating cancer. Eating &ldquo;anticancer products&rdquo; like vegetables, olive oil, garlic and green tea was crucial, he maintained.        

&ldquo;If we all have a potential cancer lying dormant in us,&rdquo; he wrote in &ldquo;Anticancer,&rdquo; &ldquo;each of us also has a body designed to fight the process of tumor development.&rdquo;        

Some doctors and cancer experts said Dr. Servan-Schreiber&rsquo;s methods were simplistic and not supported by scientific evidence.        

&ldquo;Extracts of garlic, onions and leeks, for instance, will demolish all kinds of cancer cells in a culture,&rdquo; the journalist and physician Dr. Abigail Zuger wrote in The New York Times in 2008 in a review of the book. &ldquo;Whether these vegetables are still active in the busy metropolis of the body, with thousands of cellular processes going on at once, is another question: once the leek is chewed, swallowed, demolished by intestinal enzymes and absorbed into the blood, how likely are its molecules to brush up against a cancer cell, let alone engage it in armed combat? No one knows.&rdquo;        

Dr. Servan-Schreiber&rsquo;s book was translated into 36 languages and was on The Times&rsquo;s best-seller list for several weeks in 2010.        

He promoted his ideas on Web sites, in blogs, in speaking engagements, in a column in Ode magazine (which calls itself a journal of optimism and positive news) and in television interviews. He said his approach was not intended to replace traditional methods like chemotherapy and radiotherapy, which he believed were the most important weapons against cancer, but to supplement them.        

An earlier book, &ldquo;Healing Without Freud or Prozac: Natural Approaches to Curing Stress, Anxiety and Depression&rdquo; (2003), also sold well internationally in many translations. The book focuses on what Dr. Servan-Schreiber called the &ldquo;emotional brain,&rdquo; as distinct from the &ldquo;cognitive brain&rdquo; of rational thought.        

&ldquo;The emotional brain controls the physiology of the body: heart rate, blood pressure, appetite, sleep, sexual drive, and even the immune system,&rdquo; he wrote.        

In detailing his &ldquo;natural approaches&rdquo; to addressing anxiety and depression without drugs or psychoanalysis, he discussed heart rhythm, exposure to light, acupuncture, visualization, meditation, yoga, nutrition (including an emphasis on omega-3 fatty acids, found in fish and some vegetables), exercise and &ldquo;emotional communication&rdquo; with people and pets.        

Born in the wealthy Paris suburb of Neuilly-sur-Seine on April 21, 1961, David Servan-Schreiber came from a well-known family of entrepreneurs with Prussian-Jewish roots. His father, Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber, was a prominent politician and journalist and the co-founder, with the feminist writer Fran&ccedil;oise Giroud, of the magazine L&rsquo;Express.        

Dr. Servan-Schreiber earned a bachelor&rsquo;s degree in mathematics and physics at the Acad&eacute;mie de Paris and studied medicine at a children&rsquo;s hospital in Paris before finishing his medical education at Laval University in Quebec in 1984.        

He spent much of his professional life in the United States, working as a clinical professor of psychiatry at the University of Pittsburgh, where he co-founded the Center for Complementary Medicine.        

In 1991, he began working with the French branch of Doctors Without Borders, providing medical and psychiatric support in Iraqi Kurdistan after the first Persian Gulf war, as well as in Tajikistan, India and Kosovo.        

It was on a mission for the group in Tibet, he wrote, that he became interested in healing practices involving meditation, acupuncture and nutrition.        

He was also a founding board member of the United States branch of Doctors Without Borders. The international group was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1999.        

In addition to his brother, his survivors include his wife, Gwena&euml;lle; two other brothers, Emile and Edouard; his mother, the former Sabine Becq de Fouqui&egrave;res; and three children.        

After he was told in 2010 that another brain tumor had been found &mdash; he called it &ldquo;the Big One&rdquo; &mdash; Dr. Servan-Schreiber wrote a third book, &ldquo;We Can Tell Each Other Goodbye Several Times,&rdquo; with Ursula Gauthier, a journalist. Many viewed it as a final testament.        

&ldquo;Death is part of the life process; everyone goes through it,&rdquo; he said in one of his last interviews. &ldquo;It is very reassuring in itself.&rdquo;        
