
BEIJING &mdash; A weekend of violence in China&rsquo;s far western Xinjiang region has left at least 18 people dead in the ancient city of Kashgar, state-controlled media reported Sunday. It was the second major episode of violence in the last several weeks in an area racked by ethnic tensions.        

The police in Kashgar killed five suspects Sunday after &ldquo;a group of armed terrorists&rdquo; stormed into a restaurant in the city center, killing the owner and a waiter and then setting the restaurant on fire, the Kashgar city government said in two statements on its Web site, according to The Associated Press. They then ran out of the restaurant and stabbed civilians indiscriminately, leaving another four people dead and 12 injured, it said.        

Earlier, Xinhua quoted local sources as saying that two civilians and one police officer had died, either from a bomb explosion or from an attack by &ldquo;rioters.&rdquo;        

Those deaths followed a Saturday night attack, which was reported as being carried out by knife-wielding assailants, in which seven people died.        

Two Kashgar residents contacted by telephone late Sunday said that the city appeared calm and that traffic was flowing normally.        

The government media offered no explanation for any of the killings. But there have been repeated outbreaks of violence in Xinjiang in recent years, often the result of tensions between ethnic Uighurs and the country&rsquo;s majority ethnic group, the Han, who have steadily moved into the area, dominated its economic activity and placed curbs on the Uighurs&rsquo; Islamic practices.        

Chinese authorities blamed Uighur separatists for an attack in Kashgar three years ago that killed 16 people. Less than a year later, ethnic rioting erupted in Xinjiang&rsquo;s capital, Urumqi, leaving almost 200 people dead. Two weeks ago, 18 people died after rioters in a predominantly Uighur district of Hotan, a Xinjiang desert city, stormed a police station.        

Details of the latest bloodshed, limited to conflicting reports from the state media, were sketchy and could not be independently confirmed. Xinhua said that the violence in Kashgar broke out shortly before midnight on Saturday, about an hour after residents heard two explosions, one inside a minivan and the other along a popular street lined with food stalls. The reports quoted police officials as saying that two men later hijacked a truck, stabbed its driver to death and drove the vehicle to the street of food stalls, where they attacked people with knives.        

Seven were said to have died and another 22 were reported injured. The officials were quoted as saying that one of the attackers was killed and the second apprehended.        

The second spate of violence occurred about 4:30 p.m. after rioting broke out in an unidentified location in the city.        
Mia Li contributed research.
