
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; American and allied forces in Afghanistan are strengthening a layered defense along the border with Pakistan to seize Haqqani network militants as they try to make their way to Kabul to carry out spectacular attacks, according to senior military officers.        

Commanders continue to debate whether Pakistan is unable &mdash; or unwilling &mdash; to eliminate the safe haven within its borders used by the Haqqani network, a powerful insurgent group that American officials say is nurtured by Pakistani security and intelligence officers to maintain influence in Afghanistan.        

After Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, visited the Afghanistan-Pakistan border area Sunday, he flew back to Kabul where he praised an evolving strategy to thicken defenses from the border toward Kabul to make it more difficult for Haqqani operatives to use rugged mountain passes as a &ldquo;jet stream&rdquo; to feed in militants for attacks.        

&ldquo;And it is more difficult,&rdquo; Admiral Mullen said.        

Admiral Mullen, who has sought to restore relations with Pakistan damaged by the unilateral American raid that killed Osama bin Laden, acknowledged American frustrations with the pace that Pakistani security forces have moved to cleanse their border regions of militants.        

&ldquo;It has to be addressed,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The leadership in Pakistan understands that.&rdquo;        

During a three-day visit to Afghanistan, Admiral Mullen also met with commanders and troops across the south and southwest, a focus of the troop &ldquo;surge&rdquo; ordered by President Obama. Despite a wave of spectacular suicide attacks there, he offered assurances that allied and local security forces would continue to push insurgents into retreat.        

Admiral Mullen made the case that the Taliban had suffered such losses over recent months that it could not mount significant military offensives to retake safe havens or expand political control, and in desperation had resorted instead to individual, terrorist-style attacks.        

Even so, the murders of two key local leaders with national profiles &mdash; one, the half-brother of President Hamid Karzai, and the other the mayor of Kandahar &mdash; have unsettled the region that once served as the Taliban capital just as the military begins the withdrawal of American forces as ordered by President Obama.        

The most notorious killings &mdash; the case of Ahmed Wali Karzai, the president&rsquo;s half-brother &mdash; now appears most likely to have been a murder by an associate over a personal issue rather than a Taliban assassination, according to a Western official.        

But the Taliban are continuing to carry out a relentless string of attacks against NATO and Afghan security forces and civilians &mdash; a fact highlighted on Sunday morning by the explosion of a suicide car bomb outside a police training center in the capital of Helmand Province. Afghan authorities said the bomber rammed into an Afghan police convoy as it rolled out the gates of the center and into the streets of Lashkar Gah, a southern city where Afghans took control of security on July 20.        

Twelve police officers and one boy were killed, and 12 others &mdash; mostly officers &mdash; were wounded, according to the Interior Ministry, which condemned the attacks. Lashkar Gah was one of seven cities and provinces handpicked by the Afghan government to make a transition to Afghan-led security this summer. The first set of largely symbolic handovers is an early step in withdrawal plans that calls for NATO-led troops to leave by the end of 2014.        

The Taliban, which claimed responsibility for Sunday&rsquo;s attack, have made targets of Lashkar Gah and other areas making the early security transition.        

Assessing the overall mission, Admiral Mullen said the president&rsquo;s order to begin withdrawing the 33,000 additional American &ldquo;surge&rdquo; troops could be carried out without putting the mission at risk. Under the president&rsquo;s order, all 33,000 &ldquo;surge&rdquo; troops are to leave Afghanistan by the end of September 2012, leaving an American deployment of about 68,000.        

&ldquo;I am very confident that we can meet both the needs on the ground as well as the deadlines and the goals that have been laid out by the president,&rdquo; he said.        

Details of the withdrawal have not been completed, but it is certain that some entire units returning home will not be replaced; two Army National Guard battalions in Kabul and a Marine battalion now in Helmand Province are expected to leave without other units sent in to cover their territory. Those three units alone total 4,000 troops out of the initial flow of 10,000 troops that President Obama ordered home by December.        

Officers said the reductions ordered by the president will be met also by identifying tasks currently performed by military personnel within Afghanistan that could be done from a headquarters outside the war zone. Some responsibilities, like training Afghan security forces, could also be turned over to contractors.        

Admiral Mullen disclosed that top commanders in Afghanistan were likely to submit their specific proposals for a withdrawal timeline in October.        

During his visit, he used some of his harshest language to date to express American concerns that corruption continues to put security successes at risk.        

He specifically criticized what he described as &ldquo;criminal patronage networks that are here, and how they are woven into the fabric of how things get governed, the loyalties between people, how decisions get made and how that gets in the way of support for the normal Afghan citizen who is worried about their government not delivering good services.&rdquo;        

After three days of consultations with commanders across southern and eastern Afghanistan, Admiral Mullen said that &ldquo;all the leaders are reasonably confident on the security side and probably very concerned on the governance side.&rdquo;        
Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar, Afghanistan.
