
CAIRO &mdash; The trial of former President Hosni Mubarak will be held in a large hall that can accommodate 600 spectators, and will be broadcast on Egyptian state television, the judge who will preside over the trial said Sunday.        

The judge, Ahmed Refaat, said the arrangements stemmed from the court&rsquo;s &ldquo;belief in the right of the people to be at ease.&rdquo; Judge Refaat promised that the proceedings would be speedy, with &ldquo;consecutive sessions&rdquo; held to try the former president, his two sons, his former interior minister and other officials on charges including corruption and murder.        

The announcement by Judge Refaat, made at a news conference where he took no questions, seemed intended to placate protesters who have complained about the slow pace of prosecution of former government officials and police officers accused of killing demonstrators during Egypt&rsquo;s 18-day uprising, and the lack of public access to trials.        

It was not clear whether the judge&rsquo;s assurances would satisfy critics, and the judge did not answer one of the main questions about the trial: whether Mr. Mubarak will actually be present. The former president, a cancer survivor, has been held in custody in a hospital in Sharm el Sheik since he suffered chest pains during his first interrogation; he has also repeatedly complained of other maladies. Last week he refused solid food, according to the doctors treating him, who said he was weak and losing weight.        

Officials said his weak condition is why Mr. Mubarak has not been jailed so far, though many Egyptians see his illnesses as ploys to avoid prosecution. On Sunday, state radio, quoting hospital officials, said Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s health was &ldquo;satisfactory,&rdquo; though his psychological state was deteriorating. A cabinet spokesman said the general prosecutor issued an order on Sunday to transfer Mr. Mubarak to Cairo to appear at Wednesday&rsquo;s trial. In recent days, officials have said that Mr. Mubarak, his sons and the other defendants would be seated in the courtroom in the same place as other suspects in Egyptian courts: inside a metal cage.        

The charges against Mr. Mubarak include corruption and ordering the killing of protesters. His sons, Alaa and Gamal, face corruption counts. The former interior minister, Habib al-Adly, along with six of his aides, will be tried for killing and injuring protesters.        
Heba Afify reported from Cairo, and Kareem Fahim from Tunis.
