
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The Afghan attorney general has sent the names of several people accused in the scheme to defraud Kabul Bank of hundreds of millions of dollars to the Afghan courts for trial, including the bank&rsquo;s former executive director and its board chairman.        

In doing so, the Afghan government is taking a step toward bringing to justice some of those accused of bilking Kabul Bank of some $900 million. A major complaint of international financial institutions like the International Monetary Fund, which has refused to renew its program with Afghanistan, is that the Afghan government failed to hold accountable those who had borrowed money and to secure enforceable agreements to get the money paid back.        

It is not clear that the court case will constitute sufficient evidence of an effort to get the money back to satisfy the I.M.F., but along with other steps, like a forensic audit of the bank that is under way, it is likely to help get the country&rsquo;s program restarted.        

The bank&rsquo;s former chairman, Sherkhan Farnood, and its former chief executive officer, Khalil Frozi, are thought to have masterminded the scheme, although many people were involved in carrying it out. Mr. Farnood and Mr. Frozi are among approximately 15 defendants who will be tried in the first case, Deputy Attorney General Rahmatullah Nazari said in a recent interview on Afghan television.        

Kabul Bank was the nation&rsquo;s largest private bank and its foundering, which began last year after articles about its bad loans started to surface, shook confidence in the country&rsquo;s nascent banking system and raised questions about the extent to which favored treatment for relatives and friends of powerful politicians had contributed to the collapse. These included President Hamid Karzai and First Vice President Marshal Fahim.        

Both President Karzai&rsquo;s brother Mahmood Karzai, and Hassan Fahim, the brother of the first vice president, had shares in the bank and received millions of dollars in loans &mdash; interest free. Both men have agreed to pay back most of the money and there is no indication that they are among those named in the court case. Several other beneficiaries of the bank&rsquo;s largesse also had political connections.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a very big case and not a simple case,&rdquo; Mr. Nazari said in a separate interview with The Associated Press, adding that the allegations include corruption, abuse of authority, preparing fake loan documents or receiving illegal loans. He said from 30 to 40 people were involved in the scams.        

Some of the $900 million went for loans to bank customers to buy real estate in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, including purchases when real estate prices were at their peak. When the global real estate recession hit, the borrowers were left with property that was worth substantially less than they paid for it. Some of the money was given away as gifts, and from $300 million to $350 million is untraceable either because no loan records were kept or the names of the borrowers were fictitious, officials have said.        
Abdul Waheed Wafa contributed reporting.
