
HAMAR, Norway &mdash; Like veteran soldiers of an operation gone wrong, about a dozen sleep-deprived young people gathered on a beach of this small lakeside town to reminisce about the comrade they left behind.        

They were survivors of the July 22 massacre on the island of Utoya, and each had a story &mdash; of hiding in toilets, jumping out windows or playing dead in order to survive. But all made it back here to their serene hometown; all, that is, except for Ismail Haji Ahmed, better known here as the dancer Isma Brown.        

He was one of at least 69 mostly young people killed on Utoya. Police have identified all of the victims and have begun returning them to their hometowns for burial. And for many survivors, the full weight of the tragedy has hit home only when they see the bodies of their friends come back in coffins.        

&ldquo;When I saw Ismail&rsquo;s body at the hospital it became real,&rdquo; said Semir Vranesi, 17, a friend of his who survived on Utoya by hiding behind a large rock for an hour and a half until help arrived. &ldquo;I saw Ismail dead, and it was true. I was thinking that it could have been me, and my family standing around. It was like being stabbed in the heart.&rdquo;        

A tall, spidery 19-year-old, with almond-brown skin and an ever-changing hairdo, Mr. Ahmed injected a flamboyance into this staid Nordic city that was clearly missing on a recent visit.        

In a city where ethnic Norwegians and immigrants have only started to become cohesive, Mr. Ahmed, a native of Somalia, would stroll down the streets in Lady Gaga-inspired outfits of his own making, holding impromptu public dance parties with his friends from Norway, Somalia, Bosnia and elsewhere.        

&ldquo;He never touched alcohol, never girls &mdash; he just danced,&rdquo; said Woria Ali Ahmad, another friend. &ldquo;There is no way to start to describe him. He is too special.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ahmad, 21, was with his friend to the last, he said. Both ran to the water when the shooting started, but the gunman, identified by the police as Anders Behring Breivik, tracked them down. Standing on the bank above them, he sprayed bullets in their direction, killing several girls trying to hide nearby. Both men played dead on the rocky shore, but in Mr. Ahmed&rsquo;s case the killer did not believe the ruse.        

&ldquo;He aimed and shot him in the head,&rdquo; said Mr. Ahmad, who went unnoticed behind some rocks. &ldquo;He died, and I didn&rsquo;t do anything. I feel guilty.&rdquo;        

Smoking a water pipe and eating potato chips and McDonald&rsquo;s hamburgers on a grassy patch overlooking Lake Mjosa, Mr. Ahmad, an ethnic Kurd born in Iraq, joined several other survivors in an effort to ease some of the strains that most said are unbearable when they are alone.        

Many in Mr. Ahmed&rsquo;s circle were immigrants or the children of immigrants for whom his death was especially wrenching. With their families, they had fled war-torn corners of the world in search of a peaceful life. Their homelands made a virtual catalog of the world&rsquo;s conflicts over the last two decades: Afghanistan, Bosnia, Chechnya, Iraq, Kosovo and the Palestinian territories.        

Mr. Ahmed was like them to a point. He came to Norway with his family in 2002 at age 10. Though originally from Somalia, his family had fled the violence there in the early 1990s, settling for about a decade in Yemen before moving as asylum seekers to Hamar, a town of about 28,000 that is 80 miles north of Oslo.        

In those days, with the town only starting to see an influx of immigrants from Africa, Eastern Europe and the Middle East, the welcome was not as warm as they might have hoped.        

Despite Norway&rsquo;s emphasis on egalitarianism and tolerance, Mr. Ahmed&rsquo;s brother, Khalid, said the family met with what he described as &ldquo;indirect racism.&rdquo; It was noticeable, he said, in the suspicious looks of store clerks and elderly women at the bus stop, who clutched their bags more tightly when a dark-skinned immigrant walked by.        

Khalid Haji Ahmed, 32, decided to confront such attitudes through politics, joining the local branch of the liberal Labor Party&rsquo;s youth wing. His brother also joined, but found he could best shape attitudes through dance.        

&ldquo;My brother was always inspired by dance,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;He lived inside the music, and the music comes inside him.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ahmed arranged charity concerts for people in need, the latest to raise money for cancer research. What little money he had, he either spent on his wildly extravagant clothes or gave to the poor, friends said. Poor people in the town, who patronized his charity, used to call him &ldquo;the Boss,&rdquo; friends said.        

Before long he was a local celebrity. He had recently staged a production of the musical &ldquo;Hair,&rdquo; and in a tribute to Lady Gaga choreographed a theatrical version of her single &ldquo;Judas,&rdquo; casting himself as Jesus. This year, he took part in a televised talent competition similar to &ldquo;American Idol,&rdquo; dancing with a Norwegian girl who had converted to Islam.        

His parents tolerated his somewhat unorthodox lifestyle to a point, his brother said, and he accommodated their wishes when possible. He agreed, for instance, to his mother&rsquo;s request to dye his bleach-blond mohawk dark for Ramadan.        

His celebrity extended to the summer camp on Utoya, an annual affair organized by the ruling Labor Party, where Mr. Ahmed&rsquo;s dance shows became legendary. For decades the camp, which is run by the youth wing of the Labor Party, has provided a platform for young people to come together and effect change.        

For Mr. Ahmed, it also provided a stage.        

His last show was an impromptu event on the campgrounds. There was no music, only Mr. Ahmed, banging sticks together for an improvised beat. A crowd formed immediately and began dancing along with his wild gyrations, friends said.        

&ldquo;That&rsquo;s my last memory of him,&rdquo; said Mr. Vranesi, his friend. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a very good memory.&rdquo;        

It was a week before the police released Mr. Ahmed&rsquo;s body to his family. As a final service to him, a day before his funeral on Friday, several of his friends decided to wash his body in accordance with Islamic custom.        

&ldquo;It felt right. He was our friend,&rdquo; said Mr. Ahmad, his friend from Iraq. &ldquo;And I felt stronger when I did it.&rdquo;        
