
BEIJING &mdash; The authorities in China&rsquo;s troubled Xinjiang region charged Monday that the leader of the first of two lethal assaults over the weekend had trained in Pakistan, an unusually specific accusation that could hint at growing Chinese impatience with Pakistan&rsquo;s inability to control radical groups operating within its borders.        

The accusation, made by local authorities in the historic city of Kashgar, came as the head of Pakistan&rsquo;s spy agency, the Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence, was completing a visit to Beijing at which rising violence by predominantly Muslim, ethnic Uighur separatists in Xinjiang was almost certain to have been discussed. Some Pakistani news reports placed the agency&rsquo;s director, Lt. Gen. Ahmed Shuja Pasha, in Xinjiang as the second spate of violence in Kashgar flared on Sunday.        

Kashgar officials said Monday that the death toll in attacks on Saturday and Sunday had risen to 18, including 12 civilians and 6 attackers. The state-run Xinhua news service reported that 14 civilians had died. Two suspected attackers, both ethnic Uighurs, were shot and killed by the police on Monday, according to an Associated Press report citing a local government Web site. In a statement, the officials said that the attacker who was captured had confessed that the group&rsquo;s ringleader had gone to Pakistan for training in bomb- and gun-making by the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, a small Uighur group that advocates independence for Xinjiang.        

The statement said the attacks were not isolated, but represented &ldquo;another terrorist act, plotted and planned by a small number of adamants in the current special circumstance.&rdquo;        

Pakistan&rsquo;s government issued a statement pledging full cooperation with China against the East Turkestan group and expressing confidence that China would &ldquo;succeed in frustrating evil designs of the terrorists, extremists and separatists.&rdquo;        

While the United States and other powers have openly criticized Pakistan&rsquo;s failure to rein in insurgents operating from its own wild tribal regions, China has largely confined its public statements to support for Islamabad&rsquo;s security policies.        

But the Chinese, who view Uighur separatist sentiment as a dire threat, have become increasingly concerned about Pakistan as a haven for radicals. A Pakistani terrorism expert, Muhammad Amir Rana, said last month that Pakistani intelligence officials had traveled to Beijing in early June to reassure the Chinese of their commitment to weed out Uighur separatists from their territory.        

Whether Kashgar officials cleared their statement with the central government in Beijing is not known. Local and regional governments frequently act without central government approval on issues both large and small. The attacks came less than two weeks after Uighur assailants invaded a police station in Hotan, a Xinjiang desert town, killing four civilians and reportedly displaying separatist banners before being gunned down. Xinjiang&rsquo;s capital, Urumqi, was the scene of Uighur rioting in July 2009 that killed nearly 200 people, many of them members of China&rsquo;s majority ethnic group, the Han, a focus of Uighur resentment.        

Chinese officials frequently attribute ethnic strife in Xinjiang to foreign militants rather than to domestic discontent. But some experts said say the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, which trained some members in Afghanistan in the 1990s, is no longer an effective organization. Others say foreign involvement appeared unlikely in this case. Both attacks were carried out with just knives.        

&ldquo;This is a recurring allegation by a Chinese government that is reluctant to admit that there could be any sort of homegrown groups, Uighur organizations, that are opposed to the Chinese state, because the government says all ethnic groups are a happy family,&rdquo; said Nicholas Bequelin, a Xinjiang expert and researcher for Human Rights Watch in Hong Kong. &ldquo;The causes of the violence are domestic, and not to be found in some kind of terrorist organization that wants to destabilize China.&rdquo;        

But Michael Kugelman of the Woodrow Wilson International Center, based in Washington, said in an e-mail that considerable evidence suggests that Pakistan-based militants have had a role in some Xinjiang violence. He said he believed it was unlikely that local officials would have made the accusation about Pakistan without approval.        

Although reports of the violence remain sketchy, two small explosions apparently preceded the Saturday attack, in which the authorities said two men hijacked a truck, killed its driver and drove to a street of food stalls, where they attacked people with knives. A third blast struck Sunday at a restaurant that, according to official accounts, was stormed by assailants who killed the owner and a waiter and burned the place.        

In an interview, a Kashgar spokeswoman who identified herself as Ms. Chen declined to specify where the attacks took place. But news reports placed one on a thoroughfare with many Han businesses.        

The city was reported to be calm on Monday.        

One visitor to Kashgar over the weekend described a scene of &ldquo;palpable tension&rdquo; in an interview Monday, with all Han-operated shops closed and most Uighur stores shut down for Ramadan. That observer, who asked not to be identified for fear of retribution by Chinese authorities, said Han residents began to carry sticks and pipes after the second attack on Sunday.        

Posts on China&rsquo;s Twitter-like microblogs largely appeared to support a harsh government response to the attacks, but censors later banned messages using the word &ldquo;Kashgar,&rdquo; effectively closing off debate.        
Li Bibo contributed research from Beijing, and Salman Masood from Islamabad, Pakistan.
