
CAIRO &mdash; Central Tahrir Square was forcibly cleared Monday of the remnants of a three-week-old sit-in protesting the slow pace of change since the revolution that toppled Hosni Mubarak, with hundreds of Egyptian troops and security police officers shredding tents, arresting dozens of protesters, thwacking some with truncheons and sending about 200 others fleeing into nearby streets as the holy month of Ramadan began.        

The army deployed at least a dozen tanks in the square and prevented protesters from reconstituting their sit-in, but by nightfall hundreds of Egyptians had come to the square perimeter, chanting &ldquo;Down with military rule!&rdquo; as military police officers watched.        

In another area, protesters began a rock-and-bottle-throwing melee after soldiers and police officers stormed into the Omar Makram Mosque, a sanctuary for the protesters, where at least 500 people had been praying. Witnesses said the officers beat many of the people inside.        

The intensity of the Cairo clashes was some of the worst since the revolution that felled Mr. Mubarak nearly six months ago, and came at the start of monthly Muslim observance more associated with forgiveness and compassion than mayhem and retribution.        

The clashes also came two days before Mr. Mubarak, a former military officer, is scheduled to go on trial in what is seen by many Egyptians as a test of the military government&rsquo;s sincerity in prosecuting him and his colleagues for crimes committed during his three decades of autocratic rule.        

State radio said at least 270 people were arrested during the day in Cairo.        

The violence began as squads of troops and police officers, including many in plain clothes, used sticks to shred the tents in the square, ripping the cloth fabric so the tents could not be rebuilt. Dozens of garbage workers then moved in to clear the wreckage and load it into trucks.        

Some military officers also stopped people holding cameras from photographing the eviction, and destroyed a few cameras and cellphones of others who had taken pictures. A few officers were seen violently removing two young men from the square and herding them into a back alley. &ldquo;Come on, walk!&rdquo; one officer could be heard saying as he punched one youth in the back of his head.        

The protesters, including women and children, had been camped out in the square since July 8 to demand more political openness and faster justice for crimes committed during Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s rule. They accused the interim military government of protecting Mr. Mubarak, who was toppled in a revolution in February, and his cronies.        

The sit-in had dwindled with the approach of Ramadan, one of Islam&rsquo;s most important holidays, when people fast and pray during the day, and feast at night. Those protesters who remained were viewed by local merchants and others living and working near the square as an increasing annoyance, blocking the square and disrupting traffic. Many bystanders cheered when the army and security police moved in.        

&ldquo;Finally!&rdquo; said Ramzy Youssef, 38, watching workers toss debris from the sit-in into garbage trucks. &ldquo;The protest was fine, but we also want space to breathe, we want to see the traffic flow.&rdquo; Another bystander, Mohamed Magdy, said that with many of the protesters having left the square by Sunday, &ldquo;only thugs were remaining.&rdquo;        

Other bystanders were angry over the forced eviction.        

&ldquo;You can&rsquo;t remove them like this, like animals,&rdquo; said Ahmed Adib, 26, arguing with a group who said they supported the move. Mr. Adib said he had participated in the sit-in himself but, like many of the protest leaders, he had favored ending it a few days earlier before the advent of Ramadan, which lasts until the end of the month.        

&ldquo;This was expected but not acceptable,&rdquo; said Ahmed Abd Rabbo, a spokesman for the Democratic Front, a party that includes activists from the anti-Mubarak revolution. &ldquo;I was hoping we would disperse the sit-in willingly, but we failed.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mubarak, 83, is scheduled to go on trial on Wednesday, accused of corruption and ordering the killing of protesters before he was ousted. More than 800 people were killed in the 18-day uprising that transfixed the Arab world and forced Mr. Mubarak to step down.        

The judge who will oversee the trial said Sunday that the proceeding would be held in a large Cairo hall and broadcast on Egyptian television. However, it remained unclear whether Mr. Mubarak would be present.        

The former president, a cancer survivor, has been held in custody in a hospital in Sharm el Sheik, the Sinai resort where he has a summer home. He has complained of numerous maladies, and doctors reported last week that he had refused solid food.        

Officials have said he was too weak to be jailed, but many Egyptians see his illnesses as ploys to avoid prosecution. On Sunday, state radio, quoting hospital officials, said Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s health was &ldquo;satisfactory.&rdquo;        
Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York.
