
AL RUFAIT, Iraq &mdash; The American and Iraqi soldiers came to this village of grape farmers and tribal traditions in the dark in search of a suspected insurgent, and left in the morning sunlight.        

In the hours between, however, the operation went horribly wrong: the suspect eluded capture, but three men, including a tribal elder, were killed and five people were wounded, among them two young girls.        

The next day, on Sunday morning, the villagers submitted to the grief rituals familiar to Iraqi life. Young men were erecting a tent for the three-day funeral that would begin later in the day. A mother displayed the bloodied garment her son, a local teacher, had been wearing when he was shot dead. Inside, a woman cried and wailed about her dead brother: &ldquo;Why did you leave me?&rdquo;        

The men mostly wanted to get answers and to vent their anger against the Americans, even though the operation had been led by Iraqi security forces.        

The raid and the deaths prompted outrage on Monday in Parliament and in the local press, and coincide with a continuing debate about the future role of the United States military here. They are likely to provide another rallying point for those opposed to an American troop presence beyond the end of the year, when the military is required, under current agreements, to withdraw completely.        

But they also underscore how nearly a year after President Obama declared the official end of the combat mission, American soldiers are still deeply engaged in the fighting on two fronts: against Sunni insurgents in the Sunni-dominated areas north of Baghdad like Salahuddin Province, where this village is located, and against Shiite militias in the south, which are responsible for a sharp increase in combat-related deaths of American soldiers.        

It is a war fought largely beyond public scrutiny, and is visited upon small villages and urban neighborhoods almost nightly, when Iraqi and American Special Forces teams descend on homes in search of weapons and insurgents. Shots are rarely fired, yet sometimes, as happened early Saturday in this Sunni village just south of Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s hometown of Tikrit, there are lethal consequences.        

&ldquo;The war is not over,&rdquo; said Sheik Youseff Ahmad, a leader of the tribe Al Rufait, which he said has farmed the land here for hundreds of years.        

The leading crops are grapes, wheat and oranges, but mostly grapes, and in a successful year a farmer can earn more than $42,000. On this day, the men brandished evidence of the nocturnal raid. One held up a shell casing. Another, the pin from a grenade. Tangled in the brush was a piece of a black plastic handcuff, made in New Hampshire.        

Sheik Ahmad and his tribesmen condemned the operation, which the American military said was aimed at a suspected member of an insurgent group, Al Qaeda in Iraq, and carried out with an Iraqi judicial warrant.        

Predictably, in the fog-of-war aftermath of the raid, competing stories emerged. Sheik Ahmad had first said that some villagers opened fire when the raid began, thinking they were under attack by insurgents. The American military verified this, yet the next day residents said they had never fired weapons.        

In an e-mail statement, a military spokesman in Baghdad wrote, &ldquo;As the team of Iraqi forces with U.S. advisers came near the house, they received fire and fired back in self-defense.&rdquo; The spokesman said there had been &ldquo;an unknown number of casualties and the incident is under investigation by the Iraqi government.&rdquo;        

When the raid began shortly after 1 a.m., villagers said 16 people, including many children, were sleeping on the roof &mdash; a common practice in Iraq to escape the heat and shortages of electricity to power air-conditioners &mdash; of the first house the American and Iraqi soldiers went to. The soldiers apparently took fire from the roof, and responded by tossing a grenade. &ldquo;Immediately thereafter, the lethal fires ceased,&rdquo; wrote the American military spokesman.        

The next day the roof was pockmarked from the impact of the grenade, and footprints in blood smeared the floor. Two young girls had been wounded by shrapnel, villagers said.        
An Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Salahuddin Province.
