
KALANDIA, West Bank &mdash; Israeli forces killed two Palestinians in a refugee camp here early Monday after raiding several houses and being set upon by stone-throwing Palestinians.        

Witnesses and family members said the two were Ali Hassan Khalifeh, 26, a member of the Palestinian military intelligence force, and Moatassem Issa Adwan, 22, a student. Both were said to have been bystanders in the fighting, which occurred around 3 a.m. as residents were preparing to eat and pray in advance of the daylong fast on the first day of the holy month of Ramadan.        

The Israeli Army said that its soldiers had gone into Kalandia for &ldquo;routine arrests,&rdquo; that a &ldquo;mass riot&rdquo; had broken out and that the soldiers responded with riot control tactics followed by live fire. It said five soldiers were slightly injured, but had no information on the Palestinian casualties. The army said it made three arrests.        

Camp residents who gathered at midday at a mosque for the Palestinians&rsquo; funerals said the raid involved scores of Israeli troops. They said that people up early for Ramadan saw the troops and began throwing stones at them. Israeli reinforcements came in shooting, they said.        

The Palestinian Authority issued an angry statement saying that &ldquo;Israeli forces were raiding the camp&rsquo;s houses, destroying personal property and beating up people of all ages.&rdquo; It added that on Sunday, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel &ldquo;sent a message of greetings to the Arab and Muslim world on the start of the holy month of Ramadan.        

&ldquo;His greetings,&rdquo; the statement continued, &ldquo;were shortly followed by a deadly attack against Palestinians in the Kalandia refugee camp.&rdquo;        

Bullet holes were evident on the outer walls of several houses in the Antar neighborhood of the camp, where the confrontations occurred.        

One resident, Wajeh Ismael Al Khatib, said the soldiers raided his house in search of two of his grandsons. They were not there, he said, but they ended up arresting a third grandson, also named Wajeh, age 20, beating and handcuffing him before telling him to report for questioning in the morning.        

Kalandia, near Ramallah, is part of the West Bank section known as Area A, which is policed and secured during the day by Palestinian Authority forces. The Israeli military reserves the right to enter it at night. In a recent interview, a top Israeli military commander said his troops made about half a dozen nightly raids in Area A.        

&ldquo;For intelligence dominance and freedom of action, this is the minimum number of entries we have to make per night,&rdquo; he said. A year or two ago, the number of nightly raids was more like a dozen. To reduce the raids further, he said, would require a political decision that would involve a security risk. He said he favored such a decision, but it was not his to make.        

He added that in recent months the Palestinian Authority forces were arresting fewer suspects, especially those affiliated with Hamas, because of the unity agreement the Palestinian Authority and Hamas were negotiating.        

&ldquo;They only go after the major criminals and they have let more people out of prison,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They tell us who they are going to release in hopes we will not go after them, but we are not going along with that. We have had to step up our arrests because of their pulling back.&rdquo;        

Last week, Israeli troops raided a well-known theater in Jenin, arresting two. Two weeks, ago a 21-year-old Palestinian man was killed in a raid on a refugee camp near the city of Nablus.        

In an unrelated event, Israeli and Lebanese forces briefly exchanged fire across their border on Monday when the Lebanese believed that patrolling Israelis had crossed the border. The Israelis denied the violation. No injuries were reported and United Nations forces said they were investigating.        
