
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; Airport immigration officials denied entry to three Japanese lawmakers on Monday, thwarting their plan to travel close to a set of tiny islands claimed by South Korea and Japan. The trio then refused for hours to board a return flight home in the confrontation, which has laid bare longstanding animosities between the two countries rooted in Japan&rsquo;s colonialist past.        

The trio &mdash; Yoshitaka Shindo, Tomomi Inada and Masahisa Sato, all from Japan&rsquo;s conservative Liberal Democratic Party &mdash; arrived at Seoul&rsquo;s Gimpo International Airport as part of their previously announced vow to visit South Korea so that they could travel near the disputed islands, a cluster of volcanic outcroppings called the Dokdo by South Korea and the Takeshima by Japan.        

South Korea had considered the trip an attempt to reassert Japan&rsquo;s claim to the islands, which are situated about halfway between the two countries. The South Koreans had told the Japanese that the lawmakers would be denied entry.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s difficult to secure their safety, and their trip will have a negative impact on bilateral relations,&rdquo; the Foreign Ministry said in a statement.        

After defying the immigration officials who urged them to return home for hours, the Japanese politicians boarded the last direct flight for Japan on Monday evening.        

&ldquo;We are not terrorists,&rdquo; Mr. Shindo told reporters at the airport. &ldquo;We must discuss this issue as there is a difference in opinion between Japan and South Korea.&rdquo;        

Outside the arrival gate, members of South Korean civic groups opposed to Japan&rsquo;s claims shouted for the Japanese politicians to come out. They displayed three wooden coffins they said they would use to &ldquo;arrest&rdquo; them.        

A shoving match erupted with the riot police when the activists tried to barge into the customs zone. One activist dumped a large pot of curry sauce in protest.        

Japan ruled Korea as a colony for 35 years until Japan&rsquo;s defeat in World War II. South Korea has kept a small contingent of police officers on the disputed islands since the liberation.        

The Japanese claim to the islands and the anger it provokes among Koreans reflect the enmity and mistrust that have endured since the colonial era. The dispute has strained the broader relationship between Japan and South Korea, the two most important Asian allies of the United States, which has hoped to bring them into a tighter relationship to guard against North Korea and China&rsquo;s expanding military prowess in the region.        

On Monday, all South Korean political parties issued statements calling the three lawmakers political opportunists appealing to right-wing Japanese for political benefits.        

In a sign of the South Korean political sensitivities raised by the disputed islands , Lee Jae-oh, a key aide to President Lee Myung-bak, visited the islands on Monday to serve as a volunteer police officer. Pictures of him wearing a combat police uniform and a helmet were circulated on South Korean Web sites.        

&ldquo;I will stay there until the Japanese lawmakers leave,&rdquo; Mr. Lee, a member of the ruling conservative Grand National Party, wrote in his Twitter account. &ldquo;I will show them clearly that there is no land here for them to set foot on.&rdquo;        

The latest uproar began when Korean Air conducted a test flight of its new A380 aircraft over the islands in June. In response, Japan ordered public servants to boycott Korean Air for a month. The Japanese lawmakers announced last month that they wanted to travel to the South Korean island of Ulleung, about 56 miles west of the disputed islands.        

.        
