
MOSCOW &mdash; Almost exactly three years after the brief war between Russia and Georgia, Washington and Moscow are trading challenging statements over its unresolved legacy, in another sign that the &ldquo;reset&rdquo; of relations between the two cold war enemies is coming under pressure.        

A spokesman for Russia&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry bristled on Monday at a resolution from the Senate in support of Georgia, saying that it &ldquo;leaves the impression of a broken record.&rdquo; The spokesman, Aleksandr K. Lukashevich, was particularly scathing about the Senate&rsquo;s use of the word &ldquo;occupation&rdquo; to refer to Russia&rsquo;s military presence in the separatist Georgian territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.        

&ldquo;The statement of the American senators about this testifies either to illiteracy of international law, or else complete disregard for the real facts,&rdquo; Mr. Lukashevich said. &ldquo;All this is convincing evidence that the given resolution is no less than an exercise in P.R., taken in order to return attention to the &lsquo;Georgian question.&rsquo; &rdquo;        

Little has changed on the ground since Russia and Georgia agreed to a cease-fire after five days of combat in August 2008. The French-brokered deal required Russia to withdraw its troops to prewar positions, but Russia then argued that its recognition of the two enclaves nullified that commitment. Although the United States has maintained that Russia is in violation, the dispute has been soft-pedaled amid efforts to work cooperatively with Moscow on issues like Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program and the war in Afghanistan.        

Georgia&rsquo;s grievances are re-emerging in Washington, however. A group of senators is pressing the Obama administration to explain its response to a series of mysterious bombings that Georgian officials traced to a Russian military intelligence officer in Abkhazia. A classified United States intelligence report corroborated some significant Georgian findings.        

On Friday, the Senate unanimously passed a resolution that described the two enclaves as &ldquo;occupied by the Russian Federation.&rdquo;        

The exchange came a few days after the State Department disclosed that it had imposed a visa ban on a list of officials who have been linked with the death of Sergei L. Magnitsky in a Moscow detention center. Senators have been pushing for more stringent measures, including freezing the officials&rsquo; American assets. The Russian Foreign Ministry condemned the action as &ldquo;arbitrary punishment&rdquo; of individuals who have not been found guilty in court, and warned that it may employ a retaliatory visa ban against Americans.        
