
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; A day after one of the Syrian government&rsquo;s bloodiest assaults on the four-month-old uprising, security forces attacked the central city at the heart of the protests again on Monday, killing at least eight people, as demonstrations erupted elsewhere in Syria in support of the besieged city, activists and residents said.        

The second day of assaults on the city, Hama, signaled the intention of the government of President Bashar al-Assad to crush the uprising by force. The assaults stirred international condemnations and raised more questions over his government&rsquo;s strategy in dealing with an uprising that appears to gain only more momentum as the violence builds.        

&ldquo;What did they achieve from the raids?&rdquo; asked a doctor from Hama who gave his name as Abu Abdo and who was recently released from detention for participating in the protests. &ldquo;Nothing. The army is still at the city&rsquo;s outskirts. It was an operation to kill as many people as possible to prevent the planned demonstrations.&rdquo;        

The scale of Monday&rsquo;s violence paled before the ferocity of Sunday&rsquo;s attack, in which at least 85 people died, 53 of them in Hama alone. But as night fell, residents in Hama reported that heavy firing in nearly every neighborhood reverberated across the city. There was no immediate word on casualties, but the attack appeared aimed at keeping people off the streets after evening prayers during Ramadan.        

Ramadan, the Muslim holy month in which the observant fast from dawn to dusk, began Monday. For weeks, activists have vowed to escalate their uprising during the month, when many residents gather in the mosques at night after breaking their fast.        

The intensity of the gunfire kept people off the streets, residents said, though neighborhood groups tried to organize smaller protests in the side streets of residential areas. &ldquo;They were determined to keep us from the mosques,&rdquo; the doctor in Hama said.        

The United States, European countries and Turkey strongly condemned the violence, in particular in Hama, where hundreds of thousands of protesters had demonstrated peacefully for weeks after government security forces withdrew in June. The criticism was especially pronounced in Turkey, which had emerged as one of Syria&rsquo;s closest allies before the uprising erupted in mid-March. Turkey, like the United States, has yet to demand that Mr. Assad surrender power.        

&ldquo;The incidents of Sunday simply horrified us,&rdquo; said the Turkish president, Abdullah Gul. &ldquo;I am shaken by the use of heavy artillery and tanks against the people of Hama.&rdquo;        

Even Russia, which has opposed international action against Syria, demanded that Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government stop using force against protesters, in what amounted to its strongest criticism yet. The Russian Foreign Ministry called the assault &ldquo;unacceptable.&rdquo;        

At the United Nations, the escalating violence seemed to break the logjam which had stymied Security Council action since May. After a sobering briefing by a senior United Nations official, council members agreed to begin negotiating over a resolution condemning the violence.        

For weeks, the Syrian uprising has been shaped by a relentless cycle of resilient protest and stubborn crackdown. But Sunday&rsquo;s assault, and its continuation into Monday, marked a new stage in the government&rsquo;s willingness to deploy its forces. Both Hama and Deir al-Zour, a city in eastern Syria and a hub of its gas and oil industry, had wrested themselves from government control, and each appeared to pose specific challenges to Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government, which has staggered before the mass protests in both locales.        

In 1982, Hama was the site of one of the most brutal crackdowns in modern Middle East history, and both the military and security forces appeared to be reluctant to intervene there, given the city&rsquo;s symbolism. Deir al-Zour is knit by extended clans &mdash; restive and armed &mdash; and the government long seemed leery of picking a fight there.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve made our decision and we&rsquo;ll accept the results of it,&rdquo; declared an activist in Deir al-Zour, who gave his name as Atwan.        

Some activists speculated that the two-day assault was an attempt by the authorities to reinstall the wall of fear. The government, they said, wanted to act quickly before the demonstrations during Ramadan gave the uprising new momentum.        

Shelling of Hama resumed in the early hours Monday as people returned home from mosques, where they had performed dawn prayers. The Local Coordination Committees, an opposition group that helps organize and document the protests, said at least four people had been killed in Hama and dozens of others were wounded, some severely. After a lull during the day, gunfire began again at night.        

Obada Arwany, an activist reached by telephone in Hama, said tanks entered two neighborhoods, Al-Qousour and Al-Hamidiya, in the morning and shelled residential buildings. One man was killed in his sleep when his house was fired on, and another by a sniper&rsquo;s bullet as he was getting in his car, he said.        

&ldquo;The city is like a ghost town,&rdquo; Mr. Arwany said. &ldquo;We were not expecting this at all, we were not expecting this raid at all. Hama is getting massacred.&rdquo;        

Although the city had braced itself for weeks for an attack, and youths had built makeshift barricades of furniture, cinder blocks, sandbags and iron railing, none of it stood much of a chance against the government&rsquo;s tanks and armored vehicles.        

&ldquo;It was like suicide,&rdquo; the doctor in Hama said, by phone.        

Residents in the city reported that on Monday people in nearby villages and towns had set up roadblocks on the main highway to the city to prevent the army from sending supplies to its troops, who are still positioned at the outskirts of the city.        

Across Syria, activists said, protests gathered in solidarity with Hama and Deir al-Zour. On Sunday evening, smaller demonstrations convened in the capital, Damascus, and Aleppo, Syria&rsquo;s second-largest city, both of which have remained relatively quiet.        

Mr. Arwany said water supplies had been cut to large parts of Hama. So were phone lines and Internet service, he said. Most bakeries remained closed Monday, and Mr. Arwany said some residents reported shortages of food. Hospitals, overwhelmed by Sunday&rsquo;s casualties, suffered from shortages of blood, he added.        

The situation was quieter in Deir al-Zour, residents said, though at least one person was killed there Monday, the Local Coordination Committees said. The activist reached by phone said residents there had set up barricades like those in Hama.        

To an even greater degree in the past, Syria&rsquo;s state-controlled media have offered accounts that bear almost no resemblance to residents&rsquo; testimony.        

The Interior Ministry said only eight people had been killed in Hama, and it blamed &ldquo;armed terrorist groups&rdquo; for the bloodshed, a phrase it has often invoked to describe the protesters. The state news agency SANA carried a speech by Mr. Assad, marking Army Day, in which he praised the military for &ldquo;its loyalty to its people, country and creed.&rdquo;        
Hwaida Saad and Anthony Shadid contributed reporting from Beirut, and Neil MacFarquhar from the United Nations.
