
ROME &mdash; After weeks of uncharacteristic and increasingly unsettling silence, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi is expected to address Parliament about the economy on Wednesday. On Tuesday, the financial markets pummeled Italy, sending interest rates on its benchmark 10-year bond well above 6 percent.        

Most alarming to economists is that Italy&rsquo;s position in the markets is deteriorating even though the Parliament passed austerity measures last month. The country&rsquo;s financial woes have arrived in a feverish climate of judicial investigations, lurid rumors and rising popular anger with politicians who keep their privileges while imposing spending cuts on other Italians.        

In an opera buffa interlude this year, prosecutors charged Mr. Berlusconi with paying for sex with a minor. But the new investigations tap deeper veins: corruption, influence peddling and accusations that public officials are answering to murky networks of power far beyond their institutional roles.        

The most prominent investigation touches on Giulio Tremonti, the finance minister, whose political future was jeopardized when he admitted to paying cash to stay in a Rome apartment owned by a former political adviser and member of Parliament. The adviser was accused in June of accepting bribes in exchange for influence in public administration appointments.        

With bond markets so intensely focused on Italy, it remains to be seen whether &mdash; or when &mdash; Mr. Berlusconi will oust Mr. Tremonti, an occasional political rival who had earned considerable respect in international financial circles. Yet the uncertainty surrounding Mr. Tremonti is emblematic of the uncertainty surrounding the entire Berlusconi government, which is growing weaker by the day but remains unlikely to fall until Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s coalition partners are convinced they can survive without him.        

&ldquo;We are in a climate of stable instability,&rdquo; said Massimo Franco, the chief political columnist of Italy&rsquo;s leading daily, Corriere della Sera. &ldquo;The risk is that this instability will become more dramatic because of the market speculation,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;But Italy is trapped in this phase. Berlusconi has no exit. To have a different government, Berlusconi would need to stand down, and he won&rsquo;t.&rdquo;        

Critics have accused the prime minister of focusing more on his personal legal woes than on the country&rsquo;s problems. The financial pressure on Italy is rising, and despite approving almost $70 billion in spending cuts and tax increases last month, politicians say the country needs to pass new austerity measures as soon as September.        

Last week, Mr. Tremonti defended the $5,700 he paid in cash each month to stay in a Rome apartment owned by Marco Milanese. Prosecutors are seeking to arrest Mr. Milanese on charges of passing confidential information about a criminal investigation to a businessman in exchange for cash and gifts.        

In response to criticism that cash payments are a classic means of tax evasion, the finance minister said he had done nothing untoward. &ldquo;There was nothing under the table, nothing irregular,&rdquo; Mr. Tremonti wrote in a letter to Corriere della Sera on Friday. In the letter, Mr. Tremonti, whose home is in Pavia, outside Milan, said he had &ldquo;made a mistake&rdquo; in not having left the apartment sooner.        

Mr. Tremonti added that he had chosen against having a formal rental contract &ldquo;not for economic convenience, but for privacy.&rdquo;        

A more surreal plot twist takes place largely between the lines. According to some news reports that cite judicial sources, Mr. Tremonti has testified that he chose to stay in the apartment when in Rome, and not in a hotel or government accommodation, because he was afraid that some members of his security detail were spying on him and gathering information to use against him.        

Parliament is expected to vote in September on whether to allow prosecutors to arrest Mr. Milanese.        

Popular anger is rising at the unwillingness of Parliament, which just raised taxes and health care co-payments for Italians, to make cuts in politicians&rsquo; perks, pensions and expense accounts.        
(Page 2 of 2)
In recent weeks, a blog called Secrets of the Caste of Montecitorio, named after the building that houses Italy&rsquo;s lower house, has gained considerable traction. The blog has a running ticker of lawmaker perks, including reduced cellphone rates and discounted Fiat cars. The site is run by &ldquo;Spider Truman,&rdquo; a man who insists on anonymity and claims he worked as an assistant to a member of Parliament and was paid under the table with no formal contract until being fired this year.        

Members of Parliament earn $16,600 a month before taxes, and about $10,200 more to cover expenses or pay aides &mdash; whom they can choose on their own and without any formal screening process.        

Gian Antonio Stella, a journalist and the co-author with Sergio Rizzo of &ldquo;The Caste,&rdquo; a 2007 best-selling expos&eacute; about the staggering cost of Italian politics, figured that Americans spent about $7 a year on their politicians, whereas Italians paid closer to $38.        

The austerity measures passed last month include pension cuts, tax increases and wage freezes for Italians &mdash; but not for politicians. According to Italian news reports, a group of Parliament members met before the vote and removed reductions to salaries and chauffeured cars.        

The anger &ldquo;is growing, it&rsquo;s something very clear,&rdquo; Mr. Stella said. &ldquo;We can tell from the letters we get. This time readers on the right understand that it&rsquo;s not the fault of the left. Readers on the right have finally understood that it&rsquo;s also the fault of the right.&rdquo;        

With the anger growing, Mr. Berlusconi appears to be circling the wagons. Adding to the increasingly paranoid climate here, Corriere della Sera published a front-page report over the weekend that Mr. Berlusconi was growing ever more worried that the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, once his ally, now wanted him dead for Italy&rsquo;s support of NATO&rsquo;s intervention in Libya.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve heard this from my reliable sources,&rdquo; the newspaper said, attributing the words to Mr. Berlusconi through an omniscient narrator approach common in Italian journalism.        

Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s office later issued a characteristically florid denial, calling the report &ldquo;the fruit of the most fervid fantasy.&rdquo;        
