
MOSCOW &mdash; Members of Russia&rsquo;s opposition picketed government buildings here on Monday, denouncing a Moscow court&rsquo;s decision to jail, for up to 15 days, several leaders of their movement who took part in an antigovernment rally.        

Almost 70 people were arrested here during a New Year&rsquo;s Eve protest against restrictions on freedom of assembly. Boris Y. Nemtsov, one of the opposition&rsquo;s most prominent leaders, was among those arrested. On Sunday, a Moscow court sentenced Mr. Nemtsov, a central official in the government of former President Boris N. Yeltsin, to 15 days in jail. Other leaders received similar or lesser sentences.        

The arrests occurred despite a Moscow City Hall decision to allow the rally, and appeared to indicate some disagreement within the Russian government over how to deal with the country&rsquo;s tiny, but vocal, opposition.        

The opposition seemed to have scored a victory recently after the government began granting permission for its semiregular protests, held on the last day of months with 31 days. Previously, antigovernment rallies had typically been quashed.        

The  movement held its first legal rally  on Halloween night. That event ended with a handful of arrests but seemed to suggest an effort, if a begrudging one, among the authorities to accommodate such street protests as long as they remained small.        

President Dmitri A. Medvedev recently singled out Mr. Nemtsov and several other opposition leaders, referring to them as &ldquo;well-known politicians&rdquo; who could in the future play a serious role in the political life of the country.        

The remarks contrasted with those of Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s mentor, Vladimir V. Putin, Russia&rsquo;s prime minister and paramount leader, who, when asked last month about Mr. Nemtsov and other opposition figures, dismissed them as interested only in &ldquo;money and power.&rdquo;        

It was unclear what prompted the arrests during the rally on New Year&rsquo;s Eve. The police said that those arrested were part of a separate, unsanctioned rally who were trying to urge protesters to leave their designated area on Triumfalnaya Square in central Moscow and march to another area of the city.        

Olga Shorina, a spokeswoman for Mr. Nemtsov and his political group, Solidarity, said he had been charged with public swearing and resisting arrest.        

In a video of the arrest posted to the Solidarity Web site, Mr. Nemtsov is heard saying, &ldquo;Calm down, calm down,&rdquo; as  officers escort him to a van. He is then shown waving from the van door.        

The judge would not allow the video to be used as evidence, and also refused Mr. Nemtsov&rsquo;s requests for a chair, leaving him to stand for the five-hour hearing on Sunday, Ms. Shorina said.        

Opposition supporters responded with outrage to the arrests. At least 20  were detained here while picketing in support of Mr. Nemtsov, Solidarity said. Some were later released.        

In Washington, the White House said in a statement that it was &ldquo;surprised&rdquo; by the arrests, given the earlier decision to allow the demonstrations. &ldquo;President Obama met with Boris Nemtsov in Moscow in July 2009 and continues to admire his work in promoting democratic development in Russia,&rdquo; the statement said.        
 Peter Baker contributed reporting from Washington.
