
LONDON &mdash; On the ground floor of the sprawling office complex that was, until recently, the home of The News of the World, a bespectacled clerk sat at a counter behind a reinforced glass cashier&rsquo;s window. When reporters needed cash to pursue articles, they simply filled out a green form and, after getting authorization from the managing editor, exchanged it at the window for up to tens of thousands of pounds, said several journalists who worked there.        

As the police on Tuesday arrested the former managing editor, Stuart Kuttner, on suspicion of conspiring to hack cellphones and pay police officers, that cash payment system has become the focus of inquiries by Scotland Yard and by News International, which owned the tabloid until it closed in July.        

Mr. Kuttner, who is the 11th former News of the World employee arrested in the scandal surrounding the tabloid, personally authorized cash expenses until his retirement two years ago in his role as managing editor, said multiple current and former company employees, who, like most people interviewed spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the continuing police investigations and to avoid jeopardizing their ties with the company. Mr. Kuttner did not respond to requests for comment.        

A person familiar with the company&rsquo;s internal investigation said the regular infusions of cash, usually also authorized by newsroom editors as well as Mr. Kuttner, contributed to the newsroom&rsquo;s &ldquo;wild West&rdquo; atmosphere. The funds were used as advances on expenses and also to pay sources for articles, said the former journalists. So far a search by the company of the cash records has found more than $200,000 in payments to police officers from The News of the World, according to two people with knowledge of the documents.        

The investigation of payoffs to the police is one part of what has become a three-pronged inquiry that began by focusing on the hacking of cellphone voice messages and has also expanded to the hacking of e-mails.        

An official at News International, a British subsidiary of the News Corporation, said the records of cash payment went back as far as 2002, covering the editorships of Andy Coulson and Rebekah Brooks, both of whom were arrested in recent weeks. The News International internal review has been expanded to examine both cash payments and the use of private investigators at the company&rsquo;s other British newspapers, which include The Sun, The Times of London and The Sunday Times, the official familiar with the News Corporation inquiry said, speaking on the condition of anonymity.        

A press officer for News International said the police agreed to allow the company to retain possession of the records while it conducted the first examination of them. The company said it could not hand the evidence directly to police without ensuring that journalistic sources, and legally privileged documents, were protected.        

That arrangement drew criticism from a former senior Scotland Yard official, who was not involved in the hacking inquiry. &ldquo;On the day News Corp. announced it was shutting down the newspaper, what I would have done is gotten a warrant, raided the premises and taken everything so that I could have looked at it myself,&rdquo; the former official said.        

Scotland Yard declined to comment because investigations were still under way.        

Mr. Kuttner, 71, who worked at the tabloid for 22 years, is known to have kept meticulous written records. Former reporters describe him as a penny pincher, prone to calling journalists to demand justification for expenses. Reporters had to give details about whom the cash was intended for, and the nature of the article. &ldquo;He didn&rsquo;t see it as Rupert&rsquo;s money you were spending,&rdquo; said one, referring to the tabloid&rsquo;s owner, Rupert Murdoch, &ldquo;he saw it as Stuart&rsquo;s money.&rdquo;        

In a 2003 e-mail exchange that has partly formed the basis for the investigation into police payments, the newspaper&rsquo;s royal reporter complained about a management push, spearheaded by Mr. Kuttner, to cut back on payments to sources. The reporter, Clive Goodman, told Mr. Coulson, the top editor at the time, that he needed to pay his contacts in the Scotland Yard unit that protects the royal family. Mr. Goodman pleaded guilty to phone hacking in 2006 and was jailed. He was recently rearrested on suspicion of making payments to the police.        

In the years after Mr. Goodman&rsquo;s initial arrest, and as the newspaper moved to a new building, the payments system changed, said two former journalists. Small payments were doled out from a safe in a senior editor&rsquo;s office, the journalists said. Larger amounts of money, if needed, were brought from banks, said a senior News International official.        

The company is also reviewing its own records at the request of the police, in an effort to uncover hacking and other potentially illegal practices.        

Also Tuesday, a London court imposed a six-week jail term on a 26-year-old man who threw a paper plate of foam at Mr. Murdoch two weeks ago during a parliamentary hearing. The lawyer for the man, Jonathan May-Bowles, a stand-up comic known as Jonnie Marbles, said the court had been told that Mr. Murdoch had not wanted charges to be brought. But the district judge said the comic had aimed to disrupt a parliamentary hearing that was of &ldquo;huge importance.&rdquo;        
John F. Burns contributed reporting.
