
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; After at least 26 people were killed in shootings and other attacks in the southern port city of Karachi over the past two days, the Pakistani government on Tuesday authorized paramilitary forces to conduct raids in some of the city&rsquo;s most violent neighborhoods to try to restore order.        

The government of President Asif Ali Zardari offered rewards for people willing to provide photographs and videos that show those involved in the killings.        

Karachi, the nation&rsquo;s commercial and financial hub, has a population of 17 million to 20 million. A city of immigrants, it has become a caldron of ethnic, political and religious strife.        

A brutal war over turf and patronage has developed in recent years involving the governing Pakistan Peoples Party, the Awami National Party and the Muttahida Qaumi Movement.        

The Muttahida Qaumi Movement, a party that has represented immigrants from India, had long dominated Karachi&rsquo;s politics, but it has been challenged by the Awami National Party, which is generally supported by Pashtuns.        

Activists from both parties have conducted drive-by shootings, government officials and political analysts say. The violence, which has generally been confined to poor neighborhoods, has also assumed an ethnic dimension, with tensions increasing between Pashtuns and Urdu-speaking immigrants.        

More than 300 people were killed in political and ethnic violence in July, making the month among the worst on record, local news media reported. The government sent a paramilitary force to quell the violence in the Orangi neighborhood, but the attacks have spilled into other parts of the city.        

Armed groups carried out several attacks in another neighborhood, Surjani, a stronghold of criminal gangs.        

Interior Minister Rehman Malik said in Karachi that the government was preparing a stern response to the shootings, arson and property damage. &ldquo;I want to warn that you have tested the patience of the government enough,&rdquo; Mr. Malik said of the perpetrators. &ldquo;I won&rsquo;t say anything else. You will see the action yourself.&rdquo;        

The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, an independent rights group, on Monday urged a political solution.        

&ldquo;While gangs of land-grabbers and mafias have tried to exploit the breakdown of law and order,&rdquo; the organization said in a statement, &ldquo;they do not appear to be the main directors of the horrible game of death and destruction; that distinction belongs to more powerful political groups, and it is they who hold the key to peace.&rdquo;        
