
CAIRO &mdash; An ailing Hosni Mubarak, who had served longer than any other ruler of modern Egypt until a revolution toppled him in February, was rolled into a courtroom in a hospital bed on Wednesday to face charges of corruption and complicity in the killing of protesters, offering an indelible lesson for Egypt and the Arab world in the humbling of power.        

The symbolism of the day&rsquo;s events, watched live by tens of millions, made the episode one of the most visceral ever in a region where uprisings have shaken Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s contemporaries. On this day, the aura of their power was made mundane, and Mr. Mubarak, 83, dressed in prison whites and bearing a look that some read as disdainful, was chastened.        

Even those who most ardently demanded his prosecution believed that his lingering prestige would keep him from a cage fashioned of bars and wire, a reflection of the unease that reigns in a country whose revolution remains unresolved. As a helicopter ferried Mr. Mubarak to the courtroom, housed in a police academy that once bore his name, cheers went up from a crowd gathered outside.        

&ldquo;The thief is here!&rdquo; his opponents shouted. &ldquo;The butcher is here!&rdquo;        

But the four-hour hearing perhaps spoke most eloquently to Egypt&rsquo;s past, as the court brought someone to account for decades of stagnation and repression so rife it became casual, under whom Egypt lost its perch as the Arab world&rsquo;s most powerful country. The future of the country remained unclear, though, still beholden as it is to a powerful military that gave up one of its own, in what some saw as a cynical gesture to appease an angry public bent on achieving a far greater transformation of Egypt than the military wants.        

&ldquo;We need more than the trial,&rdquo; said Menna Kamal, 22, an activist at the courthouse. &ldquo;I still feel I&rsquo;m a foreigner here. It&rsquo;s still their country, not ours, not mine.&rdquo;        

The scene itself was seminal for its very clarity, at a time when the Arab world seems so confused. The trial riveted the region, where uprisings inspired in part by Egypt have shaken the rule of autocrats in Libya, Syria, Yemen and Bahrain. But the euphoria of Tahrir Square, a symbol of popular will, has given way to a more familiar chaos and bloodshed in those places. Some Arab officials even suggested that the spectacle of the trial on Wednesday &mdash; a president and his family, along with his retinue of officials, facing charges &mdash; would make those leaders all the more reluctant to step down.        

On the very day Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s trial began, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria escalated his own bloody crackdown on a city at the heart of the uprising against him. Yemen faces chaos, Bahrain unrelenting repression, and the leader in Libya, seemingly unhinged, has helped take his country into what looks like a prolonged civil war.        

&ldquo;Mubarak in the Cage,&rdquo; read a headline in a Lebanese newspaper, Al Akhbar.        

&ldquo;Who is going to be the winner?&rdquo; it asked.        

The trial began precisely on time, at 10 a.m. in Cairo. While the other defendants took a seat, Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s sons remained standing, seeming to block the view of their father. Mr. Mubarak appeared tired but alert, occasionally speaking with his sons, who both held Korans.        

&ldquo;The first defendant, Muhammad Hosni al-Sayyid Mubarak,&rdquo; said the chief judge, Ahmed Refaat, speaking to the cage holding Mr. Mubarak; his two sons, Gamal and Alaa; former Interior Minister Habib el-Adly; and six senior police officers.        

&ldquo;Sir, I am present,&rdquo; Mr. Mubarak replied into a microphone, from his bed.        

&ldquo;You heard the charges that the prosecutor made against you,&rdquo; the judge said from his bench in the wood-paneled courtroom. &ldquo;What do you say?&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I deny all these accusations completely,&rdquo; Mr. Mubarak replied, wearily waving his hand.        

Mr. Mubarak last appeared in public on Feb. 10. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not about me,&rdquo; he said in a speech then, to the disbelief of hundreds of thousands demonstrating in the capital. On Wednesday, television captured him picking his nose.        

The two sentences were the only words he uttered to the judge. Hard of hearing, Mr. Mubarak had his son repeat the judge&rsquo;s question to him.        

&ldquo;God brings glory to whomever he wants and humiliates whomever he wants,&rdquo; several spectators outside said, quoting a Koranic verse as Mr. Mubarak appeared on a giant screen.        
Heba Afify contributed reporting.
