
PARIS &mdash; Air France&rsquo;s largest pilots&rsquo; union suspended cooperation on Wednesday with investigators seeking to identify the causes of a fatal 2009 crash of a Rio de Janeiro-to-Paris flight, in protest of what it said was a decision by investigators to play down the role of the plane&rsquo;s stall-warning system in an interim report last week.        

The move followed reports in the French news media suggesting that text and recommendations related to the stall-alarm system of the Airbus A330-200 jet were part of the investigators&rsquo; working draft and had circulated within the Bureau of Investigations and Analyses, or B.E.A. However, those references did not appear in the 117-page report released Friday.        

The union, S.N.P.L. France A.L.P.A., said the news media reports had &ldquo;seriously damaged&rdquo; its confidence in the investigation. In a statement, the union, which represents 71 percent of Air France&rsquo;s pilots, said it had asked its representative to withdraw from the investigation until the B.E.A. explained its reasons for not publishing any findings related to the stall alarm.        

The alarm went off a dozen times in the plane&rsquo;s final four minutes, but it may have confused the pilots. Because the alarm does not function at extremely low speeds, it would have stopped sounding once the plane&rsquo;s stall was far advanced. But when the plane regained some speed &mdash; as when the pilot at the controls briefly pushed the nose down &mdash; the alarm sounded again, possibly discouraging the very course of action that might have saved it.        

Martine Del Bono, a B.E.A. spokeswoman, confirmed that Alain Bouillard, the bureau&rsquo;s chief investigator, had proposed a stall-warning recommendation in a confidential draft of the report last month. The proposed recommendation was dropped early last week, she said, on the advice of the bureau&rsquo;s technical experts, who felt there was not yet sufficient evidence to justify it.        

&ldquo;It was felt that this needed further in-depth study,&rdquo; Ms. Del Bono said, adding that a discussion of the stall alarm&rsquo;s role would appear in the investigators&rsquo; final report, expected next year. She said that she &ldquo;deeply regretted&rdquo; the pilots&rsquo; union&rsquo;s decision and emphasized that discussion with all parties involved was critical to the investigation.        

The report released Friday found that the two co-pilots of Air France Flight 447 had not been trained to fly the aircraft in manual mode at high altitude or to promptly recognize and respond to a speed-sensor malfunction at high altitude &mdash; skills that experts say could have helped avert disaster, though they were not part of standard industry training at the time. The report appeared over all to support suggestions by experts that fundamental errors by the pilots caused the plane to stall and plummet 38,000 feet into the Atlantic Ocean, killing all 228 people aboard.        

At a news conference as the report was released, investigators conceded that the pilots might have been confused by intermittent stall warnings that began shortly after a failure of the plane&rsquo;s airspeed sensors disabled the autopilot and autothrust. Jean-Paul Troadec, the B.E.A. director, said a working group of behavioral psychologists and cockpit design experts had been asked to study the effect the alarms might have had on the crew&rsquo;s responses.        

Air France itself has also blamed the &ldquo;misleading&rdquo; pattern of stall warnings for contributing to the crew&rsquo;s difficulties. The airline sent a letter to the European Aviation Safety Agency this week asking it to study and, if necessary, make safety recommendations about the design of stall-alarm systems.        

Dominique Fouda, an agency spokesman, said a response to Air France would be made in the coming weeks. But he said his agency, which is cooperating with the inquiry, did not question the omission of any findings related to the stall-alarm system. &ldquo;If the investigators consider that they do not have sufficient evidence to say whether a specific issue is part of the cause, it makes sense that they would investigate further before making any recommendations,&rdquo; he said.        
