
MIT KENANA, Egypt &mdash; In this town of unfinished brick buildings, along parcels of corn and rice watered by the Nile, the elation, suspicion and introspection of a country played out along one street a day after residents witnessed the unthinkable: former President Hosni Mubarak put on trial.        

A teacher called it a distraction from the real agenda of the revolution. A storekeeper suggested mercy for an ailing 83-year-old man never quite as loathsome as other Arab leaders. A cook described it as justice, and his friend as God&rsquo;s will. Then Ahmed Said, a 30-year-old college graduate looking for work, spoke up.        

&ldquo;A lesson for the future,&rdquo; he called it. &ldquo;Whoever does wrong has to be held to account.&rdquo;        

Revolution, wars and upheavals inevitably force some reckoning with the past. In South Africa, there was truth and reconciliation. Lebanon coped with the aftermath of its 15-year civil war with a form of collective amnesia. Egypt is still in the throes of its own tumult, but many people said Thursday that they already saw signs of a reckoning, in what they described as a shift in the political culture of the Arab world: that power will no longer go uncontested.        

&ldquo;It is a turning point in the concept of a president,&rdquo; said Laila Soueif, a professor at Cairo University and a human rights activist. &ldquo;People will believe that Mubarak&rsquo;s era is over, that a new era is starting, and they will start acting accordingly. And anyone in a position of power will be scared and realize that power is a responsibility, not a privilege.&rdquo;        

The scene on Wednesday in the courtroom of a police academy once named for Mr. Mubarak was as historic as it was emotional. There was no longer mystique to the power of the man, no imperial distance that he and his equals so long cultivated in palaces that are citadels.        

The trial for the most despised of his lieutenants &mdash; former Interior Minister Habib el-Adly &mdash; continued Thursday, but it seemed anticlimactic after the four-hour session on Wednesday in which Mr. Mubarak lay in his bed in prison whites, his two sons standing by his side. Newspaper headlines focused on one line Mr. Mubarak uttered, in which he finally answered to another authority.        

&ldquo;Sir, I am here,&rdquo; he told the judge.        

As the words were rebroadcast Thursday, a sense of justice and vengeance were conflated for many, particularly the relatives of the protesters killed in the demonstrations during the revolution in January and February. They refused to give their names; they were only the mothers of Khaled Atteya, Mahmoud Radi and so on.        

&ldquo;There are tears of joy at the sight of Hosni Mubarak behind bars,&rdquo; said the mother of Mr. Atteya, who was killed Jan. 28. &ldquo;The blood of my son will be avenged.&rdquo;        

Those words struck a chord in Mit Kenana, a town an hour or so north of Cairo, its roads plied by tractors, pickup trucks and horse-drawn carts, a place where traditions run deep. Everyone said they watched the trial and everyone had an opinion.        

&ldquo;The families of the martyrs in Tahrir Square, they have to see Hosni Mubarak tried,&rdquo; said Mohammed Salameh, a friend of Mr. Said, the college graduate. &ldquo;Otherwise they&rsquo;ll never find peace. They have to have revenge, so that they can go on with their lives.&rdquo;        

He and Mr. Said suggested that an execution was warranted, but as they pondered the prospect of Mr. Mubarak in the gallows, a sick man hanging, they offered alternatives: a sentence of death that is then commuted, or a stay in prison where he would eventually die.        

&ldquo;He has to pay a price,&rdquo; Mr. Salameh said. &ldquo;He brought this upon himself.&rdquo;        

Together, Egyptian newspapers tried to mark a moment that at least hinted at shmata, the Arabic word that comes closest to gloating. One called him a pharaoh, and nearly all celebrated the humiliating image of the former president in a cage. Some seemed to hint at a more cynical motivation for the powerful military council to prosecute one of its own, at a time many believe the military is bent on safeguarding its interests and its influence.        

&ldquo;The revolution has succeeded,&rdquo; declared the newspaper Al-Akhbar, offering a definition of success that ignores the calls for rule of law and sweeping democratic change.        
Heba Afify contributed reporting.
