
NEW DELHI &mdash; India&rsquo;s most powerful politician, Sonia Gandhi, has flown to the United States for surgery, said a spokesman for the governing Congress Party, which Mrs. Gandhi leads.        

The nature of her illness was not disclosed, but the spokesman, Janardan Dwivedi, told reporters here that &ldquo;generally her condition is satisfactory, but her operation has not taken place as yet.&rdquo;        

Mr. Dwivedi would not disclose what operation Ms. Gandhi would undergo or when. He did say that she was expected to recuperate abroad for two or three weeks. He did not say whether that would be in the United States.        

Mrs. Gandhi, 64, the widow of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, has transformed herself from a shy, foreign-born homemaker to a formidable political force. Though she holds no formal position in the government, she is without question the most powerful figure in the Congress Party, her influence far eclipsing that of Manmohan Singh, India&rsquo;s prime minister.        

Mrs. Gandhi is deeply influential, especially on social policy. With the help of a quasi-governmental kitchen cabinet called the National Advisory Council, she has pushed expensive but popular social welfare programs that were an important factor in her party&rsquo;s election victory in 2009.        

In 2004, when she led the Congress Party to power after six years in opposition, she resisted calls to become prime minister, instead choosing Mr. Singh, a soft-spoken economist who had ushered in economic reforms as finance minister in 1991.        

Information about the Gandhi family is tightly guarded, but Mrs. Gandhi is not known to suffer from any major illnesses.        

Her absence from India comes at a difficult time. The government is battling multiple corruption scandals and struggling to combat rising inflation and slumping economic growth.        

Her son and heir apparent, Rahul, will lead the party in her absence along with three other senior Congress Party leaders, Mr. Dwivedi said.        
