
Andrzej Lepper, a populist politician who rose from pig farmer to deputy prime minister of Poland but whose career was undone by scandal, was found dead on Friday in his office in Warsaw, the police said. He was 57.        

The police would not officially comment on the cause of death, but a police spokesman told The Associated Press, &ldquo;Everything indicates that he killed himself.&rdquo;        

A friend and colleague, Wladyslaw Serafin, said Mr. Lepper had been distraught over his son&rsquo;s serious illness as well as the threat of jail after his conviction in 2010 on sex charges. The Polish news agency PAP reported that he had hanged himself.        

As leader of the provocatively named Self-Defense Party, Mr. Lepper was deemed a demagogue, even &ldquo;a barbarian&rdquo; by opponents, but his supporters regarded him as a voice for the poor at a time of high unemployment and economic uncertainty. A four-time presidential candidate, he spoke out on behalf of farmers and against the European Union, which he saw as a threat to Poland.        

Mr. Lepper was one of Poland&rsquo;s most prominent politicians until being tarnished by repeated scandals. Yet even without them he had become out of step with the political mainstream, a holdover from a moment of anxiety about the country&rsquo;s impending entrance into the union. A vast majority of voters now embrace Poland&rsquo;s membership, polls show.        

Mr. Lepper&rsquo;s Self-Defense party became a junior partner in a conservative-nationalist government led by Prime Minister Jaroslaw Kaczynski in 2006 and 2007. He served as agriculture minister as well as deputy prime minister.        

But his tenure ended in the shadow of corruption scandals, including bribery allegations. At one point he was investigated for slander after he accused half a dozen politicians of corruption from the floor of Parliament. In 2010 he was convicted of soliciting sex from a woman who worked for his party.        

In the tumultuous decades after the end of Communist rule, Mr. Lepper stood out among firebrand politicians, leading demonstrations of thousands of farmers suffering during the transition to capitalism. He was fierce in his criticism of the European Union. &ldquo;The European Union is only interested in helping itself and making Poland a good market for its products,&rdquo; he said.        

But when Poland became a member in 2004, he was among the first 5,000 farmers to receive farm subsidies from Brussels.        

After his party won 11.5 percent of the vote in the 2005 parliamentary election, it won just 1.5 percent in 2007; 5 percent was required for representation in Parliament.        

Mr. Lepper is survived by his wife, Irena, and two daughters and a son.        
Joanna Berendt contributed reporting from Warsaw.
