
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Syria&rsquo;s state news media broadcast stark images of the destruction in the besieged city of Hama for the first time on Friday, showing burned buildings, makeshift barricades and deserted streets strewn with rubble in footage that appeared designed to show that government forces had put down a rebellion in the city.        

The images were unmistakably Hama, Syria&rsquo;s fourth-largest city and a focal point of the five-month-old uprising that has left President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s leadership isolated and weakened. They suggested the military had retaken control of a city that had briefly wrested itself from four decades of authoritarian rule by the Assad family and enjoyed an unprecedented measure of freedom.        

The reports by Syrian television and Sana, the official news agency, portrayed the army as Hama&rsquo;s savior. The news appeared aimed at reinforcing the leadership&rsquo;s message to internal opponents that they are regarded as armed insurrectionist gangs inspired by hostile foreign powers and will be dealt with accordingly. But the television footage of the wreckage in Hama also implicitly acknowledged that the violence there had been far more serious than Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government had until now been willing to publicly admit.        

It also underlined a legacy of the assault: Hama was remarkably peaceful after security forces withdrew in June. Violence erupted only when the government, fearing the momentum the city might provide the uprising, began its ferocious assault on Sunday. Although government officials insist the protesters were armed, not a single weapon was seen in the streets on a recent visit, an account confirmed by diplomats in their trips there. Barricades were set up, but only to block the return of the military and security forces.        

&ldquo;Today we are alive, but tomorrow we don&rsquo;t know,&rdquo; said a resident reached by telephone who gave his name as Fadi. &ldquo;The humanitarian situation is getting worse day by day.&rdquo;        

Government officials offered an altogether different version of events, in reports from Damascus, the capital, that appeared more and more to defy reality.        

&ldquo;Syrian Arab Army units are working to restore security, stability and normal life to Hama after armed terrorist groups perpetrated acts of sabotage and killing through setting up barricades, breaking off roads, attacking and burning police stations, using different kinds of weapons,&rdquo; according to Sana&rsquo;s account of the violence in Hama.        

The Syrian accounts also said at least 20 soldiers had been killed in the fighting, but said nothing about civilian casualties. Activist groups reporting from Hama &mdash; the source of most information about the mayhem there since Syrian forces first besieged the city last weekend &mdash; have said at least 200 civilians have been killed by military shelling and snipers. They reported a new round of shelling on Friday.        

The resident reached by telephone said that 200 tanks had entered the city before dawn, and that security forces were blocking residents from gathering in the city&rsquo;s mosques.        

&ldquo;The government has given up its responsibilities and handed everything over to the security forces,&rdquo; said Louay Hussein, a prominent opposition figure in Damascus. &ldquo;They have lost their mind. They are acting without any strategic or political goal. The government&rsquo;s armed gangs are roaming the streets, simply looking for vengeance.&rdquo;        

As the government pressed its crackdown on Hama, military and security forces appeared to prepare for another assault on Deir al-Zour, a city in eastern Syria knitted by the loyalties of extended clans where protests had gathered force for the past month. Those forces shelled the city on Thursday night into Friday morning, residents said.        

An activist in Deir al-Zour who gave his name as Tarik said that thousands of soldiers and hundreds of tanks and armored vehicles were trying to divide the city into smaller parts, a tactic the military has used elsewhere. Protesters still gathered in some squares, he said.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re trying to block the roads,&rdquo; said another resident, a grocer who gave his name as Mohammed. He put the numbers of protesters on Friday in the tens of thousands and said the demonstrators were chanting, &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want the army inside the cities.&rdquo;        

Some residents, also reached by telephone, reported shortages of food and water.        

Reports of defections have abounded for weeks now, especially in Deir al-Zour, but they seem too small to threaten Mr. Assad&rsquo;s hold on the security apparatus.        
Nada Bakri reported from Beirut, and Anthony Shadid from Cairo. Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
