
BAGHDAD &mdash; Deadly attacks against religious pilgrims and members of Iraq&rsquo;s security forces continued on Monday, including three car bombings around the city of Karbala, where as many as 10 million marchers are expected to travel in observance of one of the most sacred holidays on the Shiite Muslim calendar.        

A roadside bomb in Baghdad&rsquo;s Shula neighborhood wounded another five marchers.        

The attacks on pilgrims, which began with two nearly simultaneous blasts in the early morning hours, killed as many as 30 and wounded more than 100.        

The blasts raised the tally of Shiite marchers killed in the last week to as high as 85.        

The Iraqi authorities provided disparate accounts of the times of the attacks and the numbers of killed and wounded. Initial accounts ranged from as few as 10 deaths to as many as 30. Casualty figures often change in the hours and days after an attack as more information comes to light.        

No group has claimed responsibility for the attacks.        

As with other recent attacks, the bombs set off a flurry of theories and recriminations. Some Iraqis speculated they were meant to undermine confidence in security before the Arab League summit meeting scheduled in Baghdad for March. Others thought they might be the work of foreigners or local people, meant to discredit the police or done with the complicity of security forces.        

&ldquo;It is clear that the Baath and Al Qaeda are working together on these explosions,&rdquo; said Nusaif al-Khatab, deputy head of the Karbala provincial council, referring to Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s former ruling party.        

American and Iraqi security forces have regularly reported discovering collaborations between former Baathists and Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, a Sunni extremist group, though the two groups are radically different in their orientations and goals. Recently Lt. Gen. Robert W. Cone, second in command of American forces in Iraq, said he had seen little evidence of such collaboration, though some Baathists might work for Al Qaeda for money.        

As with the attacks on Christians late last year, the bombs elicited statements of martyrdom from some members of the group attacked, in this case Shiites. The pilgrimage to Karbala commemorates the martyrdom of Imam Hussein ibn Ali, grandson of the Prophet Muhammad, in the seventh century.        

&ldquo;We learn from our imam and say we will be oppressed and not oppressors,&rdquo; said Ahmed Hashim, 27, a lawyer who marched from Baghdad to Karbala, about 55 miles, in two days.        

He said that the attacks were meant not just to kill pilgrims, but also to start a religious war. &ldquo;And they are sending a message to say that this government is not qualified to control,&rdquo; he said. But like other marchers, he said he was only more determined in the face of violence.        

&ldquo;This will only increase our numbers to visit the love of our life, our imam,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It has been so many years and we never stopped, so they will be stupid if they think that they can stop us now.&rdquo;        

Iraq, which was a distinctively secular society until the late years of Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s rule, has in the last decade followed the rest of the region in becoming more religious, with more religious practice and more religious violence.        

Mr. Hussein, a Sunni, banned pilgrimages and other public observances by the country&rsquo;s Shiite majority. Since the fall of his government in 2003, the marches have become a show of strength for Shiites and a target for attacks.        

There were also multiple attacks on lawmakers and members of the security forces on Monday, including an unsuccessful assassination attempt against the governor of Salahuddin Province, north of Baghdad.        

In the capital, attackers using guns with silencers &mdash; an increasingly common weapon of choice &mdash; killed an officer assigned to protect embassies. In Kirkuk, an area disputed by Arab and Kurdish partisans, two men stabbed a police officer, who was evacuated to a nearby hospital.        

South of Kirkuk, in the village of Humera, a dawn ambush killed a leader of the Sunni Awakening, the government-backed militia credited with helping to reduce violence in Iraq, according to a police official in Taza.        

A roadside bomb killed Brig. Gen. Samer Hassan Saleh near his home in Baghdad.        

No one claimed responsibility for the attacks on officials or security force members, but on Monday the Islamic State of Iraq, a Sunni extremist group affiliated with Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, took responsibility on its Web site for attacks against security forces last week in Tikrit and Diyala that killed dozens.        

The Web site said the group wanted to kill &ldquo;stupid apostate policemen,&rdquo; who were trying &ldquo;to turn the Sunni places into Shiite.&rdquo;        
Iraqi employees of The New York Times contributed reporting from Hilla, Kirkuk and Samarra.
