
ATHENS &mdash; The president of Cyprus, Demetris Christofias, shuffled his cabinet on Friday, but he failed to attract members of the opposition whose support is needed to impose crucial austerity measures.        

The political and economic crisis is raising fears that Cyprus will become the next country to seek a bailout from the European Union and is undermining peace talks mediated by the United Nations aimed at reunifying the island, which has been divided since a Turkish invasion in 1974 that was prompted by a coup engineered by Greece.        

The country&rsquo;s problems have been driven in part by its exposure to the shattered Greek economy; Cyprus&rsquo;s banks hold about $7.1 billion in Greek debt. But the troubles worsened in recent weeks after an explosion at a munitions dump knocked out a major power plant, forcing the authorities to import power and dampening hopes for economic growth. Three major credit rating agencies have downgraded the country&rsquo;s debt ratings in recent months.        

Mr. Christofias&rsquo;s ability to address the cascading problems was dealt a serious blow this week when the junior partner in the government, the centrist DIKO party, quit over disagreements over how to handle the economic woes and the peace talks, leaving his party with just 19 seats in the country&rsquo;s 56-seat Parliament.        

Because the country adheres to a presidential system, Mr. Christofias&rsquo;s position is not threatened, though opinion polls show his popularity plummeting and protesters frequently gather outside his Nicosia residence. But he will need to persuade the Parliament to support draft austerity measures, chiefly cuts to public spending and tax increases, announced July 1.        

&ldquo;Constitutionally, the government is viable but practically it can&rsquo;t rule, it will need to bargain with five opposition parties on each piece of legislation it brings to Parliament,&rdquo; said Victor Roudometof, an associate professor of sociology at the University of Cyprus. &ldquo;He can&rsquo;t do it on his own &mdash; it&rsquo;s mission impossible.&rdquo;        

In the shuffle, many of the ministers in the 11-member cabinet kept their posts. The most important change was the naming of a new finance minister, Kikis Kazamias, a former member of the European Court of Auditors, following hours of negotiations. Mr. Kazamias is broadly regarded as a good choice for the job in good part because he is with the ruling Communist-rooted party, which is expected to help in talks with trade unions over planned public sector cuts. His European Union experience is also considered a plus.        

But hopes that the president could use cabinet appointments to secure more support from opposition parties for economic change fell flat despite several overtures to candidates in other parties.        

Mr. Roudometof suggested that many opposition members may have refused overtures to create distance from the government as campaigning for the next presidential election is set to begin soon.        

In many ways, the troubles in tiny Cyprus are nowhere near as destabilizing for Europe as those besetting Greece, Italy and others. The Cypriot economy accounts for just 0.2 percent of the euro zone economy.        

But the need for any bailout, however small, could add to a sense that Europe&rsquo;s economic problems are gaining speed.        

The island nation also has an outsize strategic significance. The outcome of peace talks will help determine whether Turkey, currently the only country that recognizes the Turkish-Cypriot government in the island&rsquo;s north, can join the European Union. Analysts say the newly formed government has little time to get backing for the economic changes many economists say are needed to prevent freefall. The draft plan announced July 1 lacks details that the government will need to work out with Parliament before the plan can be implemented.        

Last month Athanasios Orphanides, the central bank governor and a member of the European Central Bank&rsquo;s governing council, issued a starkly worded warning that Cyprus might be forced to seek a bailout &mdash; following the example of Greece, Portugal and Ireland &mdash; if planned spending cuts were not carried out quickly.        

And earlier this week, the island&rsquo;s biggest lender, the Bank of Cyprus, also called for &ldquo;immediate and effective action&rdquo; to avert the need for foreign support after official figures showed the budget deficit for the first half of this year had shot up to 3.47 percent of gross domestic product from 1.89 percent in the same period last year. The furor prompted the government in Nicosia to insist that its financing needs are covered until December.        

&ldquo;We have not seen this mix of economic, political and social upheaval since the Turkish invasion of 1974,&rdquo; said John Sitilides, who runs the State Department&rsquo;s professional development program for United States diplomats in Greece and Cyprus. &ldquo;It is a potent brew.&rdquo;        
