
JERUSALEM &mdash; The tent protest movement dominating Israel for three weeks focuses on the cost of living but is really about something deeper &mdash; the nature of the country&rsquo;s social contract. Many Israelis feel that their sacrifices are not being repaid.        

Israel&rsquo;s majority Jewish citizens feel they have suppressed their individual needs for the perceived good of the community over the course of many wars. Indeed, the recent protest movement has a recent precedent: the tent-based demonstration of the family of Staff Sgt. Gilad Shalit, abducted by Hamas and held in Gaza for the past five years. Sergeant Shalit has been one of the few points of collective yearning and accord in an often fractured society, and the protests reflect a belief &mdash; rightly or wrongly &mdash; that the government has not done all it can to gain his release.        

Yet the frustration runs deeper. The shift from state-dominated quasi socialism to markets and privatization &mdash; a shift that arguably saved the country from economic collapse in the 1980s &mdash; has been accompanied by some sense of loss of community, spiking prices and the accumulation of great wealth in a few hands.        

As with the Shalit movement, the current wave of protests over the cost of housing and basic goods stems partly from the feeling that the government stopped doing all it could and should for average citizens &mdash; making sure they were well housed and fed &mdash; and that the collective vision that animated Israel is being lost to a world of global capitalism and runaway individualism.        

&ldquo;The protest washing over Israel&rsquo;s streets and squares today has long ceased to be merely a protest over housing distress,&rdquo; wrote Israel&rsquo;s most respected author, Amos Oz, in a front-page essay this week in the newspaper Haaretz. &ldquo;The heart of this protest is the affront and outrage over the government&rsquo;s indifference to the people&rsquo;s suffering, the double standard against the working population and the destruction of social solidarity.&rdquo;        

Mr. Oz added that &ldquo;the first thing these demonstrators are saying, even before &lsquo;social justice&rsquo; and &lsquo;down with the government,&rsquo; is: &lsquo;we are brethren.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

All modern democracies seek to balance collective will and individualism, the force of markets and the power of the state. And every government is accused by its opponents of having abandoned core national values. But in Israel the debate seems more freighted. This is a small and intensely personal state born only decades ago in conflict.        

More than most countries, Israel seeks a lyrical narrative about itself stemming from notions of history, divinity and collective redemption. Writers and poets have therefore long held an honored place in public dialogue, and it is noteworthy that Mr. Oz and two other writers, David Grossman and Meir Shalev, are suddenly back with high public profiles after several years of being seen as politically pass&eacute;.        

The writers come from the political left, which has been in steep decline over failed Middle East peace efforts, but the kinds of arguments they tend to make about Israeli society &mdash; invoking its early years and larger purposes &mdash; are once again being sought out.        

Mr. Grossman was on the front page of the biggest-selling newspaper, Yediot Aharonot, on Friday, saying that last Saturday night he joined protesters in Jerusalem &mdash; some 150,000 people took part across the country &mdash; and that at first he felt discomfort over playing the role of a member of the revolutionary masses.        

Then he wrote: &ldquo;But after a few steps something happens, gets into the blood. The rhythm, the movement, the togetherness. Not a threatening, faceless &lsquo;unity,&rsquo; but mosaic-like and messy, like a family, with a strong feeling of &mdash; here we are, doing the right thing. And then the shock comes &mdash; where were we up to now? How did we let this happen?&rdquo;        

An entire industry is arising in Israel seeking to interpret what is happening on the streets. If the high cost of housing could be reduced or the prices of basic goods slashed through price controls, would the protesters go home? Are they a leftist movement in disguise? Is their real aim to shut down West Bank settlements?        

Sallai Meridor, who was ambassador to Washington and chairman of the Jewish Agency for Israel, said he was put in mind of a biblical proverb, &ldquo;Where there is no vision, the people cast off restraint.&rdquo; Mr. Meridor meant that the country&rsquo;s leadership seemed unable to provide a sufficient sense of collective purpose and that people had taken to the streets without clear goals.        

He pointed to developments others have noted: the stalled Middle East peace process, economic support for the ultra-Orthodox, the enormous wealth that seems not to be filtering down to average people, and the feeling by some protest leaders that secular, educated urban dwellers had lost their elite status as the country moved to the right and became more religious.        

But Mr. Meridor also suggested that the rise in the past decade of yearlong leadership institutes attended by thousands of top high school graduates before their army service might be partly responsible for the rise of a generation of young leaders who had set up the tent camps.        

&ldquo;They&rsquo;ve been trained, and now they feel the guts and the power to get up and say something about the direction of the country,&rdquo; he said.        

Others are also struck by the age of the protest leaders in a country that has tended to recycle the same political leadership decade after decade.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t care what they advocate; I am just thrilled to see the educated young rising up and in the streets and involved in reshaping this society,&rdquo; said Yael, a Tel Aviv grandmother of five who said her work prevented her from having her last name published.        

With another large demonstration planned for Saturday night in Tel Aviv, the future of the protest movement remained an open question. The sense of unity was already cracking as politics came into the open.        

Martin Sherman, a right-wing columnist for The Jerusalem Post, argued on Friday that the easy way to solve Israel&rsquo;s housing crisis was to build more West Bank settlements because the settlement construction freeze last year caused the crisis.        

The protesters tend to argue the opposite: the investment in West Bank settlements has reduced building in Israel proper and a shift is needed. That view, Mr. Sherman argued, exposed the movement&rsquo;s real nature. &ldquo;Genuine nonpolitical social protest?&rdquo; he concluded. &ldquo;Give me a break!&rdquo;        
