
MEXICO CITY &mdash; Cuba&rsquo;s highest court on Friday upheld a 15-year prison sentence for Alan Gross, an American contractor charged with crimes against the Cuban state for distributing satellite telephone equipment to Jewish groups in Havana.        

The ruling leaves Mr. Gross, 62, without another opportunity for appeal. He has already spent a year and a half in a Cuban prison, bruising relations with the United States, which has requested his release. Mr. Gross&rsquo;s lawyers say his only hope now is clemency.        

&ldquo;While we are not surprised, we are extremely disappointed with today&rsquo;s ruling,&rdquo; said Peter J. Kahn, Mr. Gross&rsquo;s American lawyer. He added that Mr. Gross&rsquo;s family &ldquo;remains hopeful that there continues to be room for a diplomatic resolution.&rdquo;        

Analysts said a release from the Cuban courts was never likely, in part because Mr. Gross, a technology consultant from Maryland, has become caught up in a longstanding dispute between the highest levels of the American and Cuban governments.        

He had been sent to Cuba as part of a semicovert United States Agency for International Development program that has been supported for years by conservative Cuban-American exiles, and thus hated by Cuban officials, who see such programs as an affront to sovereignty. Since he was detained in December 2009 after being caught trying to hand out satellite telephone equipment that provides access to the Internet &mdash; which the Cuban government tightly controls &mdash; he has been held up as an example by both sides.        

Cuban authorities have focused less on what he did than on their contention that he was part of a well-financed American conspiracy to &ldquo;subvert Cuban constitutional order.&rdquo; Mr. Gross&rsquo;s supporters in turn have used his case to highlight Cuba&rsquo;s limits on freedom, as they did again on Friday.        

&ldquo;Mr. Gross&rsquo;s unjust sentence is the latest example of everything that is wrong with the Castro regime,&rdquo; said Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, whose parents are Cuban exiles. &ldquo;For every Alan Gross, there are many more Cubans being incarcerated, harassed and repressed for simply yearning to be free.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gross&rsquo;s lawyers have been more conciliatory &mdash; emphasizing that he has lost 100 pounds in prison, by his own estimation, and that several of his close relatives are ill. Philip Peters, an analyst with the Lexington Institute, a research and policy group, said that if there was a silver lining in Friday&rsquo;s decision, it would be that it cleared the way for a high-level discussion about a release on humanitarian grounds.        

&ldquo;The real issue is political,&rdquo; Mr. Peters said, &ldquo;and needs to be addressed not in courts, but in diplomatic talks.&rdquo;        
