
LONDON        

GREETING guests in his office beside the Thames, a short stroll from the House of Commons, Ed Miliband plunges into an improbable topic for a British politician: the Boston Red Sox, their current battle with the Yankees at the top of the standings and happy days, stretching back to his boyhood as the son of a visiting professor, spent high in the bleachers at Fenway Park.        

&ldquo;Baseball is definitely high on the list&rdquo; of things he admires about America, Mr. Miliband, the Labour Party leader, said, along with &ldquo;the sense of optimism and the sense of possibility.&rdquo; Beyond those, he said, there is the sense of America being less of a &ldquo;closed society,&rdquo; and &ldquo;less of a class-bound country,&rdquo; as well as a tradition among American politicians and reporters of keeping &ldquo;a bit more distance&rdquo; from each other than is common in the cozy world of Westminster.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve always felt my home is in Britain, but I love being in America,&rdquo; Mr. Miliband said.        

It is rare for a British politician, particularly one with roots in the traditional, leftist wing of the Labour Party like Mr. Miliband, to speak with such unguarded enthusiasm of the United States, particularly in ways that make for unflattering comparisons with Britain. But it is the House of Commons&rsquo; summer recess, the end of the first parliamentary term since Mr. Miliband was elected leader of the Labour Party last fall, and his admiration for American civics is more than a graceful nod to American visitors. At least for now, it is a measure of a new spirit engendered by the turmoil over what seems to have been a wave of criminality in British tabloid newsrooms, the biggest scandal of its kind to hit Britain in 50 years.        

The uproar over The News of the World and its ramifications for Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s media empire, as well as for rival newspapers that have been implicated in the phone hacking and other abuses, have changed much in Britain. The scandal has also raised difficult, career-threatening questions for Prime Minister David Cameron and has led to a stunning reversal in fortunes for the 41-year-old Mr. Miliband, who as recently as last spring appeared to be sinking fast as Labour&rsquo;s new helmsman.        

For months, he had been outpointed at almost every turn in the Commons by Mr. Cameron, a politician of apparently superior debating and presentational skills, and gifted with what seemed an easy target in Mr. Miliband and, his critics said, his often mirthless, lecturing style.        

Before the Murdoch scandal, there were bets as to how long Mr. Miliband could last, and how long, with him at the helm, Labour would be condemned to serving in the opposition. It was a commonplace among British commentators to say that Labour had made a poor choice in selecting Mr. Miliband for its leader over his older and more centrist brother, David, a former foreign secretary, and in allowing the party&rsquo;s choice to be dictated by a union bloc vote.        

No more. As the phone hacking scandal unfolded last month, Mr. Miliband seemed to find his voice, looking beyond the abuses that took root in the cozy world of Britain&rsquo;s press, politicians and the police and casting the abuses as symptomatic of a deep moral malaise that has eroded the fabric of British society. &ldquo;This is about what kind of country you want to live in,&rdquo; he said in an interview in his office as the parliamentary session ended. &ldquo;For me, this goes to quite deep issues about the character of Britain, and where we are as a country, and what it says, in a way, about all of us.&rdquo;        

MR. MILIBAND has the advantage of not having to account, as Mr. Cameron does, for his awkward personal links to the Murdoch family and top executives in its media empire, including Rebekah Brooks, the chief of its British publishing arm, News International, and the former editor of The News of the World, Andy Coulson, whom Mr. Cameron hired as his media chief until the pressures of the police inquiry prompted him to resign.        

But Mr. Miliband concedes that Labour was itself slow to confront the Murdochs. Shortly before the scandal broke in full force, he attended Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s summer party in London, for years one of the hottest tickets in town, and, by the Labour leader&rsquo;s own admission, failed to broach the revelations that were already in the public domain about the phone hacking.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;It&rsquo;s quite hard to go to someone&rsquo;s party and say, &lsquo;Now let me ask you about your phone hacking,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We were more reluctant to speak out than we should have been because of the power of News International.&rdquo; But now, he said, &ldquo;I think the spell has been broken,&rdquo; to the point that future Murdoch endorsements, in the wake of the scandal, would be &ldquo;more double-edged,&rdquo; likely to hurt as much as to help politically.        

In describing the Murdoch scandal as a symptom of a wider &ldquo;shirking of responsibility&rdquo; in Britain &mdash; extending in his vision from multimillionaire bankers who drove the country to the brink of financial disaster in the years before 2008 to politicians milking expense accounts and a welfare-dependent underclass with some people who shun work while living off public benefits &mdash; Mr. Miliband finds an elevating contrast in the United States.        

THE younger son of Ralph Miliband, a prominent Marxist intellectual, the Labour leader had his first exposure to America as a child, when his father taught at Brandeis University and the City University of New York. At 18, before entering Oxford, he worked as an intern at The Nation magazine and for &ldquo;The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour&rdquo; in New York. In 2002, on a 16-month sabbatical from a high-ranking job as adviser to Gordon Brown, then Britain&rsquo;s chancellor of the Exchequer, he taught a course &mdash; entitled &ldquo;What&rsquo;s Left?&rdquo; &mdash; at Harvard.        

The history of his family, as Polish Jews who settled in Britain in refuge from the Holocaust, and with a maternal grandfather, David Kozak, who died at Auschwitz, has engendered a strong sense of gratitude and rootedness in Britain.        

But many of the lessons he sees as relevant to Britain in the light of recent events spring from his sense of America as a fundamentally more open and competitive society, antithetical to the clubbiness, class-consciousness and closed-door attitudes he sees as having wide tentacles here. His favorite president is Theodore Roosevelt, primarily for his no-holds-barred trust-busting.        

&ldquo;This is something that Teddy Roosevelt talked about a lot, how you deal with concentrations of power,&rdquo; Mr. Miliband said. &ldquo;My understanding of your laws is that you wouldn&rsquo;t allow the kind of cross-media ownership that Rupert Murdoch has here,&rdquo; with 40 percent of newspaper readership and, through his controlling share in British Sky Broadcasting, dominance of Britain&rsquo;s satellite television market. &ldquo;Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s scale of ownership is unhealthy for Britain, and one of the things that has changed in the last few weeks is that people are now willing to say that.&rdquo;        

As for his own political prospects, Mr. Miliband is cautious. &ldquo;The Westminster village is very much a black-and-white place. You&rsquo;re either doing disastrously or you&rsquo;re a hero,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The gap between triumph and disaster is extremely narrow.&rdquo;        

But after the plaudits he has received for his performance in the past month, was he confident Labour could win the next election, currently expected in 2015? &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve got a long way to go,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We lost an election just over a year ago, and our first task is to be a decent opposition.&rdquo;        

He added, &ldquo;But we also have to show people that we&rsquo;ve understood some of the reasons why they got rid of us in the first place.&rdquo;        
