
XIAHE, China &mdash; His name is on the lips of the ruddy-cheeked monks, the anxious hotel owners and the intrepid tourists who make their way to this isolated and starkly beautiful town in the mountains of Gansu Province: will he come to Xiahe, as unverified reports suggest, and how long will he stay?        

&ldquo;He&rdquo; is China&rsquo;s handpicked Panchen Lama, the second-most important religious figure in Tibetan Buddhism, and despite his formidable rank, his presence is not universally welcomed by the faithful in and around the white-wall Labrang Monastery that sprawls into a cavernous valley here.        

In recent weeks, as word has spread that he might be coming to study at the monastery, emotions have spiked, as have the numbers of police officers, both uniformed and in plain clothes, hoping to head off trouble in a place where ethnic Tibetans have been unafraid to express their enmity toward Chinese rule.        

&ldquo;Nobody wants him to come, and yet still he will come,&rdquo; said one 26-year-old monk. &ldquo;We feel powerless.&rdquo;        

The main problem is that this Panchen Lama, 21, is one of two young men with claims to the title. The one chosen by Communist Party officials in 1995, named Gyaltsen Norbu at birth, is often referred to by local residents as the &ldquo;Chinese Panchen Lama.&rdquo; The other is Gedhun Choekyi Nyima, who would now be 22, a herder&rsquo;s son who was anointed that same year by the Dalai Lama, the exiled Tibetan leader.        

Most Tibetans are still loyal to the memory of Gedhun Choekyi Nyima, even if he has been missing since Chinese authorities swept him and his family into &ldquo;protective custody&rdquo; more than 16 years ago.        

&ldquo;We just hope he is still alive,&rdquo; said Tsering Woeser, a Tibetan essayist and blogger who noted that Gedhun Choekyi Nyima&rsquo;s visage, frozen as a 5-year-old, hangs in many homes and temples. &ldquo;We are waiting for him.&rdquo;        

As Gyaltsen Norbu moves from adolescence to adulthood, Chinese authorities are facing a quandary over how to burnish his bona fides: his standing will continue to suffer if he remains apart from Tibetan monks and the faithful, but officials risk inflaming passions by foisting him on a community that remains deeply suspicious.        

In recent years, the Communist Party has tried other means to raise his profile. They named him vice president of the state-run Buddhist association and appointed him to the Chinese People&rsquo;s Political Consultative Conference, an advisory body that meets annually in Beijing.        

But so far most of his public statements have left Tibetans unimpressed. In one typically stolid remark last March, he said, &ldquo;We live in a society governed by law, while the religious practices fall into the category of social activity; therefore, only by administration according to law can we ensure a stable and harmonious development of religious affairs.&rdquo;        

The government bureaucrats who oversee Tibetan affairs have come to the conclusion, one rooted in history, that only a significant stint in a prominent monastery can bolster the Panchen Lama&rsquo;s religious credentials, according to scholars and local religious figures.        

&ldquo;The Tibetans respect good Buddhist practice and accomplishment,&rdquo; Hu Shisheng, a researcher at the China Institute of Contemporary International Relations, said in a telephone interview from Lhasa, Tibet&rsquo;s capital.        

The government&rsquo;s struggle to legitimize the Panchen Lama among Tibetans foreshadows the deeper struggle Beijing will face upon the death of the Dalai Lama, when it has said it will name a successor. The Dalai Lama, 76, is still revered on the Tibetan plateau despite years of fierce propaganda that brands him as a troublemaking separatist, even as he insists that he is interested only in genuine autonomy for Tibetans.        

Although officially atheist, the Communist Party asserts that only it has the authority to pick top spiritual leaders, who, according to Tibetan theology, are reincarnated from deceased religious figures.        

A previous attempt to improve the Panchen Lama&rsquo;s religious standing in 1998 did not end well. After officials sought to pair the boy with the abbot of Kumbum, a revered monastery in Qinghai Province, the abbot, Arjia Rinpoche, fled China and sought asylum in the United States. &ldquo;It was a very difficult decision, but I did not want to be seen as a collaborator with the Chinese government,&rdquo; Arjia Rinpoche said by telephone from Indiana, where he now lives.        
Adam Century and Edy Yin contributed research.
