
This article is by 
Ray Rivera, 
Alissa J. Rubin and 
Thom Shanker.        

KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; In the deadliest day for American forces in the nearly decade-long war in Afghanistan, insurgents shot down a Chinook transport helicopter on Saturday, killing 30 Americans, including some Navy Seal commandos from the unit that killed Osama bin Laden, as well as 8 Afghans, American and Afghan officials said.        

The helicopter, on a night-raid mission in the Tangi Valley of Wardak Province, to the west of Kabul, was most likely brought down by a rocket-propelled grenade, one coalition official said.        

The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack, and they could hardly have found a more valuable target: American officials said that 22 of the dead were Navy Seal commandos, including members of Seal Team 6. Other commandos from that team conducted the raid in Abbottabad, Pakistan, that killed Bin Laden in May. The officials said that those who were killed Saturday were not involved in the Pakistan mission.        

Saturday&rsquo;s attack came during a surge of violence that has accompanied the beginning of a drawdown of American and NATO troops, and it showed how deeply entrenched the insurgency remains even far from its main strongholds in southern Afghanistan and along the Afghan-Pakistani border in the east. American soldiers had recently turned over the sole combat outpost in the Tangi Valley to Afghans.        

Gen. Abdul Qayum Baqizoy, the police chief of Wardak, said the attack occurred around 1 a.m. Saturday after an assault on a Taliban compound in the village of Jaw-e-Mekh Zareen in the Tangi Valley. The fighting lasted at least two hours, the general said.        

A spokesman for the Taliban, Zabiullah Mujahid, confirmed that insurgents had been gathering at the compound, adding that eight of them had been killed in the fighting.        

President Obama offered his condolences to the families of the Americans and Afghans who died in the attack. &ldquo;Their death is a re-minder of the extraordinary sacrifice made by the men and women of our military and their families,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said. President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan also offered his sympathies.        

Gen. John R. Allen, the commander of the international military mission in Afghanistan, said: &ldquo;All of those killed in this operation were true heroes who had already given so much in the defense of freedom. Their sacrifice will not be forgotten.&rdquo;        

The Tangi Valley traverses the border between Wardak and Logar Province, an area where security has worsened over the past two years, bringing the insurgency closer to the capital, Kabul. It is one of several inaccessible areas that have become havens for insurgents, according to operations and intelligence officers with the Fourth Brigade Combat Team, 10th Mountain Division, which patrols the area. The mountainous region, with its steeply pitched hillsides and arid shale, laced by small footpaths and byways, has long been an area that the Taliban have used to move between Logar and Wardak, local officials said.        

Officers at a forward operating base near the valley described Tangi as one of the most troubled areas in Logar and Wardak Provinces. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a lot happening in Tangi,&rdquo; said Capt. Kirstin Massey, 31, the assistant intelligence officer for Fourth Brigade Combat Team in an interview last week. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a stronghold for the Taliban.&rdquo;        

The fighters are entirely Afghans and almost all local residents, Captain Massey said, noting that &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t capture any fighters who are non-Afghans.&rdquo;        

The redoubts in these areas pose the kind of problems the military faced last year in similarly remote areas of Kunar Province, forcing commanders to weigh the mission&rsquo;s value given the cost in soldiers&rsquo; lives and dollars spent in places where the vast majority of the insurgents are local residents who resent both the NATO presence and the Afghan government.        

The dilemma is that if NATO military forces do not stay, the areas often quickly slip back under Taliban influence, if not outright control, and the Afghan National Security Forces do not have the ability yet to rout them.        

When the Fourth Brigade Combat Team handed over its only combat outpost in the Tangi Valley to Afghan security forces in April, the American commander for the area said that as troops began to withdraw, he wanted to focus his forces on troubled areas that had larger populations. But he pledged that coalition forces would continue to carry out raids there to stem insurgent activity.        
Ray Rivera and Alissa J. Rubin reported from Kabul, and Thom Shanker from Washington. Jack Healy, Abdul Waheed Wafa and Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul.
