
PORAK, Afghanistan &mdash; The devastating attack on an American helicopter in eastern Afghanistan over the weekend has heightened attention on the harsh reality that even now, at the height of the NATO troop presence and not far from Afghanistan&rsquo;s capital, large stretches of the country are perilous and heavily infiltrated by insurgents.        

Logar Province, which lies to the south of the capital, and Wardak Province, which lies to the west, are gateways to the capital, Kabul. Yet it was there, in a valley traversing the two provinces, that insurgents shot down a Chinook helicopter in the early hours of Saturday morning, killing 30 Americans, including 22 members of an elite Navy Seal team, 7 Afghan commandos and an interpreter.        

Both provinces, much like Kunar and Nangarhar in the east, have become increasingly insecure even as NATO has stepped up its troop numbers nationwide.        

&ldquo;It was not as bad in Logar two years back, but recently it has deteriorated dramatically,&rdquo; said Nafisa Hejran, a member of the Logar Provincial Council, who two weeks ago received a death threat from insurgents telling her to quit her job. She said most members of the provincial council in Logar no longer attended council meetings either because the journey from their homes was dangerous or they had nowhere safe to stay once they arrived.        

&ldquo;The Taliban are setting up checkpoints on the main road, searching peoples&rsquo; pockets for ID cards and documents that indicate they work either for Afghan government or the international forces,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;If they find something, then they behead the person on the spot to create fear and terror among the people.&rdquo;        

The attack on the helicopter was a reminder of the insurgency&rsquo;s ability to entrench itself almost anywhere that the Afghan government is weak, absent or hated for its corruption. Despite all the increases in NATO forces, those troops cannot assert themselves in every village and valley, and too often when they do, their night raids and intrusions into peoples homes stir up resentment, said a number of people interviewed in Logar in the past week.        

&ldquo;The reason the security situation began to deteriorate is that the international forces were not paying attention to the customs and traditions of the people,&rdquo; said Abdul Hakim Suleiman Khail, 51, a member of the Logar provincial council. &ldquo;They were doing night raids, and since they don&rsquo;t know the area well they are mistreating the people, which increased the gap between the government and the people; and they were detaining innocent people.&rdquo;        

He added that in his native Charkh district, which he said was so violent that 20 percent to 30 percent of the residents have fled, &ldquo;the international forces say they are there to help us, but they are there only to endanger our lives and destroy our property.&rdquo;        

He noted that an eminent Charkh family of more than 300 people had to leave their ancestral village because of cross-fire. The Americans then destroyed their home so the Taliban would not use it. The family has yet to be compensated, said Nasir Ahmad Yusufzai, the clan elder, who now lives in Kabul.        

Afghan government officials, American military officers, and residents in Logar and Wardak repeatedly said that several districts in both provinces &mdash; including Wardak Province&rsquo;s Saydabad district, where the helicopter went down &mdash; were no longer under government control, except in the district centers. Adolescent girls cannot attend school in many areas, and attacks are routine.        

In a June 27 report on the rising insurgency around Kabul, the International Crisis Group described insurgents as having &ldquo;a stronger hold&rdquo; in&nbsp; Logar, Wardak and Ghazni than in any other provinces around the capital. It also noted the pervasiveness of Taliban courts in Wardak, which essentially crowd out the government&rsquo;s judicial function.        

Local officials are loath to discuss the depth of the problem and insist that the situation is bad primarily because American and Afghan forces have searched out the insurgents in their mountain redoubts for the first time, provoking them into striking back.        

&ldquo;There are fewer Taliban this year, but they are more active,&rdquo; said Logar&rsquo;s deputy governor, Shuja Oudins.        
Sangar Rahimi and Ray Rivera contributed reporting from Kabul, Afghanistan.
