
DUBAI, United Arab Emirates (AP) &mdash; Two former lawmakers from Bahrain&rsquo;s Shiite opposition were freed from jail on Sunday with several others who were arrested in the wake of widespread antigovernment protests.        

Their release appears aimed at diffusing tensions in Bahrain, which is home to the United States Navy&rsquo;s Fifth Fleet, Washington&rsquo;s main counterweight to Iran&rsquo;s influence in the Persian Gulf.        

The move also comes after Bahrain&rsquo;s king accepted a series of political reforms drawn up by a government-sanctioned panel created to address grievances that have emerged during the protests.        

The lawmakers, Jawad Fairooz and Matar Matar, were arrested in May on antistate security charges. They still face trial and have vowed to continue pushing for a greater voice in politics.        

Both are members of Bahrain&rsquo;s largest Shiite party, Wefaq. They and the rest of the Wefaq bloc in Parliament resigned in February after a government crackdown on Shiite-led protests that was inspired by uprisings elsewhere in the Arab world.        

Shiites account for about 70 percent of the kingdom&rsquo;s population but say they are discriminated against by the Sunni monarchy.        

Also set free on Sunday was Mohammed al-Tajir, a human rights lawyer who has defended a number of activists. He was taken into custody in April.        

The official Bahrain News Agency quoted the attorney general as saying that former lawmakers, a lawyer and an unspecified number of other detainees had been ordered released, but it did not identify them by name. It said the detainees were freed because the time they spent in custody might equal the sentence they would receive after trial.        

The government crushed protests by imposing a series of emergency laws, and it had the help of troops from neighboring countries. Activists and rights groups say at least 32 people were killed during the unrest earlier this year.        

The emergency laws were lifted in June, but activists say riot police officers use sound bombs and tear gas nightly to confront young protesters.        
