
This article was reported by  Jonathan Ansfield,  Michael Wines and  Sharon LaFraniere and written by Mr. Wines.         

BEIJING &mdash; China&rsquo;s prime minister, Wen Jiabao, stood amid funerary wreaths in Wenzhou, near where a high-speed train accident claimed 40 lives late last month, and pledged an &ldquo;open and transparent&rdquo; government inquiry into the disaster. &ldquo;The key,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;is whether the people can get the truth.&rdquo;        

The next day, censors silenced the news media&rsquo;s dogged reporting on railway negligence and corruption, then started censoring posts on microblogs that had stoked outrage over the crash.        

By last week, the government inquiry itself was accused of being rigged, run by a panel that included the Railways Ministry&rsquo;s second in command and loyalist experts.        

Such indignities are not new. As Mr. Wen enters the twilight of a decade as China&rsquo;s third-ranked leader, he appears to be struggling to remain relevant in a political system that covets his benevolent public image but has little use for his ideas.        

The leading spokesman for what passes for political liberalism in China, Mr. Wen is by most accounts ideologically isolated on the Communist Party&rsquo;s nine-member Politburo standing committee. More than once, his views have been rebuffed, tacitly or openly, in party organs. There are tantalizing hints of rifts with his boss, President Hu Jintao.        

&ldquo;Grandpa Wen,&rdquo; who shares the common man&rsquo;s pain and champions his interests, is easily China&rsquo;s most popular politician. But internally, as Communist Party hard-liners strengthen their control, his advocacy of political reform has increasingly sapped his influence.        

He has become such a high-risk figure, one official news media editor says, that a conservative-led state radio network last year balked at his offer of an exclusive exchange with listeners on the air. Even liberals who support Mr. Wen&rsquo;s reformist oratory find themselves disillusioned by his failure to gain traction within the leadership.        

&ldquo;When Wen became premier eight years ago, people had high hopes because his speeches always leave people hopeful,&rdquo; said He Weifang, a liberal Beijing legal scholar. &ldquo;But now it has been eight years. His term is coming to an end. It&rsquo;s doubtful whether he genuinely has the strong will to reform, because it doesn&rsquo;t seem he has taken enough convincing actions to resist the conservatives.&rdquo;        

Mr. Wen has never been seen as especially strong. Some scholars of China&rsquo;s leadership say his unspecific calls for democracy and people power actually fit comfortably within a Communist Party committed to absolute rule.        

Others question his maverick credentials, calling him less a reformer than the good cop in a bad-cop system. &ldquo;Wen&rsquo;s become the human face of the administration, and he&rsquo;s been very effective,&rdquo; said Susan Shirk, a longtime China expert at the University of California, San Diego. &ldquo;The other possibility is that Wen Jiabao has two faces. He advocates transparency in his public statements, but only insofar as it doesn&rsquo;t threaten the authority of the party.&rdquo;        

But in a mostly faceless and closed-mouth leadership, no one strains so publicly at his tethers &mdash; or suffers as many rebuffs &mdash; as Mr. Wen. That pattern has intensified as jockeying begins for next year&rsquo;s choices of a new politburo and the next generation of China&rsquo;s top leaders.        

The Wenzhou episode is illustrative. One political analyst close to senior officials said Mr. Wen had not planned to visit the disaster scene; a deputy prime minister who oversees work safety, Zhang Dejiang, was to handle the matter.        

But with Mr. Zhang in charge, backhoes crushed and buried a wrecked train car at the site &mdash; and provoked a national outcry from bloggers who accused the government of a cover-up. Mr. Wen, then in a People&rsquo;s Liberation Army hospital and limited to occasional appearances, was sent to Wenzhou to soothe the masses.        

Mr. Wen pointedly mentioned that he had been sick &mdash; a rare disclosure for a leader &mdash; then delivered a call for truth, justice and an inquiry that was open at &ldquo;every step&rdquo; to public supervision. The official state media took Mr. Wen&rsquo;s broadside as a pass to keep digging into Railways Ministry incompetence.        
Staff of the Beijing bureau of The New York Times contributed research.
