
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The Syrian military defied growing condemnation and initiated another assault on the country&rsquo;s most restive locales on Sunday, deploying dozens of tanks and armored vehicles into parts of a city in eastern Syria that it had long feared provoking, activists and residents said. Dozens were killed, they said, and thousands had fled the city.        

The attack before dawn on the eastern city, Deir al-Zour, came exactly a week after Syrian forces attacked Hama, a city in central Syria that had largely wrested itself from government control this summer. Like Hama, Deir al-Zour, in Syria&rsquo;s oil- and gas-producing region, had been the scene of mass protests, with hundreds of thousands in the streets. But the military, wary of the city&rsquo;s powerful and well-armed extended clans, had mostly stayed on the outskirts.        

Together, the two cities &mdash; Syria&rsquo;s fourth and fifth largest &mdash; have been the most defiant in a five-month uprising against four decades of rule by the Assad family. After a week of strong rebukes by a chorus of international voices, from the United Nations to the pope, the renewed assault confirmed what many saw as the determination of President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s government to keep power through violence.        

By the count of some human rights groups, more than 2,000 people have been killed in the crackdown so far.        

Other signs of pressure on the government have emerged, perhaps most importantly indications that the business elite in Damascus has begun preparing for the government&rsquo;s fall. That elite has long proved one of the most important pillars of the Syrian leadership, notably during the Islamist revolt in 1982.        

&ldquo;The regime is its own worst enemy, and it can&rsquo;t be saved from itself,&rdquo; said a Damascus-based analyst who asked to remain anonymous. &ldquo;It is ripe for collapse, but the question remains what will trigger it and when.&rdquo;        

Residents put the death toll in Deir al-Zour at 42, and one of them said a family of six trying to escape &mdash; a couple with four children &mdash; was among the dead. Activists said that many residents had left in recent days. A local man who gave his name as Maamoun said that pickup trucks packed with as many as 25 women and children each were fleeing down abandoned streets.        

He said there were shortages of fuel and bread. Other residents said that private hospitals had closed but that families were reluctant to take their wounded to government ones for fear they would be arrested. By evening, another resident said, Syrian forces had entered a traffic circle in the heart of the city once named Assad Square and now renamed Martyrs&rsquo; Square.        

&ldquo;The city has never witnessed a day like this,&rdquo; Maamoun said by telephone, with bursts of gunfire audible in the background.        

Over the weekend, calls mounted for restraint. The Arab League expressed &ldquo;growing concern&rdquo; on Sunday and called on the authorities to stop attacks on protesters. Pope Benedict XVI called Sunday for Mr. Assad to respond to the &ldquo;legitimate aspirations&rdquo; of Syria&rsquo;s people, and Turkey announced that it was sending its foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, to Damascus on Tuesday with a similar message.        

In a statement to Al Arabiya television on Monday, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia called the violence unacceptable and said that he was recalling the Saudi ambassador from Damascus.        

For weeks, Syrian activists had predicted that the Muslim holy month of Ramadan would bring an escalation of the uprising, as protesters gathered nightly in mosques, then organized demonstrations. Instead, the government has chosen the time for a full-scale assault on the cities that seemed most determined to throw off the yoke of the ubiquitous security forces.        

Both Deir al-Zour and Hama represent targets of repression that carry special risks in Syria.        

In 1982, Hama was the victim of one of the bloodiest moments in modern Middle East history, when the military crushed an Islamist revolt there and killed at least 10,000 people. The assault last week, in which more than 200 people were killed, inflamed sentiments across Syria.        

Deir al-Zour may prove no less vexing for the government, but for different reasons. Armed and fiercely independent, the extended clans there have ties to tribes across eastern Syria and western Iraq. In past days, some of their leaders had vowed to forgo peaceful protests and take up arms if forces attacked, although there were no reports on Sunday of government casualties.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria.
