
Yemen&rsquo;s embattled and wounded president has been discharged from the hospital where he was being treated in Saudi Arabia and has moved into a government residence there, Yemen&rsquo;s official SABA news agency reported Sunday.        

The president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, was severely wounded in a bomb attack in June but has refused to step down, despite six months of mass protests demanding his ouster.        

&ldquo;He left the hospital within the past 24 hours, but still needs to recuperate further before returning to Yemen,&rdquo; a Yemeni diplomat said, speaking on the condition on anonymity.        

Mr. Saleh has undergone a number of operations since a bomb exploded in the presidential mosque on June 3, forcing him and several other wounded high-ranking officials to travel to Saudi Arabia for medical treatment. The news agency also reported that Prime Minister Ali Mujawar had been released from the Saudi hospital.        

Even as Mr. Saleh has been hospitalized in Riyadh for more than two months, high-ranking officials and Saleh family members have maintained that he would return to the country as president. In a recent televised interview on state television, the foreign minister, Abu Bakr al-Qirbi, reiterated the governing party&rsquo;s position that political transition will only come via the &ldquo;ballot box,&rdquo; meaning presidential elections.        

However, the governing party&rsquo;s calls for early elections have gone nowhere, as the opposition leaders have been unwilling to cooperate with the government as long as Mr. Saleh remains president.        

Yemeni and Saudi officials confirmed that Mr. Saleh had left the hospital and that they were trying to arrange rehabilitation services. A Yemeni official said he was still not well enough to function as president, and there was no word on Sunday as to how long his treatment would take or when he might return to Yemen.        

Abdul-Ghani al-Iryani, a prominent Yemeni political analyst, said that Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s release from the hospital carries only &ldquo;minor significance,&rdquo; aside from possibly lifting the morale of his supporters who see his health is improving.        

That Mr. Saleh and those who surround him are still talking about political transition &ldquo;is very promising,&rdquo; Mr. Iryani said. The attack on the president &ldquo;made the political process even more necessary since Saleh is not in the country to conduct a war.&rdquo;        

Likewise, the opposition spokesman, Mohammed Qahtan, said that Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s release &ldquo;does not mean anything to us.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;There is a revolution against the president, against Ali Abdullah Saleh, and it will continue until his regime ends,&rdquo; Mr. Qahtan said.        

But the revolution has stalled, and so has the political process. Daily street protests are still held in cities throughout the country, even during this the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, calling for an end to the Saleh government, although little has changed since Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s departure to advance or diminish the rebel cause.        

The government, run by Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s relatives and appointees, remains largely intact if not in full control. A number of outlying provinces have fallen completely outside government authority, including into the hands of militants linked to Al Qaeda. Security has deteriorated across the country, and an economic crisis has made daily life a struggle for most Yemenis.        

Over the last few days, fighting broke out again in Sana between government forces and tribesmen loyal to the Ahmar family, Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s rivals, threatening a cease-fire that has held since early June. The cease-fire ended two weeks of conflict in which more than 100 people were killed and the northern district of the capital became a war zone.        

In the south, Islamic militants who took over Zinjibar, the capital of Abyan Province, released a lengthy video online last week of what they said was their attack on security forces in the deserted streets of the city. It was unclear when the video was shot.        

The militants, who call themselves Ansar Shariah, or supporters of Islamic law, have been suspected of having ties to Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the Yemeni branch of the international terrorist network.        

The video appeared to confirm that relationship, showing the militants raising a flag bearing the official logo of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. Some of the fighters have been reported to be foreign nationals, which also suggests the group is more than home-grown jihadis.        

The army, backed by local tribesmen, has been fighting the militants for months to try to regain the town. But there has been little, if any, change in control.        

Severe and deadly violence also continued in the central Yemeni city of Taiz and in Arhab, a region north of Sana, between opposition tribesmen and Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s Republican Guards. Dozens of people from both sides have been killed in the fighting, including some civilians.        

In a statement published online Saturday by local news media, the Arhab tribesmen threatened to attack Sana International Airport, which lies about 20 miles from Arhab.        

&ldquo;The barbaric aggression on our areas has reached its climax,&rdquo; the statement read. &ldquo;They used all kinds of weapons against us, tanks, artillery, missiles and finally aerial bombings.        

&ldquo;Therefore, we will strike the international airport of Sana&rsquo;a with all methods of war in retaliation for that aggression.&rdquo;        
Nasser Arrabyee and Yasser Alarami contributed reporting from Sana, Yemen, and Neil MacFarquhar from New York.
