
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Kuwait recalled their ambassadors from Damascus on Monday, joining a chorus of global criticism of Syria, as Syrian forces pressed ahead with President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s brutal crackdown on the most restive areas.        

The Saudi monarch, King Abdullah, called on Mr. Assad to stop the &ldquo;killing machine and end the bloodshed,&rdquo; a remarkably sharp rebuke from one of the region&rsquo;s most repressive countries, underscoring frustration with the rising death toll and the isolation of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government.        

The diplomatic moves came as Mr. Assad replaced his defense minister with the army&rsquo;s chief of staff, the Syrian state-run news agency said. The departure of Lt. Gen. Ali Habib, a longtime figure in the leadership who had served as defense minister since June 2009, marked one of the highest-level shakeups since the revolt began in March.        

The news agency said he was in poor health and his condition had &ldquo;deteriorated recently.&rdquo; His replacement was Gen. Dawoud Rajha. Mr. Assad&rsquo;s brother, Maher, and brother-in-law, Assef Shawkat, are thought to exercise power every bit as decisive as the defense minister&rsquo;s.        

Most Arab leaders have tried to tighten their grip on power after revolutions swept through Tunisia and Egypt. Saudi Arabia in particular has tried to protect the general status quo, splitting from Washington over American support for Arab uprisings, shielding other monarchies, and dispatching its armed forces to help crush an uprising this spring in Bahrain &mdash; which itself relentlessly cracked down on its opposition.        

But in a region where leaders have long proved reluctant to criticize on another, the Saudi statement suggests that the kingdom sees more potential turmoil if Mr. Assad stays than if he goes.        

Saudi-Syrian relations have long ebbed and flowed, particularly over competing policies in Syria&rsquo;s neighbor Lebanon, but ties had warmed somewhat before the Syrian uprising began.        

Addressing &ldquo;sister Syria,&rdquo; King Abdullah on Monday condemned the loss of lives and said that hope for the region would not come from &ldquo;the blood of innocent people.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stands before its historic responsibility toward her brothers, demanding the stoppage of the killing machine and bloodshed, and the use of reason before it is too late,&rdquo; the king said in a statement read on Saudi state television.        

Similar but less strongly worded statements have been made since Saturday by the Arab League and the Gulf Cooperation Council, which comprises Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. Bahrain and Kuwait withdrew their ambassadors after Saudi Arabia did so. Italy and Qatar called back their ambassadors earlier this summer.        

&ldquo;The velocity of the snowball is picking up heavily,&rdquo; said Hussein Shobokshi, a columnist and writer in the Saudi-owned newspaper, Asharq al-Awsat. He described Syria&rsquo;s isolation as so deep that &ldquo;the regime can&rsquo;t market its case anymore.&rdquo;        

Regarding the ouster of General Habib as defense minister, an American official said that while there have been low-level defections inside the Syrian military, there is no evidence that the shift came because he was moving against the Assad government. Instead, the official said it was most likely a result of President Assad&rsquo;s anger about the military&rsquo;s performance since the domestic crackdown began.        

&ldquo;There are indications that Assad isn&rsquo;t happy with the military&rsquo;s inability to control the internal security situation,&rdquo; said the official, speaking on ground rules of anonymity about American intelligence assessments.        

The Syrian government is known in the region for hunkering down in times of crisis and trying to rehabilitate itself after tension passes. Though the United States and European countries, along with Syria&rsquo;s Arab neighbors, have stopped short of demanding that Mr. Assad step down, he has never experienced the current level of isolation.        

Turkey, once an emerging ally, has grown increasingly critical, and is sending its foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, to Damascus on Tuesday to deliver what is expected to be a tough message. Even Russia, a close ally, has had harsh words, joining with other United Nations members to rebuke Syria.        
Hwaida Saad and Anthony Shadid contributed reporting from Beirut, and Mark Mazzetti from Washington.
