
MELBOURNE, Australia &mdash; The death toll from severe flooding in northeastern Australia rose to at least nine on Monday as the authorities airlifted supplies to communities facing raging waters that were expected to swell further over the next two days.        

One more person was reported missing and presumed dead, according to a spokeswoman for the police in the state of Queensland.        

The military flew supplies into Rockhampton, a town of about 75,000, as water from the Fitzroy River spilled into streets, public buildings and homes. The local airport and the main highway to the state capital of Brisbane were closed, according to a spokeswoman for the Queensland Police Service, forcing troops to fly into a nearby community and truck in fresh food, water and other supplies.        

By early Tuesday, only one road to the town of Rockhampton was still open, as a rising expanse of water submerged most of the roads in and out of town, the police said.        

Heavy rains began falling nearly two weeks ago as Cyclone Tasha crashed along the coast, drenching Queensland. At least 200,000 people in an area the size of France and Germany have been affected by the flooding, according to Paul Birch, senior hydrologist at the Bureau of Meteorology.        

While the rainfall has lessened, the authorities warned that the floodwaters would not peak until Tuesday or Wednesday.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re still getting warnings over thunderstorms, flash floods and hailstones,&rdquo; said a Queensland police spokeswoman. &ldquo;This is far from over.&rdquo;        

Emergency response authorities in Queensland said it could take months to recover from the floods. Prime Minister Julia Gillard extended emergency relief to communities affected by the waters, and she acknowledged that the damage from the floods might run into hundreds of millions of dollars.        

&ldquo;This is a major natural disaster, and recovery will take a significant amount of time,&rdquo; Ms. Gillard said at a news conference.        

The Queensland premier, Anna Bligh, called for an emergency cabinet meeting to be held Wednesday. &ldquo;As Queensland faces its toughest hour, the cabinet will meet to immediately begin the significant rebuilding process,&rdquo; she said.        

Queensland emergency officials, quoted by the local news media, said floodwaters in Rockhampton stood at roughly 30 feet and risked rising to levels not seen since 1918.        

More than 3,000 volunteers were helping at 17 evacuation centers across Queensland, police officials said. The police were regularly posting  information on social networking Web sites.        
Aubrey Belford reported from Melbourne, and Kevin Drew from Hong Kong.
