
A Ugandan court has dropped charges against an opposition politician, Kizza Besigye, who organized and led street protests against the government in the spring.        

A magistrate, George Watyekere, said that prosecutors had failed to make a case against Mr. Besigye, who has run for president three times, and that there was not enough evidence &ldquo;to require him to defend himself,&rdquo; a local newspaper, Daily Monitor, reported on Tuesday.        

After finishing a distant second to President Yoweri Museveni in an election in February, Mr. Besigye announced that he was going to walk to his office, rather than use his car, to protest rising commodity prices and corruption. He was initially joined by only a few fellow protesters, but Mr. Museveni&rsquo;s government responded with overwhelming force, locking up hundreds of opposition supporters and at times using tear gas and water cannons to disperse even small numbers of protesters. At least nine people were killed during the demonstrations.        

Fueled by anger over the government&rsquo;s repressive response, ever larger numbers of people joined the protests, and Mr. Besigye, once seen as an ineffective politician, saw his standing rise. And the government of Mr. Museveni, long viewed by the United States as a liberal ally, exhibited a draconian side.        

The government called Mr. Besigye&rsquo;s protests inflammatory politicking, and prosecutors charged him with a number of crimes, including rioting, incitement to violence and disobeying the orders of a traffic police officer. Prosecutors dropped the charge of incitement to violence last month. Mr. Besigye said the charges were trumped up.        

Before the presidential election, in which Mr. Museveni was re-elected to a fourth five-year term, Mr. Besigye had threatened Egyptian-style mass protests, and accusations of corruption and questionable government spending have polarized the political landscape.        

Uganda&rsquo;s economy has tumbled this year, with the local currency greatly depreciating, while food and oil prices have increased. The United Nations recently warned that the country could be the next to be threatened by the famine gripping the Horn of Africa.        
