
MANILA &mdash; Officials shut down a controversial art exhibition on Tuesday after a storm of public protest that included criticism from President Benigno S. Aquino III, who called the artwork offensive to the country&rsquo;s Christian majority.        

One of the artists whose work was on display at the Cultural Center of the Philippines, Mideo Cruz, criticized the action, saying in an interview that it would &ldquo;become a freedom of expression issue&rdquo; with far-reaching implications for artists and government-financed venues like the cultural center.        

The exhibit, which opened in June, had been scheduled to close Aug. 21. Critics called it an affront to Christianity in a country whose population of 94 million is predominantly Roman Catholic. Among the works on display was a wooden cross with a protruding penis.        

Although the cultural center&rsquo;s board cited vandalism and threats as the reasons for the closing, Mr. Aquino said on Tuesday that he had told board members that the exhibition was inappropriate for a center that relies on public financing.        

While he respected freedom of expression, the president said, that freedom is not absolute.        

The center&rsquo;s board said in a statement on Tuesday that it would &ldquo;continue to act as catalyst for free expression of Filipino artists&rdquo; but that it had &ldquo;reviewed its policies&rdquo; and that it was &ldquo;taking steps to enable its officers and staff to make more informed decisions in the future.&rdquo;        

The board did not give details about the threats, apart from pointing out that Mr. Cruz&rsquo;s installation was vandalized on Aug. 4 and that a couple tried to set it on fire. &ldquo;Subsequent hate mails and threats to members of the board intensified following this incident,&rdquo; it said.        

Karen Flores, head of the center&rsquo;s visual arts department, which organized the exhibit, said in a text message to artists and colleagues that the threats had come via text messages and e-mails. She warned Mr. Cruz &ldquo;to be extra careful.&rdquo;        

On Monday, Imelda Marcos, the country&rsquo;s former first lady, visited the exhibition and expressed her disgust at Mr. Cruz&rsquo;s work, which featured religious images and icons mixed with images of pop culture figures. In one part of the installation, a used condom was draped on a cross.        

Mrs. Marcos, who oversaw construction of the center during the rule of her husband, Ferdinand Marcos, said she had persuaded the board to close the exhibit.        

&ldquo;It was a shameful exhibit, especially since it was placed in the Cultural Center of the Philippines,&rdquo; Mrs. Marcos told reporters on Monday. &ldquo;We built that to be the sanctuary of the Filipino soul and a monument to the Filipino spirit.&rdquo;        

Mr. Cruz is known for his irreverent installations, which he says are meant to raise questions about the &ldquo;culture of idolatry&rdquo; in the Philippines. He began work on the installation, &ldquo;Poleteismo,&rdquo; in 2002, and it has been exhibited in various venues, including a Jesuit university.        

The controversy erupted several days ago when a television network broadcast a report that focused on the male genitals protruding out of the cross and on the condom.        
