
TOKYO &mdash; The Japanese government said Tuesday that it may lift an evacuation advisory for some areas near the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant as soon as next month, in what would be the first areas reopened since the nuclear accident in March.        

The easing has become possible because of success in stabilizing the three reactors at the plant that melted down after the magnitude-9 earthquake and huge tsunami on March 11, according to the Nuclear Emergency Response Headquarters. The organization, whose chairman is Prime Minister Naoto Kan, oversees the government&rsquo;s response to the disaster.        

The proposed lifting would be a largely symbolic gesture because it would cover areas that are 12 to 18 miles from the plant where the government had advised voluntary evacuations, but did not order people to evacuate. Residents are currently free to live in those areas, though about half of the estimated 58,000 residents are thought to have left.        

The lifting would not affect the government&rsquo;s compulsory evacuation orders for areas within 12 miles of the plant or farther away to its northwest, where radioactive materials spread after a series of explosions in the days after the earthquake. About 80,000 residents near the plant were forced to evacuate.        

Still, officials clearly hope that the move will lift spirits by signaling that Japan may finally be about to turn a corner and begin what looks to be a cleanup of radiation-contaminated regions that will last decades.        

The proposal could also face intense scrutiny, because the plant remains far from the so-called cold shutdown needed to bring it fully under control &mdash; something its operator, Tokyo Electric Power, hopes to achieve by early next year. Scientists have warned that the damaged reactors are still vulnerable in a large aftershock.        

On Tuesday, officials said radiation emissions had been reduced to a fraction of those in March. They also said new reactor cooling systems had proved reliable.        
