
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; President Bashar al-Assad of Syria rebuffed an appeal from Turkey on Tuesday to end the Syrian crackdown that has emerged as one of the bloodiest chapters in the Arab uprising and has plunged his country into its deepest isolation in years.        

Mr. Assad said in a statement after a six-hour meeting with Turkey&rsquo;s foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, that his government would press ahead with its fight against militant Islamists, the term the government has often used to describe the instigators of an uprising that began in March and has posed the gravest challenge to Mr. Assad&rsquo;s rule.        

Sana, Syria&rsquo;s state news agency, quoted Mr. Assad as telling Mr. Davutoglu that Damascus &ldquo;will not relent in pursuing the terrorist groups in order to protect the stability of the country and the security of the citizens.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;But it is also determined to continue reforms. And is open to any help offered by friendly and brotherly states,&rdquo; the statement published by Sana said.        

The Turkish foreign minister arrived in Syria on Tuesday morning to deliver a message that Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has summarized as Ankara&rsquo;s having &ldquo;run out of patience&rdquo; with a crackdown that has killed, by the count of some Syrian opposition groups, more than 2,000 people.        

Turkey, Syria&rsquo;s neighbor to the north, was an emerging ally before relations stumbled over Mr. Assad&rsquo;s crackdown, and its officials are still thought to retain leverage with Mr. Assad, who took power in 2000. By his own count, Mr. Davutoglu has visited Syria more than 60 times over the past eight years.        

&ldquo;Mr. Assad conveyed his own thoughts, and we shared our views for the bloodshed to stop as soon as possible and people of Syria from all sects to live in peace in the future,&rdquo; Mr. Davutoglu told reporters in Ankara after his meeting with Mr. Assad.        

Washington signaled its support for the Turkish envoy&rsquo;s visit, and a spokesman for the State Department in Washington said that Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton had spoken with Mr. Davutoglu before his meeting in Damascus. The spokesman, Mark Toner, called it an opportunity &ldquo;to send yet another strong message to Assad.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Davutoglu insisted that he was not speaking on behalf of the United States. &ldquo;We conveyed only Turkey&rsquo;s messages and none other,&rdquo; he said.        

The United States and Turkey remain allies, but under Mr. Erdogan the country has undertaken a more assertive and independent foreign policy in the Middle East, where its influence has grown markedly over the past decade.        

A Turkish official who asked not to be named said the United States was seeking further sanctions on Syria, a position that Turkey opposes. &ldquo;There is a discrepancy in the way Turkish and American officials handle the conflict,&rdquo; the official said, while adding that both wanted an end to civilian deaths.        

Turkish officials long viewed better ties with Syria as one of their greatest foreign policy successes. The two have held joint cabinet meetings and military exercises. Visa requirements were lifted in 2009, border gates were expanded and a new crossing was built, helping to triple trade in three years. The uprising, though, has shaken Turkey&rsquo;s ambitions to integrate with the region&rsquo;s economies, as Syria grows more isolated.        

As the two officials met in Damascus, the country&rsquo;s military and security forces pressed ahead with attacks on several cities, and activists said that at least 23 people were killed across the country. Tanks also assaulted the town of Binnish, in the northwestern province of Idlib, near the border with Turkey.        

Mr. Davutoglu&rsquo;s visit comes amid a flurry of diplomatic efforts on Syria. On Wednesday, representatives from India, Brazil and South Africa were scheduled to meet Syria&rsquo;s foreign minister, Walid Muallem, to urge him to end the crackdown.        

This week, in what appeared to be a coordinated campaign, Saudi Arabia and other Persian Gulf countries withdrew their ambassadors. On Tuesday, Egypt added its voice to the condemnations. Its foreign minister, Mohamed Amr, said that Syria was heading toward what he described as &ldquo;the point of no return.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Egypt is following with extreme concern the dangerous deterioration of the situation in Syria,&rdquo; Egypt&rsquo;s state news agency, Mena, quoted him as saying.        

Activists said that Deir al-Zour, a besieged city in northeastern Syria, was shelled for more than 10 hours on Tuesday and that three people had died there. One resident, who gave his name as Maamoun, said that armed men loyal to the government, known as shabiha, were burning houses and shops that belong to activists and protesters on the authorities&rsquo; lists of wanted people.        

&ldquo;We lived under this regime for 40 years, so we&rsquo;re ready to wait for another year to see it fall,&rdquo; said Maamoun, reached by phone. &ldquo;It is only a matter of time before it falls.&rdquo;        

Deir al-Zour may prove a serious challenge to Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government. Populated by extended clans that are well armed and protective of their independence, the city was long thought too dangerous for the government to attack.        

The Local Coordination Committees, a rights group that has been documenting the Syrian uprising, said five people were also killed in Taybit al-Imam, a town near the besieged city of Hama, in central Syria. Security forces withdrew from Hama in June, but a little more than a week ago the military launched a fierce assault in an effort to retake control.        

The attack came on the eve of the start of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, in which the observant fast from dawn to dusk. Activists said that more than 300 Syrians had been killed so far during Ramadan, 200 of them in Hama and the rest in Deir al-Zour and other regions.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and Sebnem Arsu from Istanbul.
