
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; The United States has proposed to meet with North Korea to discuss for the first time in six years bringing home the remains of any American soldiers buried there.        

North Korea, one of the world&rsquo;s most isolated countries, has no diplomatic ties with the United States, with which it is still technically at war.        

&ldquo;The U.S. recently sent a letter requesting a meeting on resuming remains recovery in North Korea,&rdquo; Maj. Carie A. Parker, a spokeswoman for the Defense P.O.W./Missing Personnel Office of the Pentagon, said on Tuesday. &ldquo;We have received no response from North Korean officials regarding the request.&rdquo;        

There are almost 8,000 American service members still unaccounted for from the Korean War, which ended in a truce, not a peace treaty.        

Major Parker said that North Korean officials contacted the Pentagon recently indicating that they would look favorably on an American request to discuss the possibility of recovering remains. North Korea last year accused Washington of ignoring its offer to discuss repatriating &ldquo;lots of U.S. remains&rdquo; that were &ldquo;being dug out and scattered here and there in our country.&rdquo;        

The Pentagon&rsquo;s decision to react to the latest overture from the North followed a visit to New York by Kim Kye-gwan, a senior North Korean diplomat, in late July. Mr. Kim met Stephen W. Bosworth, Washington&rsquo;s special envoy to six-nation talks aimed at ending North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear weapons programs.        

Washington&rsquo;s invitation for Mr. Kim and its decision to engage North Korea over the American remains came as the United States investigated ways of restarting the nuclear talks, suspended since 2008.        

After ignoring decades of American appeals to search for and return service members&rsquo; remains, North Korea handed over what it claimed were 208 sets of remains from 1990 to 1994. The boxes contained scattered bones and personal effects. American forensic experts believed the boxes actually contained the remains of as many as 400 individuals. They have been unable to identify most.        

American experts were allowed in North Korea in 1996 to guide more scientific recovery efforts. Thirty-three joint on-site missions yielded more than 220 sets of remains. About 80 have been identified and returned to families for burial.        

But the operations were halted in 2005 after Washington took issue with the safety and security of its workers.        

North Korea has reportedly earned millions of dollars for cooperation over the remains recovery. It has also used the matter to try to entice the United States into bilateral talks. Washington insists that any talks be within a multilateral framework.        

&ldquo;If thousands of U.S. remains buried in our country are washed off and lost due to the U.S. side&rsquo;s disregard, the U.S. side should be wholly responsible for the consequences as it has developed the humanitarian issue into a political problem,&rdquo; the North&rsquo;s official Korean Central News Agency said in April 2010.        

During his visit to Pyongyang, the North&rsquo;s capital, in December, former Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico said, a top North Korean general offered to help return the remains of several hundred American troops.        
