
SRINAGAR, Kashmir &mdash; By this time last summer, this beleaguered city was a war zone. Dozens of people had been killed in clashes between stone-throwing protesters and heavily armed security forces. Each death prompted a fresh set of angry demonstrations that prompted even tougher crackdowns, leading to more bloodshed.        

It was the third rage-filled summer in a row, and by the time the autumn leaves turned, more than 100 civilians had been killed. Apples rotted from their branches in orchards across the valley and the saffron went unharvested. The valley&rsquo;s economy virtually collapsed.        

When young Muslims across North Africa and the Arabian Peninsula rose up this winter and spring against dictatorial governments, it seemed inevitable that their example would find voice here, in a mostly Muslim region that is claimed by both India and Pakistan, and where Indian soldiers are seen as an occupying force.        

Instead, the Kashmir Valley is enjoying an unexpected season of tranquillity. Tourists from across India have descended on the valley, filling just about every airplane seat, hotel room and houseboat. Business in Lal Chowk, the city&rsquo;s bustling central market, is booming again. Wooden shikara boats ferry vacationers across the shimmering surface of Dal Lake, trying to dodge the latest attraction, zooming Jet Skis.        

No grand bargain has been struck between India and Pakistan that would explain the new calm, and no major concessions have been made within the Indian portion of the region either. Draconian laws that shield security forces from prosecution still allow the police to arrest anyone suspected of disturbing the peace.        

Yet subtle but unmistakable shifts have helped calm the situation in Kashmir, which sits astride one of the world&rsquo;s most dangerous nuclear flash points.        

&ldquo;There is visible improvement in the situation, no doubt,&rdquo; said Yusuf Tarigami, a senior state legislator. &ldquo;In terms of the relationship with the Indian government, the relationship between India and Pakistan, and the quality of governance people are enjoying.&rdquo;        

A d&eacute;tente between India and Pakistan has helped cool tensions in the region, officials here say. Talks between the nations had been on hold for two years after militants from Pakistan attacked the city of Mumbai, formerly Bombay, killing more than 160 people. The talks resumed this year in earnest, and on July 27 the two countries announced a series of measures aimed at easing restrictions at the Line of Control, the de facto border between the parts of Kashmir each country controls.        

After years of battling armed rebels seeking independence, the security forces in the region never fully shifted their mission from counterinsurgency to addressing unrest by civilians armed with nothing but rocks. But that has changed. They have received new training and equipment that allows them to control restive crowds without resorting to lethal force.        

&ldquo;The government security machinery is a lot better at handling situations that could arise out of protests than we were at the same time last year, in terms of equipment, in terms of training and in terms of mind-set as well,&rdquo; said Omar Abdullah, the chief minister of the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.        

Young Kashmiris who last summer took to the streets to throw stones at security forces are back on university campuses and cricket fields, working summer jobs at family orchards and guesthouses.        

Dozens of bunkers that scarred the streets of downtown Srinagar have been removed, lifting the sense of siege that has hung over the city for years.        

&ldquo;You drive through a crossroads in the middle of your city and instead of a roundabout you see a concrete bunker with guns pointing at you,&rdquo; Mr. Abdullah said. &ldquo;It was a provocation.&rdquo;        

Nighttime checkpoints, a humiliating nuisance to many Kashmiris, have been sharply curtailed. Heavily armed paramilitary forces used to line the streets of many city neighborhoods, particularly areas with deep-seated separatist leanings. But these deployments have been reduced.        

The government has appointed a trio of interlocutors who have been traveling around the Kashmir Valley, speaking to communities and trying to come up with ways to address their grievances. While the group has been derided for its low-key approach, its recommendations have been largely embraced in New Delhi.        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
