
As the police in London questioned a 12th suspect in connection with Britain&rsquo;s widening phone hacking scandal on Wednesday, Scotland Yard announced that Dick Fedorcio, its longtime director of public affairs, had been placed on extended leave until the criminal inquiries were concluded.        

Mr. Fedorcio, an 11-year veteran of the Metropolitan Police Service in London, was criticized by a parliamentary committee last month for hiring Neil Wallis, a former deputy editor at The News of the World, as a public relations consultant for the police from October 2009 until September 2010.        

For much of last year, according to two executives at the newspaper&rsquo;s parent company, Mr. Wallis was secretly serving two masters: Scotland Yard, which had closed its investigation of The News of the World phone hacking despite having evidence that the illegal activity was widespread; and his former bosses at the newspaper, who were eager for the investigation to remain closed.        

Mr. Wallis, 60, was arrested on July 14 on suspicion of phone hacking and bribing police officers. He and his lawyer have not responded to repeated phone messages.        

On Wednesday, the police in London arrested Greg Miskiw, a 61-year-old former editor of The News of the World, who had resigned from the tabloid in 2005 and had later moved to Delray Beach, Fla.        

Mr. Miskiw, who was questioned at a London police station, could provide details about which executives at the tabloid and its parent company, News International, a British subsidiary of Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s News Corporation, might have known about the illegal practices and how widespread they were.        

Last month, a former reporter for The News of the World told The New York Times that Mr. Miskiw had helped him find a source he was seeking by using a cellphone number. He and another reporter said this was part of a practice known as pinging, in which the police used proprietary technology to pinpoint a person&rsquo;s location based on cellphone towers. The reporter said the police were paid $500 for each request.        

Scotland Yard has recently widened its hacking inquiry to include pinging.        

Mr. Miskiw&rsquo;s arrest and the announcement of Mr. Fedorcio&rsquo;s extended leave suggest that as Scotland Yard is aggressively pursuing possible criminal activity at The News of the World, the police are also examining the long and cozy relationship between some of its own senior officials and the news media. Mr. Wallis, as much as anyone in the phone hacking scandal, exemplifies those overlapping relationships.        

Late on the afternoon of May 26, 2010, Mr. Wallis, then working twice a month as a public relations consultant for Scotland Yard, visited 10 Downing Street for a drink with Andy Coulson, who was then the communications chief for Prime Minister David Cameron.        

It appeared to be a routine social occasion between two old friends: Mr. Coulson had been the top editor at The News of the World from 2003 to 2007, and Mr. Wallis was his deputy.        

The prime minister&rsquo;s office declined to say what the two men discussed that afternoon. A spokesman said Mr. Wallis did not meet Mr. Cameron or anyone else in the government on that day.        

But the meeting took place when there were questions about the illegal telephone hacking at the tabloid under Mr. Wallis&rsquo;s and Mr. Coulson&rsquo;s stewardship.        

Mr. Wallis had parlayed decades of success in Britain&rsquo;s rambunctious press into a new career as a public relations executive with ties to Scotland Yard, 10 Downing Street and News International.        

Working for newspapers including the Daily Star, Sun and Sunday People, he deployed an aggressive style and bold story ideas to propel himself to the top of the tabloid culture.        

When Mr. Wallis emerged from his office, former reporters at The News of the World have said, they grabbed for their phones and chatted into dead air to avoid becoming one of his targets. They cringed, they said, when, after reading what they had written, Mr. Wallis would boom, &ldquo;Can we say ...&rdquo; followed by suggestions about how to torque up a story.        

Mr. Wallis left The News of the World in 2009 to start his own media relations company, Chamy Media. In October 2009, Scotland Yard hired him on a contract worth about $3,260 a month. His hiring was approved by Mr. Fedorcio, who testified last month before Parliament&rsquo;s Home Affairs select committee that he had not asked Mr. Wallis about phone hacking at the tabloid before hiring him to assist Scotland Yard&rsquo;s press office.        
Graham Bowley contributed reporting from London.
