
GIBRALTAR &mdash; It seemed for a while that this British territory with its famous rock was settling in for a period of d&eacute;tente with its Spanish neighbors to the north.        

In the summer of 2009, the Spanish foreign minister visited Gibraltar, the first time such a high-ranking official had made the trip since Spain ceded the territory to Britain under the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713.        

Of course, Spain has not given up its claim to the minuscule territory &mdash; less than three square miles, much of it the rock &mdash; on the tip of the Iberian Peninsula. But several old disputes have been hashed out in recent years, and a deal signed giving Spain access to the Gibraltar airport, which still allows traffic to cross the runways when planes are not landing.        

Lately, however, things have not been going so well.        

It seems that Alejandro S&aacute;nchez, the mayor of La L&iacute;nea de la Concepci&oacute;n, the financially troubled town on the Spanish side of the border, has been kicking up a fuss on several fronts.        

He is not happy with the airport deal because he says La L&iacute;nea has not been paid by the Spanish government for the land required to build Spanish access to the airport terminal.        

And in pursuit of even more cash, he is threatening to charge a toll in La L&iacute;nea, looking for revenue from the owners of the 10 million vehicles that cross through his town each year, mostly with people going to shop in the dense streets of Gibraltar.        

Mr. S&aacute;nchez says the income would begin to make up for the environmental impact of all that car exhaust &mdash; and for the ugliness of the long lines of vehicles waiting to get into Gibraltar, where shoppers can get deals on cigarettes, alcohol, perfume and chocolates.        

&ldquo;We have the most polluted village in all of Andalusia,&rdquo; said Mr. S&aacute;nchez. &ldquo;The shoreline is lost for tourism because of all those cars going into Gibraltar. They are always backed up on our side. The waterline is gone because there is a huge clogged road there. So we are developing a congestion charge.&rdquo;        

Gibraltar&rsquo;s chief minister, Peter Caruana, calls the proposal &ldquo;absurd&rdquo; and Mr. S&aacute;nchez  an &ldquo;irrelevant pinprick.&rdquo;        

Both sides have been taking shots at each other for several months now. At one point, Mr. S&aacute;nchez  ordered the police to check all cars traveling from Gibraltar, causing traffic to back up on the other side for once. Mr. Caruana issued a statement saying that the action was an abuse of police power and &ldquo;not acceptable in a democracy.&rdquo;        

The Spanish and the British have been bickering over Gibraltar ever since Anglo-Dutch forces captured Gibraltar during the War of the Spanish Succession in the early 18th century. In 1969, Gen. Francisco Franco closed the border entirely. It was not reopened fully until 1985, after Spain sought entry into the European Union.        

But this time, the tensions seem to have been brought on by purely local interests &mdash; Mr. S&aacute;nchez is scrambling for cash.        

Gibraltar &mdash; an offshore tax haven &mdash; is booming. Its economy grew by 5 percent last year. Mr. Caruana smiles when asked about the unemployment in Gibraltar. It hardly registers. There are, he said,  maybe 300 unemployed people in Gibraltar, which has a population of about 30,000.        

In La L&iacute;nea, a town of 65,000 people, the signs of hardship are almost everywhere. One of every six residents is unemployed. Swept into the excesses of Spain&rsquo;s construction boom, it is more than $135 million in debt and began falling behind on paying its workers last summer.        

Mr. S&aacute;nchez inherited the mess when his predecessor was forced to step down last year.        

At first, Mr. S&aacute;nchez championed the airport deal, which the Spanish government and Gibraltar signed in 2006, as a boon to the local economy. But these days he just wants to see the town get paid for its land.        

&ldquo;This is one of our most valuable assets,&rdquo; Mr. S&aacute;nchez said. &ldquo;And we have other possibilities for the use of that land.&rdquo; He is waiting for Spain to make him a reasonable offer.        

His demands are not making him any friends in Madrid. Mr. S&aacute;nchez, who belongs to Spain&rsquo;s opposition People&rsquo;s Party, received a tongue-lashing recently from Salvador de la Encina, a member of Parliament from C&aacute;diz with an interest in infrastructure issues. He has said that Spain will deliver on its agreement &ldquo;with or without Mr. S&aacute;nchez.&rdquo;        

Mr. Caruana says Gibraltar will soon be finished with its side of the airport, including an underground tunnel that will eliminate the need for traffic to cross the runways. Now, he says, it is up to the Spanish government to figure out how to deal with Mr. S&aacute;nchez.        

But high-level officials declined to discuss the issue. A spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who asked not be identified, as is customary in Spain, said no one was interested in talking about Mr. S&aacute;nchez and his declarations.        

&ldquo;Spain will comply with the agreements arrived at in C&oacute;rdoba in September 2006, between the governments of Spain, the U.K. and Gibraltar, which include the development of a new terminal for the Gibraltar airport with direct access from Spain,&rdquo; the spokesman said.        

But the deal is already several years behind schedule.        

It is not hard to find citizens on both sides of the border who roll their eyes at the recent hostilities. But a sense of injustice runs deep on the Spanish side. Thousands cross into Gibraltar every day to work in low-level jobs.        

Mr. S&aacute;nchez  had hoped to have his toll in place by now. But he is still struggling for a legal strategy. On the face of it, European Union countries cannot charge tolls at their borders. But Mr. S&aacute;nchez  says he has hired lawyers in Brussels who believe there are ways.        

&ldquo;We are developing a plan,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;You will see. Soon we will unveil it.&rdquo;        
Rachel Chaundler contributed reporting.
