
LONDON &mdash; Still reeling with shock and anger over the worst rioting in decades, Britain turned on Wednesday to a tough reckoning with the perpetrators, even as the police and political leaders worried about a potentially explosive new pattern of interracial violence that could be set off by the past four days of mayhem.        

Despite at least a temporary lull in the rioting that has ravaged London and other major cities, concern was growing about many of the ethnically segregated districts battered by the rampaging disorder, particularly Birmingham, Britain&rsquo;s second-largest city.        

Three young men of Pakistani descent were killed there on Tuesday night when a car mounted a sidewalk and crashed into a group of residents who had gathered to protect local businesses from attack. Witnesses said that the driver appeared to be of Afro-Caribbean descent, and the police arrested a 32-year-old man and charged him with murder.        

While London and other major cities afflicted by rioting were in a state of tense calm at nightfall on Wednesday, courts began round-the-clock sessions to begin processing some of the 1,200 people arrested in the five days since the rioting erupted in an impoverished district of north London. The wildfire spread of violence, the initial failure of the police to contain it, the slow early response of political leaders and the cruelty of the attacks have left the nation shaken and wrung by an embittered debate about whom and what to blame. Prime Minister David Cameron took a tough line, saying the actions of those who looted and committed arson showed a lack of &ldquo;proper morals&rdquo; and a failure of parenting.        

One surprise was the presence of young men and women with regular jobs among the riot suspects lined up in police wagons outside courthouses in London and other cities. That raised questions about why they had been caught up in the kind of mayhem that has traditionally drawn on an underclass of alienated young people, with no jobs and few prospects.        

Many of those who were remanded for trial appeared to come from just those kinds of backgrounds &mdash; evidence, as some commentators saw it, that the root causes of the disorders lay in social deprivation and despair. But those who stood before the courts for bail hearings in London, many of them still in their jeans and hooded sweatshirts, included a graphic designer, a postal employee, a dental assistant, a teaching aide, a forklift driver and a youth worker.        

One 19-year-old woman was listed on court documents as living in a converted farmhouse in a leafy, upmarket area of rural Kent that is part of what Londoners call the stockbroker belt. A 22-year-old woman gave her address as an upscale block of flats in a gentrified neighborhood of Hackney, one of the worst-hit riot areas in London. Local residents said that many of the residents of the apartments, which are valued at about $500,000, belonged to a community of affluent, middle-class people with jobs in London&rsquo;s news media and art world.        

Ahead of an emergency House of Commons session on Thursday, Mr. Cameron declared a &ldquo;fight back&rdquo; against what he condemned as the &ldquo;groups of thugs&rdquo; who had driven the riots. With his government jolted by the scenes of young people looting and setting fire to shops, warehouses, vehicles and police stations, he spoke with an angry vehemence that conveyed a sense that his government had settled on an unyielding crackdown, shorn of the kind of exculpatory language that British politicians have often used when confronted with youth disorder.        

Mr. Cameron, speaking of the inner-city gangs that the police say have played a leading role in the riots, said, &ldquo;They are in no way representative of the vast majority of young people in our country who despise them, frankly, just as much as the rest of us do.&rdquo;        

He cited an episode relayed worldwide on YouTube in which a young Malaysian student, the bloodied victim of an attack, sat slumped on a sidewalk when he was approached by hooded young men, seemingly intent on helping him, who pulled him to his feet. They then looted the man&rsquo;s backpack, with one man pulling something out, unwrapping it, then casually discarding it onto the street. The victim, who had a fractured jaw, underwent surgery in a London hospital on Wednesday, according to friends.        

&ldquo;There are pockets of our society that are not just broken but, frankly, sick,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said. &ldquo;When we see children as young as 12 and 13 looting and laughing, when we see the disgusting sight of an injured young man with people pretending to help him while they are robbing him, it is clear there are things that are badly wrong in our society.        
Alan Cowell contributed reporting.
