
Harri Holkeri, a former Finnish prime minister who helped shepherd talks that led to the historic 1998 peace agreement in Northern Ireland, died on Sunday in Helsinki. He was 74.        

His death, after a long illness, was announced by his party, the National Coalition Party.        

In November 1995, Mr. Holkeri was selected as one of three international members of a commission created by the British and Irish governments to persuade the Irish Republican Army to lay down its arms. The commission, led by former Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, forged what is commonly called the Belfast Agreement, a Northern Ireland power-sharing pact between pro-British unionists and Irish nationalists.        

The British had long said that the I.R.A. must disarm as a prerequisite for talks. London had also resisted bringing negotiators or arbitrators from other nations into the process. But Britain, Ireland and representatives of the unionists, who were mainly Protestant, and the nationalists, who were mainly Roman Catholic, agreed to the panel.        

News accounts at the time characterized Mr. Holkeri as the most neutral of the group. Some Catholics worried that the third member, Gen. John de Chastelain, a former head of the Canadian armed forces, might be influenced by his Presbyterian and British heritage. And some Protestants were wary of Mr. Mitchell, who had Irish roots and, as the son of a Lebanese mother, was raised as a Maronite Catholic.        

The commission, which came to be referred to as &ldquo;the three wise men,&rdquo; ultimately recommended that talks begin without requiring the I.R.A. to get rid of its weapons; that point could be negotiated later, it said. Britain agreed. In June 1996, the three men were named to referee formal multiparty peace talks.        

The parties announced the peace agreement on Good Friday, April 10, 1998.        

In a speech in 2008, Mr. Holkeri cited several reasons the three were able to guide the long-divided parties to a deal: small steps to build trust; not requiring parties to speak directly to each other; and not asking who shot first. He also mentioned &ldquo;infinite patience.&rdquo;        

Mark Durkan, a politician from Northern Ireland who helped negotiate the deal, said in a statement after Mr. Holkeri&rsquo;s death that Mr. Holkeri had accomplished much in informal conversations, sometimes &ldquo;with a whiskey involved.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Perhaps even more than George Mitchell, he encouraged the parties to think more, listen better and talk further with each other,&rdquo; Mr. Durkan said.        

Harri Hermanni Holkeri was born on Jan. 6, 1937, in Oripaa, a small town in western Finland. He grew up nearby in the larger town of Toijala, where his father was a police officer. He earned a master&rsquo;s degree in political science from the University of Helsinki in 1962 and joined the youth league of the conservative National Coalition Party.        

Mr. Holkeri helped move his party from the right toward Finland&rsquo;s political center. He also pushed it to support a foreign policy similar to that pursued by the more leftist parties that had governed Finland in the postwar years. Articles in the Soviet press had warned that Russian Communist leaders would frown on a less-accommodating conservative government.        

In 1987, Mauno Koivisto, Finland&rsquo;s president, named Mr. Holkeri prime minister and asked him to form a government. He pledged to maintain Finland&rsquo;s welfare state and successfully aligned his conservative party with the Social Democrats. An economic downturn contributed to the conservatives&rsquo; losing an election in 1991, ending his tenure as prime minister.        

Mr. Holkeri is survived by his wife, Marja-Liisa Lepisto; two children; and six grandchildren.        

In 2000, Mr. Holkeri was appointed to serve one year as president of the United Nations General Assembly. Three years later Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary-general, named Mr. Holkeri his special representative in Kosovo. By 2004 Mr. Holkeri had succeeded in getting Yugoslavia and Kosovo, then part of Yugoslavia, to negotiate directly and to agree to &ldquo;standards&rdquo; for use in subsequent talks.        

(After many fits and starts, Kosovo unilaterally declared independence in 2008. Some nations, including the United States, recognized it; others, like Russia, have not.)        

Mr. Holkeri considered wit a part of negotiating, as when he explained what is really meant when a negotiating partner asks his counterpart to &ldquo;walk a mile in the other man&rsquo;s shoes.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This is great,&rdquo; the counterpart thinks. &ldquo;Not only do I get new shoes out of this deal, but I&rsquo;ll be a mile a way before the other guy figures out what happened.&rdquo;        
