
SYDNEY, Australia &mdash; Just how tough should Australia be in its campaign to dissuade asylum seekers from undertaking perilous voyages to its shores?        

Over the years, as tens of thousands of refugees from the world&rsquo;s trouble spots have sailed to Australia on rickety boats, the government has instituted ever sterner policies: mandatory detentions; criminal background checks that leave asylum seekers languishing for months or years; transfer to camps in the blistering heat of remote parts of western Australia or to islands in the Pacific, like tiny Nauru, Papua New Guinea and the particularly isolated Christmas Island.        

But the latest idea &mdash; a refugee-swap deal with Malaysia meant to serve as a cautionary lesson to future boat people &mdash; has come to at least a temporary halt, and Australia has been forced to revisit a touchy issue that has bedeviled both Labor and Liberal governments for nearly two decades and exposed deep societal divisions.        

The plan, pursued by the government of Prime Minister Julia Gillard, would send up to 800 newly arrived migrants from Australia to Malaysia over the next four years to be handled by immigration authorities there, lengthening their arduous progress toward some kind of legal home. Videotapes of the deportations would be widely disseminated. The government says the intent is to deter human traffickers as much as future asylum seekers.        

In exchange, Australia would accept five times that number of foreign refugees over the same period from Malaysia, where they have been fully vetted by international organizations.        

The rationale that the plan would discourage traffickers initially appeared to sit well with a country that was horrified late last year when a vessel packed with refugees smashed against the rocky shores off Christmas Island, killing at least 27 people in front of terrified onlookers.        

Since the outlines of the plan were announced in May, officials said, the number of asylum seekers has dropped compared with the same period last year.        

Malaysia, however, is not a party to the United Nations refugee convention and has a poor record in its treatment of refugees. Amnesty International, which has harshly criticized the idea of adding to the misery of refugees to make a policy point, says they face caning, arbitrary detention, labor exploitation and sexual abuse.        

But when it became clear that the government intended to include unaccompanied minors in the plan, cracks in its support appeared. On Monday, an Australian High Court judge extended a block on the first set of 16 deportations, less than half an hour before they were to be cleared. In about two weeks, the full bench of seven judges will hear the case.        

David Manne, who heads a legal group that represents 41 asylum seekers who arrived by boat last week and who had been expected to begin leaving on Monday, had sought the injunction over concerns that sending refugees to Malaysia was a violation of Australia&rsquo;s international obligations.        

&ldquo;Our clients, these are very vulnerable people from Afghanistan and Pakistan who have come to Australia seeking refugee protection,&rdquo; Mr. Manne said. &ldquo;They are asking the High Court whether the Australian government really has the power to expel them to Malaysia instead of allowing them the right to seek refugee protection in Australia. This is absolutely a human rights issue.&rdquo;        

Adding to the criticism of the government&rsquo;s handling of the boat people is that the tough measures do not, for the most part, apply to the larger number of illegal migrants who arrive by plane, some using false identities, some overstaying visas.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not an issue, people coming here seeking asylum, unless they&rsquo;re coming by boat,&rdquo; said Graham Thom, Amnesty International&rsquo;s refugee spokesman.        

&ldquo;It becomes very visible when people come by boat,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;and so it&rsquo;s easy to be manipulated politically. The fact that we&rsquo;ve made boats into such a big issue, when they&rsquo;re really such a small number, that this government and the previous government has had to reach to more and more bizarre alternatives and alternatives that ultimately punish refugees, which is the exact opposite of what they should be doing.&rdquo;        

Finding a solution for the floods of asylum seekers &mdash; these days they are primarily refugees from Iran, Iraq and Afghanistan who are smuggled to the remote Australian territory of Christmas Island &mdash; has eluded Australian governments going back to Prime Minister John Howard, a Liberal. Mr. Howard&rsquo;s so-called Pacific Solution &mdash; transporting asylum seekers to nearby island nations for lengthy processing &mdash; drew some criticism and was abandoned when Kevin Rudd became prime minister in 2007.        

Mr. Rudd suspended the Pacific Solution and tried to streamline the processing procedures, only to see an explosion in the number of people arriving by boat: from 161 in 2008 to 2,726 in 2009 and 6,535 in 2010.        

Ms. Gillard, whose popularity has sunk to record lows in recent months, was clearly hoping for a victory with the Malaysia deal, but it failed to give her dismal poll numbers a bump and has increasingly drawn ire from human rights defenders.        

The ruling on Monday sent her government into full damage control mode. The immigration minister, Chris Bowen, immediately criticized the decision in a barrage of local news media appearances, saying traffickers might resume the onslaught on Australia.        

&ldquo;One of our arguments to the court is that people smugglers will spin this and lie about this and say this is some sort of green light,&rdquo; he said in an interview on the national broadcaster, ABC. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not.&rdquo;        

Mr. Bowen also dismissed concerns over Malaysia&rsquo;s commitment to protecting the human rights of refugees, saying he was satisfied with the bilateral commitments it has made to Canberra.        

&ldquo;Malaysia is a country that has given commitments to Australia in terms of the arrangements we have with them,&rdquo; he said.        
