
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; The South Korean military returned fire on Wednesday after North Korean artillery shells fell in waters near a South Korean island the North attacked last year with a lethal artillery barrage, Defense Ministry officials said.        

South Korean marines based on the island, Yeonpyeong, 75 miles west of Seoul, detected three artillery shots from a North Korean island around 1 p.m. Wednesday, the officials said.        

The South Korean military&rsquo;s Office of Joint Chiefs of Staff said it believed that one of the shells landed at the Northern Limit Line, a border drawn by the United Nations at the end of the 1950-53 Korean War. The South accepts and patrols the line, but the North rejects it, insisting on a border line farther south.        

South Korea responded by broadcasting a warning and then firing three artillery shells on the northern line.        

At 7:46 p.m., North Korea fired two more shells, one of them hitting the water close to the northern line, the Joint Chiefs of Staff said. In response, South Korean marines fired three artillery rounds on that area.        

&ldquo;We fired to warn them,&rdquo; said a Defense Ministry spokesman, speaking on the customary condition of anonymity. &ldquo;We are watching the situation carefully and maintain our readiness.&rdquo;        

But North Korea accused the South Korean military of mistaking construction noise for artillery, the North&rsquo;s official Korean Central News Agency reported. &ldquo;It was a tragicomedy that they indiscriminately reacted to what happened with counter-shelling even without confirming the truth about the case in the sensitive waters,&rdquo; the news agency reported.        

The South Korean military has maintained high vigilance since North Korea fired dozens of artillery shells at Yeonpyeong last November, killing two marines and two civilians. At the time, South Korea responded with an artillery attack on North Korea.        

The attack on Yeonpyeong and the sinking of a South Korean warship in March last year chilled inter-Korean relations to their lowest point in years. South Korea blames a North Korean torpedo attack for the ship&rsquo;s sinking, which killed 46 South Korean sailors. North Korea denied responsibility.        

North and South Korea remain technically at war; they suspended hostilities in 1953 with a cease-fire rather than a peace treaty. The two sides have never agreed on a western sea border, subjecting the waters around Yeonpyeong to rival claims and occasional military clashes. Hundreds of South Korean fishermen operating in the waters have been taken into custody by the North Korean Navy. The two navies fought skirmishes in 1999, 2002 and 2009.        

Earlier Wednesday, South Korean news media reported that the Seoul authorities were searching for an assassination squad assigned by North Korea to murder the South Korean defense minister, Kim Kwan-jin. But neither the Defense Ministry nor the government&rsquo;s main spy agency, the National Intelligence Service, would confirm or deny the reports. North Korea, which had earlier threatened to &ldquo;execute&rdquo; Mr. Kim for his hawkish remarks, had not yet reacted to the news reports.        

Mr. Kim, a former army general, came to office shortly after the Yeonpyeong shelling, calling for a swift and powerful retaliation against North Korean provocations. North Korean state media called him a &ldquo;national traitor&rdquo; and &ldquo;warmonger.&rdquo; In June, they called for his &ldquo;execution&rdquo; after some South Korean reserve army troops used photographs of the North&rsquo;s ruling family as rifle-range targets.        

Last week, the South Korean Justice Ministry said it would increase the cash reward for reporting a North Korean spy to the authorities to 500 million won from 100 million won, or to $462,000 from $92,000.        

Also on Wednesday, the South Korean Red Cross proposed sending nearly $5 million in baby food, cookies and instant noodles to help North Korea cope with extensive flood damage.        
