
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; A prime minister chosen by Hezbollah and its allies won enough support on Monday to form Lebanon&rsquo;s government, unleashing angry protests, realigning politics and culminating the generation-long ascent of the Shiite Muslim movement from shadowy militant group to the country&rsquo;s pre-eminent political and military force.        

Hezbollah&rsquo;s success served as a stark measure of the shifting constellation of power in this part of the Middle East, where the influence of the United States and its Arab allies &mdash; Egypt and Saudi Arabia &mdash; is seen by politicians and diplomats as receding, while Iran and Syria have become more assertive.        

American diplomats tried to forestall the triumph of Hezbollah&rsquo;s candidate, Najib Miqati. Although the final votes will be cast Tuesday, Mr. Miqati won the decisive vote from a politician who said he had to deal &ldquo;with the reality on the ground.&rdquo;        

The government that Mr. Miqati, a billionaire and former prime minister, forms may in the end look much like past cabinets in this small Mediterranean country. Indeed, Mr. Miqati struck a conciliatory tone, calling himself a consensus candidate.        

But the symbolism of Hezbollah&rsquo;s choosing Lebanon&rsquo;s prime minister was vast, potentially serving as the beginning of a new era for a combustible country whose conflicts have long entangled the United States, Iran and Syria. A practical impact may be the realignment of Lebanon away from the United States, which treated the government of Prime Minister Saad Hariri as an ally.        

&ldquo;The country is moving from one stage to another, from one approach to another,&rdquo; declared Michel Aoun, a Christian leader and key ally of Hezbollah.        

By nightfall, angry opponents of Hezbollah took to the streets in parts of Beirut, Tripoli and other cities, burning tires, shouting slogans and offering at least an image of what many feared Hezbollah&rsquo;s victory might unleash: strife among communities in a country almost evenly divided over questions of foreign patrons; posture toward Israel; and the relative power of Lebanon&rsquo;s Shiite Muslims, represented by Hezbollah, and its Sunni foes.        

Acrid smoke billowed into a nighttime sky, as barricades temporarily blocked some roads into Beirut before security forces dispersed the demonstrators. Hezbollah&rsquo;s foes called for &ldquo;a day of anger in all of Lebanon&rdquo; on Tuesday, and martial language and cries of treason began punctuating the public discourse.        

&ldquo;Down with Hezbollah! Down with Miqati!&rdquo; young men shouted in Beirut.        

Like so many crises in Lebanon, this one is maddeningly complex. It revolves around a United Nations-backed tribunal set up in 2007 to investigate the assassination of a former prime minister, Rafik Hariri, who was killed with 22 others in a spectacular bombing along Beirut&rsquo;s seafront in February 2005.        

Hezbollah has denied any role in the killing, but by its own admission, its members were named in indictments handed to a judge last week, though not yet made public. It demanded that the government of Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s son, Saad, end its cooperation with the court. When he refused, Hezbollah and its allies withdrew, forcing the government&rsquo;s collapse after a 14-month tenure that brought some calm here.        

The country is almost evenly split in its attitudes toward the court. Hezbollah&rsquo;s supporters believe it is hopelessly compromised, amounting to little more than an American-Israeli tool to bludgeon the movement. Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s supporters believe the vehemence of Hezbollah&rsquo;s reaction only underlines its guilt in the assassination.        

To form a new government, one that would denounce the tribunal&rsquo;s indictments and end Lebanon&rsquo;s cooperation, Hezbollah needed at least 65 of the 128 Parliament members. Diplomats and politicians say they now have that number.        

Hezbollah&rsquo;s leader, Hassan Nasrallah, pledged Sunday to respect the institutions of the state and work toward what he called &ldquo;a partnership government.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Hariri, who effectively leads the Sunni Muslim community, has insisted he will not join the new government, meaning that a cabinet supposed to be built on consensus will lack representation of one of the country&rsquo;s main communities.        

Though Mr. Hariri and Mr. Miqati are both Sunnis &mdash; by tradition, the sect that occupies the prime minister position &mdash; Mr. Hariri has far more support among Sunnis.        

&ldquo;It will not be easy for them to control Lebanon alone,&rdquo; warned Antoine Zahra, a Christian lawmaker allied with Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s bloc. &ldquo;They will turn it into an isolated country, ostracized by the Arab world and the international community.&rdquo;        

He called Mr. Miqati&rsquo;s victory &ldquo;a constitutional coup.&rdquo;        

In a tense city, everyone seemed to have an opinion on what the new government represented. With Mr. Miqati&rsquo;s elevation, the Shiite community that Hezbollah represents has formalized a reality that has been clear since 2008, when Hezbollah and its allies seized parts of Beirut. The movement and, by default, its Shiite constituency are the pre-eminent players in a country still beholden to rules laid down by its Christian and Sunni Muslim representatives.        
 Nada Bakri and Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.
