
MOGADISHU, Somalia &mdash; Richard Rouget, &nbsp;a gun for hire over two decades of bloody African conflict, is the unlikely face of the American campaign against militants in Somalia.        

More Photos &#x00bb;


A husky former French Army officer, Mr. Rouget, 51, commanded a group of foreign fighters during Ivory Coast&rsquo;s civil war in 2003, was convicted by a South African court of selling his military services and did a stint in the presidential guard of the Comoros Islands, an archipelago plagued by political tumult and coup attempts.        

Now Mr. Rouget works for Bancroft Global Development, an American private security company that the State Department has indirectly financed to train African troops who have fought a pitched urban battle in the ruins of this city against the Shabab, the Somali militant group allied with Al Qaeda.        

The company plays a vital part in the conflict now raging inside Somalia, a country that has been effectively ungoverned and mired in chaos for years. The fight against the Shabab, a group that United States officials fear could someday carry out strikes against the West, has mostly been outsourced to African soldiers and private companies out of reluctance to send American troops back into a country they hastily exited nearly two decades ago.        

&ldquo;We do not want an American footprint or boot on the ground,&rdquo; said Johnnie Carson, the Obama administration&rsquo;s top State Department official for Africa.        

A visible United States military presence would be provocative, he said, partly because of Somalia&rsquo;s history as a graveyard for American missions &mdash; including the &ldquo;Black Hawk Down&rdquo; episode in 1993, when Somali militiamen killed 18 American service members.        

Still, over the past year, the United States has quietly stepped up operations inside Somalia, American officials acknowledge. The Central Intelligence Agency, which largely finances the country&rsquo;s spy agency, has covertly trained Somali intelligence operatives, helped build a large base at Mogadishu&rsquo;s airport &mdash; Somalis call it &ldquo;the Pink House&rdquo; for the reddish hue of its buildings or &ldquo;Guant&aacute;namo&rdquo; for its ties to the United States &mdash; and carried out joint interrogations of suspected terrorists with their counterparts in a ramshackle Somali prison.        

The Pentagon has turned to strikes by armed drone aircraft to kill Shabab militants and recently approved $45 million in arms shipments to African troops fighting in Somalia.        

But this is a piecemeal approach that many American officials believe will not be enough to suppress the Shabab over the long run. In interviews, more than a dozen current and former United States officials and experts described an overall American strategy in Somalia that has been troubled by a lack of focus and internal battles over the past decade. While the United States has significantly stepped up clandestine operations in Pakistan and Yemen, American officials are deeply worried about Somalia but cannot agree on the risks versus the rewards of escalating military strikes here.        

&ldquo;I think that neither the international community in general nor the U.S. government in particular really knows what to do with the failure of the political process in Somalia,&rdquo; said J. Peter Pham, director of the Africa program at the Atlantic Council, a Washington research institution.        

For months, officials said, the State Department has been at odds with some military and intelligence officials about whether striking sites suspected of being militant camps in Somalia&rsquo;s southern territories or carrying out American commando raids to kill militant leaders would significantly weaken the Shabab &mdash; or instead bolster its ranks by allowing the group to present itself as the underdog against a foreign power.        

Lauren Ploch, an East Africa expert at the Congressional Research Service, said that the Obama administration was confronted with many of the same problems that had vexed its predecessors &mdash; &ldquo;balancing the risks of an on-the-ground presence&rdquo; against the risks of using &ldquo;third parties&rdquo; to carry out the American strategy in Somalia.        

 Teaching Fighting Skills        

The Shabab has already shown its ability to strike beyond Somalia, killing dozens of Ugandans last summer in a suicide attack that many believe was a reprisal for the Ugandan government&rsquo;s decision to send troops to Somalia. Now, though, thanks in part to Bancroft, the private security company, the militants have been forced into retreat. Several United Nations and African Union officials credit the work of Bancroft with improving the fighting skills of the African troops in Somalia, who this past weekend forced Shabab militants to withdraw from Mogadishu, the capital, for the first time in years.        

Like other security companies in Somalia, Bancroft has thrived as a proxy of sorts for the American government. Based in a mansion along Embassy Row in Washington, Bancroft is a nonprofit enterprise run by Michael Stock, a 34-year-old Virginia native who founded the company not long after graduating from Princeton in 1999. He used some of his family&rsquo;s banking fortune to set up Bancroft as a small land-mine clearing operation.        

In recent years, the company has expanded its mission in Somalia and now runs one of the only fortified camps in Mogadishu &mdash; a warren of prefabricated buildings rimmed with sand bags a stone&rsquo;s throw from the city&rsquo;s decrepit, seaside airport.        
Jeffrey Gettleman reported from Mogadishu, and Mark Mazzetti and Eric Schmitt from Washington.
