
WASHINGTON &mdash; An American airstrike has killed the Taliban fighters believed responsible for shooting down a Chinook helicopter and killing 38 people aboard, including 30 American military personnel, the senior American commander in Afghanistan said Wednesday.        

But the insurgent leader who was the original target of the weekend raid that ended with the shooting down of the helicopter has still eluded American and Afghan forces.        

The commander in Afghanistan, Gen. John R. Allen of the Marine Corps, said the military had tracked the insurgents after they shot down the helicopter on Saturday. Officials say the aircraft probably crashed after being hit by a rocket-propelled grenade.        

A group of fewer than 10 insurgents was tracked to a residential compound on Monday when it was attacked by F-16 fighter jets.        

Although a local Taliban commander was identified among the dead, the senior insurgent leader who was the central target of the weekend raid has not been captured or killed. Military officials have declined to disclose the leader&rsquo;s name while he remains in hiding.        

In a video briefing to the Pentagon from his headquarters in Kabul, General Allen said the Chinook helicopter also took small-arms fire as it entered the Tangi Valley in Wardak Province, just west of Kabul. An investigation has begun to determine the exact cause of the crash.        

Afghan residents near the crash site reported that militants were hiding behind trees when the helicopter was landing. The residents reported that one militant fired a rocket-propelled grenade and missed, while a second launched a similar weapon and hit the helicopter, a local police chief said.        

While a Chinook transport helicopter can ferry a larger number of troops than smaller, more nimble helicopters, military officials acknowledge that it is especially vulnerable when taking off or landing.        

Those killed were 17 members of the elite Navy Seals; five Naval Special Warfare personnel who support the Seals; three Air Force Special Operations personnel; an Army helicopter crew of five; seven Afghan commandos; a civilian Afghan interpreter; and a military dog. It was the greatest loss of American lives in a single day in the war.        

The Chinook was called to the scene of an operation in which Army Rangers were trying to capture or kill a local Taliban leader responsible for a series of attacks, including the planting of improvised roadside bombs. Officials said a number of insurgents were escaping from the area.        

The follow-up mission on Monday that killed the militants responsible for shooting down the helicopter &ldquo;does not ease our loss,&rdquo; General Allen said. He described the episode as &ldquo;a singular incident in a broader conflict in which we are making important strides and considerable progress.&rdquo;        

The jet strike on Monday killed a local Taliban leader named Mullah Mohibullah, who was part of the group that shot down the helicopter and subsequently escaped, according to a statement from the military headquarters in Kabul.        

&ldquo;After an exhaustive manhunt, Special Operations forces located Mullah Mohibullah and the shooter after receiving multiple intelligence leads and tips from local citizens,&rdquo; the statement said. &ldquo;The two men were attempting to flee the country in order to avoid capture.&rdquo;        

Said Mirzab Shah, the police chief of Saydabad District in Wardak Province, described the area in which the helicopter went down as a farm field with many surrounding trees.        

&ldquo;The reports we have got is that the Taliban were hiding behind some trees and there were two guys holding R.P.G.&rsquo;s,&rdquo; or rocket-propelled grenades, Mr. Shah said. &ldquo;When the first guy shot at the helicopter, he missed the target. But the second Taliban guy shot and hit the helicopter.&rdquo;        

The military inquiry into the episode will be led by Brig. Gen. Jeffrey Colt, deputy commanding general of the 101st Airborne Division, the military said in a statement. In addition to determining the exact cause of the crash, the inquiry is expected to look into the planning and execution of the mission, including which forces were assigned, their specific roles and the choice of aircraft for the operation.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve run more than a couple of thousand of these night operations over the last year, and this is the only occasion where this has occurred,&rdquo; General Allen said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not uncommon at all to use this aircraft on our special missions.&rdquo;        

NATO forces swarmed the Tangi Valley in the days after the crash, securing the area around the destroyed helicopter, setting up checkpoints and searching surrounding villages house to house. Helicopters zoomed overhead. Soldiers occupied rooftops.        

&ldquo;We had to take some time to clear the evidence and all the remaining parts from the crash site,&rdquo; said Brig. Gen. Carsten Jacobson, a NATO spokesman in Kabul.        

&ldquo;This was as well with respect to the fallen to keep the dignity and respect that comes along with such a tragic event,&rdquo; General Jacobson said. &ldquo;And secondly we needed to take the parts away that we need for the investigation.&rdquo;        

He said that the effort had been completed, and that &ldquo;normality will return to the valley.&rdquo;        
Thom Shanker reported from Washington, and Ray Rivera from Kabul, Afghanistan.
