
Obama administration officials say the Central Intelligence Agency&rsquo;s drone program in Pakistan has killed about 600 militants and no civilians since May 2010. The Bureau of Investigative Journalism in London, a Web-based reporting project, counted at least 45 civilian deaths. Below are the contrasting accounts of four strikes. SCOTT SHANE        

 Sept. 8, 2010        

BUREAU OF INVESTIGATIVE JOURNALISM        

A strike on a North Waziristan compound used by the militant Haqqani network killed six militants. It also hit the house next door of Din Mohammad, an Afghan refugee and not a militant, killing his son, nephew and two daughters.        

AMERICAN OFFICIAL SPEAKING         

ON THE CONDITION OF ANONYMITY        

&ldquo;The claim of four children killed is completely unsubstantiated. A small group of militants were killed that day when the compound &mdash; where they were making a car bomb to take across the border into Afghanistan &mdash; was targeted.&nbsp; The explosives ignited, injuring two in a neighboring compound who were escorted from the site.&rdquo;        

 Dec. 6, 2010        

THE BUREAU        

A missile hit a car in the village of Khushali in North Waziristan. Two people suspected of being militants died, though at least one escaped into a nearby shop. The drone then fired into the shop, killing the suspect and two civilians &mdash; the shopkeepers. Others were wounded. Some later reports claimed that all those inside the shop were militants.        

THE AMERICAN OFFICIAL         

&ldquo;There were two strikes that day, and neither matches the claim. One targeted a car, killing two militants who had visited several Al Qaeda compounds that day; the other killed a handful of militants, including a top A.Q. terrorist.&rdquo;        

 March 17, 2011        

THE BUREAU        

Missiles struck a tribal council meeting, or loya jirga, in Datta Khel, North Waziristan, convened to resolve a dispute between two contractors mining chromite nearby. Although 11 Taliban fighters were reported killed, between 19 and 30 civilians also died, including tribal elders and local police officers. Bureau researchers said the dead included members of the government-managed and armed Khassadar force. One of the contractors, Malik Daud, 45, was killed along with members of his family. Among the civilians killed were Malik Daud, Gul Akbar, Mohammad Sheen, Lewanai, Mir Zaman, Din Mohammad, Malik Tareen, Noor Ali, Zare Jan, Sadiq, Mustaqeem, Khangai, Gulnaware and Faenda Khan. Also among the dead were Dindar Khan, Umark Khan, Wali Khan, Sadar and Bakhtar, all from the Khassadar force.        

THE AMERICAN OFFICIAL         

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s no question the Pakistani and U.S. governments have different views on the outcome of this strike. The fact is that a large group of heavily armed men, some of whom were clearly connected to Al Qaeda and all of whom acted in a manner consistent with A.Q.-linked militants, were killed.&rdquo;        

 May 6, 2011        

THE BUREAU        

A strike on a religious school (also suspected of being a militant hide-out) in Datta Khel also hit a nearby roadside restaurant and a house. Many were killed in the attack. Bureau researchers found that 18 people were killed, including 6 civilians: Samad, Jamshed, Daraz, Iqbal, Noor Nawaz and Yousaf.        

THE AMERICAN OFFICIAL         

&ldquo;The claim that a restaurant was struck is ludicrous. This was a vehicle carrying explosives and nearly 10 armed men, which was engaged in a remote area just a couple miles from the Afghanistan border. There&rsquo;s no question where they or the explosives were headed &mdash; let&rsquo;s remember that the goal here is protect the lives of Afghans, Pakistanis and Americans who would otherwise be killed by these militants.&rdquo;        
