
BIRMINGHAM, England &mdash; With one senseless act, the fragile peace this city had maintained while London was convulsed with violence was suddenly threatened.        

Gangs of South Asians vowed retribution for the deaths of 21-year-old Haroon Jahan and the brothers Shazad Ali, 31, and Abdul Musavir, 30, who were run down early Wednesday morning when a car said to have been driven by an Afro-Caribbean man crashed into a group of residents who had gathered to protect local businesses from attack.        

But then one victim&rsquo;s father, Tariq Jahan, made a remarkable appeal for peace, just hours after trying in vain to revive his son.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want there to be any more trouble, anyone getting hurt,&rdquo; Mr. Jahan said. &ldquo;My son died defending the community he lived in. Blacks, Asians, whites &mdash; we all live in the same community. Step forward if you want to lose your sons. Otherwise, calm down and go home, please.&rdquo;        

His call for calm was heard, and the city was tranquil enough on Thursday for an international cricket match between England and India to go ahead uninterrupted three miles across the city. Meanwhile, the site of the three men&rsquo;s deaths has become a shrine for people wishing to express their horror at the act of violence.        

Mr. Jahan&rsquo;s quiet plea has been celebrated as a watershed moment in the disturbances that have ripped across the nation, and Prime Minister David Cameron paid tribute to him on Thursday in his address at an emergency House of Commons session. &ldquo;Everyone will have been impressed by the brave words of Tariq Jahan,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said.        

The leader of the opposition, Ed Miliband, described Mr. Jahan as &ldquo;the true face of Britain.&rdquo;        

Birmingham, a city at the forefront of the Industrial Revolution in the 18th century but one that now has many areas of deprivation, has a history of tensions between South Asian and black residents. Six years ago the city suffered two days of running battles in the racially mixed suburb of Lozells when a false rumor spread that a black woman had been raped by a South Asian man.        

There were fears on Wednesday that the violence could replicate itself in Winson Green, the suburb where the three men were killed, as some members of the community &mdash; unimpressed with the police response &mdash; vowed to take matters into their own hands.        

Bishop Andrew Watson of Aston was present when members of the community called an impromptu meeting at a local grocery on Wednesday morning. Although some elders urged restraint, a number of young voices called for retaliation. &ldquo;It became clear things could get nasty,&rdquo; Bishop Watson said. &ldquo;I came away from that meeting thinking it could go either way.&rdquo;        

There was another gathering later in the day, this time led by the local member of Parliament, and again there were demands for revenge. But that is when Mr. Jahan stepped forward and urged the angry crowd of some 150 men, many of them wearing hoods, to exercise restraint.        

The chief constable of the West Midlands Police, Chris Sims, said Mr. Jahan&rsquo;s &ldquo;powerful, generous and farsighted intervention&rdquo; was critical.        

&ldquo;I think it was a decisive impact,&rdquo; Mr. Sims said. &ldquo;Those words were so powerful, so heartfelt and so spontaneous and generous that I think anyone that heard them must have been moved. I think that was a decisive intervention in terms of Birmingham not suffering tension and violence between communities.&rdquo;        

The peace was far from assured, however. Even as Mr. Jahan was speaking, a group of more than 100 Muslim men carrying baseball bats and sticks was said to have broken away from the gathering after hearing rumors, which turned out to be false, of a group of black men robbing a house nearby. The tensions continued into Thursday.        

Knots of South Asians and numerous police officers in luminous yellow overcoats gathered around the Jet gas station on Dudley Road, where the three men fell. They stood, waiting, watching as the piles of flowers grew under a sign reading: &ldquo;Haroon, Shazad and Abdul: murdered protecting our community.&rdquo;        

Rather than a flashpoint, the makeshift shrine appears to have evolved into a focal point for the community to bond. It was there that Alton Burnett of the Afro Caribbean Millennium community center presented Mr. Jahan with flowers and a message of condolence on Thursday evening.        

&ldquo;We are one,&rdquo; Mr. Burnett said. &ldquo;We feel your pain and we feel your sorrow. We will not let this divide us.&rdquo; The two men hugged, a symbolic moment recognized with applause from those watching.        

With race relations seemingly under control, the heat seems likely to return to the police. There is a feeling among many minorities here that the authorities do not listen to their complaints. But quick action by the police seems to have eased much of the pressure.        

With 60 officers working on the case, the police announced the arrests on Thursday of two teenagers and a man on suspicion of murder. A fourth person arrested a day earlier was released on bail pending further inquiries.        
