
PARIS &mdash; President Nicolas Sarkozy faces an uncomfortable political predicament. He must satisfy an anxious market, preserve France&rsquo;s AAA credit rating, defend French banks, cut the budget to fixed targets in a time of slowing growth and make it all palatable enough to win an election only nine months away.        

It will not be an easy trick to pull off. Mr. Sarkozy is already struggling with low popularity ratings in opinion polls and a general disaffection among the French with his personality and style.        

And the job will be harder given the nature of the European Union and the euro zone, which means that France&rsquo;s money is not really its own. Even the run on French banks this week has had little to do with France, where the banks are considered well regulated. The banks are suffering in large part because of doubts about their sizable holdings of the debts of weaker European economies.        

France needs to narrow the deficit even as growth is slowing, and to that end Mr. Sarkozy broke his vacation to preside over a small cabinet meeting on Wednesday. With some fanfare, he told his budget and finance ministers to come back in a week with new measures to ensure that France, no matter what happens, meets its targets of a deficit of 5.7 percent of gross domestic product this year, 4.6 percent next year &mdash; election year &mdash; and 3 percent in 2013.        

For political reasons, he is less likely to try to narrow the gap with taxes on anyone but the very rich.        

Christophe Barbier, the editor of the weekly magazine L&rsquo;Express, credited Mr. Sarkozy with &ldquo;setting the right tone,&rdquo; but said his reform plans were insufficient. In an election year, &ldquo;he&rsquo;s faced with an insoluble equation: Either he raises taxes and risks unpopularity, or he doesn&rsquo;t raise them and trims spending, which will also translate into unpopularity.&rdquo;        

Jean-Marc Vittori, a columnist with Les &Eacute;chos, a daily business newspaper, agreed, but he said that &ldquo;one of the strengths of politicians is that they know how to make a handicap into a trump.&rdquo; Mr. Sarkozy, leading a center-right government, is liked best when he acts in a crisis, and his proposal to amend the Constitution to limit budget deficits to 3 percent of gross domestic product has &ldquo;put the Socialists into a corner,&rdquo; Mr. Vittori said. The Socialists have their own budget plans should they win power, and they think that such an amendment would be too rigid.        

To reassure anxious markets, some, like Gilles Mo&euml;c, co-head of European economics research at Deutsche Bank in London, are urging France to speed up the reduction of its deficit to 3 percent, much as Italy&rsquo;s prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, promised to balance his country&rsquo;s budget by 2013, a year earlier than planned. But Mr. Mo&euml;c is confident that France will do what it must to keep its AAA rating. He also suggested that the constitutional amendment on deficits, if passed, would reassure the markets for the future &mdash; especially helpful, he said, if the Socialists win the presidency.        

But if the problem is largely European &mdash; the failure of European leaders to put enough money and credibility behind their vows to support the euro &mdash; Mr. Sarkozy also faces another external difficulty. His default partner, the cautious German chancellor, Angela Merkel, remains unwilling to provide what many market analysts seem to demand: a German guarantee on a fund big enough to cover all the debt of all the vulnerable countries, including Spain and Italy. (Germany has the largest, strongest and most energetic economy in Europe.)        

On Thursday, Mr. Sarkozy and Mrs. Merkel announced that they would meet in Paris on Tuesday afternoon for accelerated discussions on &ldquo;joint proposals for the reform of the governance of the euro zone,&rdquo; a promise made at the last crisis summit meeting on July 21.        

Mr. Sarkozy finished that meeting rhapsodizing about the transformation of an expanded European Financial Stability Facility into a nascent European Monetary Fund. He sees the fund &mdash; to be increased to 440 billion euros (about $630 billion at current exchange rates) to cover Greece, Portugal, Ireland and more &mdash; as a way of Europeanizing the debt guarantees.        

But the fund will not be big enough to cover Spain and Italy, and because it needs to be ratified by all euro zone governments, it will not be in place until late September, forcing the European Central Bank to intervene to buy bonds in the meantime. Mrs. Merkel, who had only reluctantly agreed to strengthen the fund, and whose own coalition is deeply opposed to being dragged farther into writing blank checks for Europe, said she refuses to countenance an ever bigger fund.        
Romain Parlier contributed reporting.
