
BRUSSELS &mdash; In the latest challenge to the European Union&rsquo;s drive toward closer integration, Spain won approval Thursday to keep Romanians from seeking work there, arguing that its battered economy could not absorb fresh inflows of workers.        

The decision is the first such and comes at a time of deep soul-searching within the 27-nation bloc, alarmed by the continued impact of the debt crisis on its economy and at the prospect of increased migration following recent upheavals in the Arab world.        

Already, Europe&rsquo;s visa-free travel area, the Schengen zone, has been undermined by friction between France and Italy over migrant flow, and between Denmark and Germany over increased frontier checks, a dispute that worsened this week.        

The move Thursday is not related to the Schengen zone but to one of the European Union&rsquo;s four fundamental freedoms, which cover the movement of goods, services, capital and &mdash; as in this case &mdash; people.        

Romania and Bulgaria joined the European Union in 2007, and Spain allowed their workers access to its labor market two years later. However, Spain has now gone back on that pledge by invoking a special safeguard rule to deal with exceptional circumstances, which was approved by the bloc&rsquo;s executive, the European Commission, on Thursday.        

The restriction will apply, in the first instance, until the end of 2012 &mdash; unless the commission&rsquo;s ruling is overturned by a weighted majority of national governments. The ban could then potentially be extended another year.        

&ldquo;It is a backlash that is not really addressing the real problem, which is the lack of more flexible labor markets,&rdquo; said Heather Grabbe, director of the Open Society Institute &mdash; Brussels. &ldquo;It is a limit on free movement, which is a fundamental underpinning of Europe&rsquo;s single market. What needs to happen is for market problems to be addressed, rather than pushing back on free movement. One of the great strengths of the United States economy is that people can move.&rdquo;        

In a statement, the European Commission said the measure was justified because Spain had the highest unemployment rate in the Union, with more than 20 percent out of a job. The bloc&rsquo;s average is 9.4 percent, while the figure for the nations that use the euro is 9.9 percent.        

It added that 191,400 Romanian citizens living in Spain were unemployed in the first quarter of this year, slightly less than one-third of the number of Romanians working in the country. In total, including children and other nonworking family members, there were 823,000 Romanian nationals in Spain on January 1, 2010, though the number coming to the country to seek jobs has fallen in recent years, the commission said.        

&ldquo;This decision has been taken because of the very specific employment situation in Spain,&rdquo; the E.U. employment commissioner, Laszlo Andor, said in a statement.        

&ldquo;The Commission understands why, at this particular juncture &mdash; because of the dramatic employment situation and the very complex financial environment &mdash; the Spanish authorities wish to step back from full free movement,&rdquo; he added.        

The measures do not affect Romanians already in Spain, but those seeking to move there to seek jobs would now need a work contract before settling. Bulgarians, who have settled in much lower numbers, are not affected.        

Meanwhile the German government this week criticized plans by Denmark to build new control posts between the two countries, insisting that Copenhagen should wait for approval from the European Commission before taking such measures.        

Werner Hoyer, state secretary at the German Foreign Ministry, issued a tough statement saying that last May&rsquo;s unilateral decision to increase customs procedures on the border violated E.U. law.        

&ldquo;There is not the slightest reason now to build parts for a new Danish border control system, which raises considerable doubt with the Schengen treaty, as well as with the European Commission and the German government,&rdquo; Mr. Hoyer said.        

A Foreign Ministry official, requesting anonymity because of the sensitivity of the issue, said Thursday that the government in Berlin was surprised and disappointed that the Danes had begun to build new installations.        

Last month, after a visit to Denmark, European Commission experts reported that they were &ldquo;unable to get sufficient justifications from the Danish side for the intensification of the controls at the internal borders.&rdquo;        

The decision to step up border controls was the outcome of an agreement between the far right-wing Danish People&rsquo;s Party, or DF, and the Liberal-Conservative government. The DF had campaigned for tighter border controls, claiming they would stop the flow of illegal immigrants. The government agreed to such measures in return for DF support for its budget plan.        

The decision, however, has already hurt the tourist industry, with Denmark&rsquo;s summer house rental agencies facing cancellations by Germans.        

Judy Dempsey reported from Berlin.        
