
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Syrian security forces killed 12 people on Thursday in an attack on a western town near the border with Lebanon and stormed another town in the northwest, human rights activists in Syria reported, and President Bashar al-Assad faced new pressure from Turkey and the United States to stop his harsh repression of the protest movement challenging his rule.        

Backed by tanks, troops raided the town of Qusair in Homs Province, near the border with Lebanon, early in the day, after overnight demonstrations there calling for the downfall of Mr. Assad, activists said.        

Tanks and armored vehicles also stormed the northwestern town of Saraqib near the border with Turkey, and human rights activists said that scores of people were arrested there. Northern towns in Syria have recently become a major target for security forces after large demonstrations in the region in recent days. The raid on Saraqib came a day after the authorities took a selected group of Turkish journalists on a trip to northern towns and said that the army was withdrawing to its barracks.        

The Local Coordination Committees, a group of activists who organize and document protests across Syria, also said that one person was killed in Latakia, along the coast.        

On Wednesday, the United States imposed new sanctions on a Syrian state bank and on Syria&rsquo;s biggest mobile telephone company. The American ambassador in Syria, Robert S. Ford, warned Thursday that there would be more sanctions if the violence did not stop.        

A human rights group based in the United States released a report on Wednesday night accusing the Syrian authorities of singling out medical facilities and health workers and patients across Syria. The group, Physicians for Human Rights, also called on President Assad to ensure that doctors would be able to provide care regardless of a patient&rsquo;s politics.        

The group said that security forces controlled access to hospitals and clinics and that the injured were sometimes forgoing treatment because they feared being detained or tortured by armed men loyal to the government. It also quoted Syrian health workers as saying that the authorities had detained at least 134 doctors or were responsible for their disappearance.        

Human rights groups say that more than 2,000 people have been killed since the popular uprising against Mr. Assad began in mid-March and that thousands have been detained or have disappeared. The government disputes these numbers and blames Muslim extremists for the unrest. It says that 500 Syrian soldiers and police officers have died in the bloodshed.        

In Washington, the Obama administration continued to seek ways to maintain diplomatic pressure on Syria. President Obama spoke with Turkey&rsquo;s prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and the two leaders &ldquo;reiterated their deep concern about the Syrian government&rsquo;s use of violence against civilians and their belief that the Syrian people&rsquo;s legitimate demands for a transition to democracy should be met,&rdquo; the White House said in a statement.        

The administration also inched closer to explicitly calling on Mr. Assad to step down and allow a transition to democracy, something it has stopped short of doing despite repeated calls by members of Congress, human rights advocates and others. &ldquo;We believe that President Assad&rsquo;s opportunity to lead the transition has passed,&rdquo; Mr. Obama&rsquo;s press secretary, Jay Carney, said.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton underscored the difficulties in forcing Syria to cease its violent crackdown. She said other nations needed to do more to sever economic ties, citing European, Chinese and Indian investments in Syria&rsquo;s oil and gas industry and Russian arms sales.        

&ldquo;We have such a small stake in what they produce and what they market,&rdquo; she said in an interview on the &ldquo;CBS Evening News&rdquo; when asked about expanding sanctions. &ldquo;The real trick is to convince the Europeans and the Arabs and the Chinese and the Indians and others.&rdquo;        

External pressure on Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government also &ldquo;requires an organized opposition,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;And there isn&rsquo;t one.&rdquo;        
Nada Bakri reported from Beirut, and Steven Lee Myers from Washington.
