
KANDAHAR, Afghanistan &mdash; NATO and Afghan forces are investigating a claim by the Afghan police that American soldiers fired on them for no reason, killing four officers and wounding two others, and inflaming tensions in southern Afghanistan&rsquo;s Arghandab Valley, where security gains brought by the surge of American troops remain brittle.        

While there have been dozens of cases of Afghan soldiers firing on members of the NATO-led military coalition, reports of NATO soldiers firing on their Afghan counterparts are rare. American and NATO officials have yet to release details of the shooting, which took place on Tuesday evening at a police checkpoint outside Combat Outpost Tynes, a small base in the volatile Arghandab district of Kandahar Province.        

By Thursday, word of the shooting was stirring anger in the area, where some residents had vowed to stop helping the Americans if the soldiers responsible were not brought to justice.        

In bedside interviews at a military hospital in Kandahar on Thursday, the two wounded officers gave nearly identical accounts of the shooting. The officers, one the police commander, were interviewed separately.        

By their account, an American captain and his men were visiting the checkpoint to discuss a possible security lapse there.        

The police commander, Abdullah, who like many Afghans goes by one name, was discussing the matter with the captain over tea in the courtyard, as about a dozen soldiers and an equal number of police officers stood against opposite walls of the courtyard.        

Suddenly, gunfire sounded in the distance. Perhaps spooked by the gunfire, Mr. Abdullah said, an American soldier sitting next to the captain pulled his weapon and began firing. The others followed.        

One by one, the police officers fell. Mr. Abdullah was hit in the right arm and both legs. Others tried to pull him to safety as blood poured onto the courtyard floor, the two officers said.        

They said the Afghans never fired back. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know why they started shooting,&rdquo; Mr. Abdullah said. &ldquo;There was no argument or anything.&rdquo;        

The other wounded officer, Muhammad Naim, 19, recounted virtually the same story, except he said one of the soldiers along the wall, not the one next to the captain, fired first. Also, he did not recall hearing shots in the distance first.        

The first shots prompted the other soldiers to open fire, he said. Even the captain stood, pulled his sidearm and began shooting, he said.        

Mr. Naim was shot in both legs.        

Making it even more perplexing, both wounded officers said, is that they knew the American captain and the soldiers.        

&ldquo;We had been patrolling together the last three or four months,&rdquo; Mr. Naim said. &ldquo;We used to be good friends with the captain and his men. He was a nice person, very talkative. We went on patrols with them. We risked our lives with them. I don&rsquo;t know why they did this.&rdquo;        

The gunfire ended as the American soldiers left the compound and returned to their base, Mr. Naim said. As survivors began placing the dead and wounded in the back of police trucks to take them to the hospital, other American and Afghan soldiers appeared to treat those hurt.        

Among the dead were Mr. Naim&rsquo;s nephew, Abdul Majeed, 23, and two of Mr. Naim&rsquo;s cousins, Jumma Gul, 25, and Muhammed Gul, 21. The fourth officer killed was named Karimullah, 22. All were from Arghandab district, Mr. Naim said.        

In a statement, NATO officials in Kabul said a joint Afghan-NATO investigation was &ldquo;under way and more details will be released as appropriate.&rdquo;        

The area where the shooting occurred &mdash; a fertile but dangerous valley with lush vineyards and pomegranate orchards that has been one of the Taliban&rsquo;s traditional strongholds &mdash; is one of several in the south where NATO forces say they have made progress since the surge of American reinforcements began flooding the country last year.        

But they acknowledge that the momentum is fragile, pinned in large part on keeping the trust of local Afghans. The morning after the shooting, about 150 residents marched on the outpost demanding answers, witnesses said.        

&ldquo;Day and night the police are helping the Americans,&rdquo; said Hajji Muhammad, the leader of the Arghandab District Council. &ldquo;The police are really frustrated by this shooting. If the shooters are not brought to justice they won&rsquo;t help the Americans anymore. The people from the area are saying the same thing.&rdquo;        

Mr. Abdullah and Mr. Naim, meanwhile, lay groggy and dazed, blood soaking through their bandages. Both are expected to recover.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think people will trust Americans anymore,&rdquo; said Mr. Abdullah&rsquo;s cousin, Amanullah, as he sat by Mr. Abdullah&rsquo;s bedside. &ldquo;And I don&rsquo;t think people will let their sons help the Americans.&rdquo;        

NATO and Afghan forces have shot at each other before, often as a result of heated arguments. About 50 coalition soldiers, at least 30 of them Americans, have died in what the military calls &ldquo;green-on-blue&rdquo; attacks since March 2009, when Afghan and coalition forces began patrolling together regularly.        

But reports of NATO soldiers firing on their Afghan counterparts are uncommon. In January, an American service member killed an Afghan policeman in Helmand Province after the policeman pulled a gun on him during an argument and refused to put it down.        

The Afghan police suffered another loss in Helmand Province on Wednesday when militants attacked a police checkpoint in Greshk Bazar, killing five police officers, said Muhammad Hakim Angar, the Helmand police chief.        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul, Afghanistan.
