
BANGKOK &mdash; When the bailiff&rsquo;s seal was removed from the private jet of Thailand&rsquo;s crown prince this week, the Thai government put behind it an embarrassing episode that played out on the tarmac of the airport in Munich, a city that is a favorite destination for the globe-trotting prince.        

The unusual standoff between Thailand and Germany, which began four weeks ago with the impounding of the prince&rsquo;s Boeing 737, was resolved on Tuesday. The Thai government issued a bank guarantee for the equivalent of $54 million that satisfied the demands of debt collectors in a longstanding contract dispute over a Bangkok elevated highway project that involved a German construction company.        

&ldquo;Our tenacity has paid off,&rdquo; said Werner Schneider, the liquidator who had obtained the order to seize the jet.        

But left unanswered was the question of who, precisely, owns the plane.        

Crown Prince Maha Vajiralongkorn had no connection to the contract dispute that led to the impoundment, yet German lawyers argued that the jet belonged to the Thai government and thus was fair game as collateral. Thai officials maintain that the jet belongs to the crown prince, not the government.        

The case underlined a long-unresolved, and rarely discussed, question about the privy purse and the public purse in Thailand &mdash; and, ultimately, whether certain assets are held by crown or by country. At issue are an estimated 1.1 trillion baht, or $37 billion, in real estate holdings alone, plus substantial stakes in two of Thailand&rsquo;s most successful companies. But the agency that manages the assets, the Crown Property Bureau, is under no obligation to detail the holdings or how profits are spent, according to Porphant Ouyyanont, the author of a landmark study of the bureau in 2007.        

Mr. Porphant, an associate professor of economics at Sukhothai Thammathirat Open University, said that pressure had been building in recent years for more transparency, partly as a result of political turmoil that has emboldened Thais to be more forceful in confronting the country&rsquo;s elite and questioning the tenets of the political system.        

But, at least so far, the subject of the crown finances remains mostly taboo in a country that regularly enforces a strict law against criticizing the monarchy. The media in Thailand reported on the controversy over the crown prince&rsquo;s plane, but the episode did not generate commentary in the mainstream media about the larger questions of ownership.        

The question of ownership has a long history.        

Control over crown properties tilted toward the government after a coup in 1932 that ended the absolute monarchy in the country. But the ascendancy of the palace in the subsequent decades, due in large part to the popularity of the current monarch, King Bhumibol Adulyadej, helped to restore royal control over the possessions.        

Britain, whose constitutional monarchy inspired many of the institutions in Thailand today, resolved the question of its own crown lands two and a half centuries ago. Control over royal assets was transferred to the government, and profits were paid to the treasury.        

By contrast, a 1948 law in Thailand that is still in force says that the Crown Property Bureau&rsquo;s income can be spent &ldquo;at the king&rsquo;s pleasure.&rdquo;        

Much remains unknown about the bureau&rsquo;s assets. The specific tracts of land it owns in Bangkok have not been made public, Mr. Porphant said. Nor is it clear exactly how the bureau&rsquo;s significant revenues are spent, he said. Through its shares of Siam Cement Group and Siam Commercial Bank, the bureau received dividends from 2010 equivalent to more than $200 million.        

Officials at the Crown Property Bureau did not respond to e-mailed questions. But in its 2010 annual report, the bureau stresses its charitable works and its role in preserving and maintaining &ldquo;historic sites that have royal and religious significance.&rdquo; The bureau also calculates that 93 percent of its landholdings are rented out as government offices, to nonprofit organizations, or to poor or middle-income families &ldquo;at rates much lower than the market price.&rdquo;        

In 2008, when Forbes magazine ranked King Bhumibol as the world&rsquo;s richest royal, the Thai government strongly protested, saying the magazine had conflated the king&rsquo;s personal wealth with assets managed by the bureau.        

The subject is sensitive enough that the Crown Property Bureau, years later, insisted that the magazine was wrong. &ldquo;Crown property is state property and public property,&rdquo; the bureau said in the 2010 annual report. The bureau has always operated &ldquo;for the benefit of the public,&rdquo; the report said.        
(Page 2 of 2)
That statement drew a sharp response in recent months from one of Thailand&rsquo;s leading academic authorities on the monarchy, Somsak Jeamteerasakul, who said the bureau was distorting facts.        

&ldquo;No government has any power to control or manage crown property,&rdquo; Mr. Somsak, a professor at Thammasat University in Bangkok, wrote in a  response published on a popular Thai news Web site, Prachatai.        

Income from the crown properties is separate from the approximately $350 million in taxpayer money allocated for the royal household, royal-led development projects and other expenses related to the royal family. The king and his family also have personal assets, which the government says includes the prince&rsquo;s Boeing 737.        

Mr. Somsak, who had already been charged in a separate case involving statements about the monarchy, argued that in a constitutional monarchy, &ldquo;crown&rdquo; property should belong to the state and be &ldquo;subject to the control and oversight of the government elected by the people.&rdquo;        

Such public outspokenness about the monarchy is rare in Thailand, both because King Bhumibol commands widespread respect after more than six decades on the throne and because of the law protecting the monarchy against insult.        

Yet in the twilight of King Bhumibol&rsquo;s reign &mdash; the 83-year-old king has been hospitalized for almost two years &mdash; there appears to be a movement toward more openness over questions surrounding the king&rsquo;s role in society.        

Anand Panyarachun, a former prime minister who is seen as one of the country&rsquo;s leading statesmen, said in a television interview in June that Thais must be more prepared to tolerate dissent toward the monarchy.        

&ldquo;I can accept that as long as there&rsquo;s no persecution of the monarchy,&rdquo; he said.        

And a group of about 350 Thai writers signed an open letter in May calling for more constructive discussion of the monarchy and denouncing what they described as use of the l&egrave;se-majest&eacute; law as a political tool.        

&ldquo;It is time for Thai society to distinguish between attempts to overthrow the institution and the debates which will lead to long-term social stability and protection of freedom of expression under a democratic system with the king as head of the state,&rdquo; the letter said.        

As for the specific question of the prince&rsquo;s plane, a German court was supposed to rule on its ownership in September. But with the aircraft now back in Thai possession, the case is closed.        
