
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; A founding patron of the Taliban in Afghanistan died in the hands of a younger generation of militants in the tribal badlands of Pakistan in the last few days, a victim of the vicious forces he helped create, Pakistani officials said Monday.        

Brig. Sultan Amir, known by his nom de guerre, Colonel Imam, was captured by the Pakistani Taliban in northern Waziristan last March.        

Whether he was killed by his captors, or died of a heart attack as reported by the Taliban, remained unclear.        

The demise of Colonel Imam comes 10 days after another veteran figure in the emergence of the Afghan Taliban, Gen. Naseerullah Babar, 82, died after a long illness at his home in Peshawar, in northwest Pakistan.        

The death of the two men signified the end of an era of the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan that began in the 1970s, stretched into the American-backed mujahedeen resistance against the Soviet occupation and was followed by the coercive Taliban rule of Afghanistan in the 1990s.        

After the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, a Pakistani Taliban formed, inspired by the Afghan Taliban, to fight the Pakistani state.        

When the Taliban dominated Afghanistan in the 1990s, General Babar, then the interior minister of Pakistan under Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, called the new rulers &ldquo;our boys.&rdquo; Colonel Imam, working for Pakistan&rsquo;s Inter-Services Intelligence served as Pakistan&rsquo;s consul general in the strategic Afghan town of Herat, providing vital financial and military support to the Taliban.        

Colonel Imam formed a close bond with Mullah Muhammad Omar, the Taliban leader who welcomed Osama bin Laden to Afghanistan.        

After Sept. 11, when the Taliban movement became stronger in Pakistan, Colonel Imam struggled to stay relevant to a new younger generation of jihadists, more ruthless and uncontrollable.        

Last March, he escorted a British journalist of Pakistani origin, Asad Qureshi, to North Waziristan. Another former ISI official, Khalid Khawaja, was in the group. The three men were kidnapped by militants calling themselves &ldquo;Asian Tigers,&rdquo; a wild bunch of Mehsud tribesmen and Punjabi militants who fought among themselves.        

The Tigers killed Mr. Khawaja in April, branding him an agent of the Central Intelligence Agency and the ISI. The British journalist was released in September.        

Colonel Imam&rsquo;s family appealed for his release through the Haqqani network, the most powerful militants in North Waziristan and allies of the Pakistani military. But the Haqqanis were unable to secure his release, and it appeared that the Pakistani Army and security services were either unable or unwilling to organize a rescue operation.        

&ldquo;This was a big error on his part believing he would be welcome now in North Waziristan,&rdquo; said Rahimullah Yusufzai, a Pakistani journalist who covered Colonel Imam for many years.        

By the time Colonel Imam got to North Waziristan last year, the old guard of the Taliban that he had known had been killed or arrested, Mr. Yusufzai said. The new guard lacked an ideology, and North Waziristan had been transformed into a uncontrollable brew of groups fighting the Pakistani state, as well as Afghan Taliban fighting the Americans in Afghanistan.        

A weathered figure with a long white beard and white turban who looked to be in his 70s, Colonel Imam was initially trained by the Special Forces at Fort Bragg, N.C., in 1974, and completed a master parachutist course with the 82nd Airborne Division.        

In the late 1970s, he taught young Afghans who fled the Communist revolution in 1978, including the future resistance leaders Gulbuddin Hekmatyar and Ahmed Shah Masood. During the American covert war against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, Colonel Imam worked closely with the C.I.A., running training camps for mujahedeen guerrillas in Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal areas.        

A senior Pakistani government official in the tribal areas, Tariq Hayat, said Monday that he had been informed by a Pakistani official in North Waziristan that Colonel Imam was dead. The militants were demanding a ransom for the return of the body, he said. Only after the body has been reclaimed would the cause of death be known, Mr. Hayat said.        

Of the two men, General Babar was the more senior, the more influential. He was a powerful minister of interior in the 1990s for Benazir Bhutto, and conducted a brutal crackdown on political and criminal gangs in Karachi in 1996. He viewed the creation of the Taliban in Afghanistan as an important buffer for Pakistan against Central Asia and Russia.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m not sure General Babar realized what demons he unleashed,&rdquo; said Aitzaz Ahsan, a prominent Pakistani lawyer who was interior minister in an earlier Bhutto government.        
