
MEXICO CITY (AP) &mdash; Mexican soldiers and police officers regularly burst into homes, plant evidence and take people&rsquo;s possessions, the National Human Rights Commission said Friday, adding that the violations have increased as Mexico&rsquo;s war against drug gangs has grown more intense.        

The actions by the security forces drew renewed attention this week when police officers searching for an accused leader of a drug gang stormed into the home of a gentle poet, breaking windows and doors and emptying closets and drawers.        

The government&rsquo;s human rights commission said that to justify an illegal entry the security forces sometimes planted evidence or cited vague justifications, like having received an anonymous tip or having spotted a person who looked &ldquo;unusually nervous.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Illegal searches have become a common practice in many parts of the country, and they reveal a systematic pattern,&rdquo; the commission said in a report released on Friday. It said that the security forces &ldquo;burst into a home looking for illicit objects, they threaten, injure and detain the occupants, they take valuables or money, they alter evidence.&rdquo;        

The poet, Efra&iacute;n Bartolom&eacute;, said that in a predawn raid on Thursday the police ransacked his house in Mexico City and took a watch, a memory stick and cellphones. The police said they were searching for the suspected leader of a brutal drug gang called the Hand With Eyes, who was reported to have confessed to more than 600 murders. He was eventually captured in a nearby neighborhood.        

The raid on Mr. Bartolom&eacute;&rsquo;s home drew a rare, immediate apology from city officials, who said that cellphone signals had indicated the suspect was in the area of the home.        

But that kind of quick apology is not the rule, the commission noted.        

&ldquo;Authorities use force against the victims, to make them confess to possessing illegal articles,&rdquo; the commission said in the report, adding that the security forces sometimes threatened people &ldquo;if they complain about what happened.&rdquo; Despite such threats, the human rights agency said that the number of complaints about illicit searches increased to 946 in 2008 from 234 in 2006, when President Felipe Calder&oacute;n began the offensive against drug cartels.        

The number of complaints dipped slightly in 2009 to 947 and 826 in 2010, but it increased again to 422 in the first five months of 2011, a pace that would yield more than 1,000 such complaints by the end of this year.        

In some cases, the commission said, the authorities pressured or forced people to &ldquo;voluntarily&rdquo; agree to searches of their homes.        

The commission noted that changes in the law enacted in 2008 made it easier for the police to obtain search warrants, permitting officers to ask judges for them in e-mails or by other electronic means. The commission urged that search warrants be printed out and shown to homeowners.        

The human rights group also questioned the army&rsquo;s use of British-made GT200 bomb detectors, saying that they were of questionable reliability and legality if used without search warrants. The commission also recommended that the police and military establish clear, constitutional rules about searches, obey them and inform the public about their rights during searches.        
