
BUENOS AIRES &mdash; President Cristina Fern&aacute;ndez de Kirchner unveiled a 10-story-high tribute to Evita Per&oacute;n last month, dedicating the forged-steel portrait on the side of a government building to the memory of a woman she has often invoked in speeches to supporters.        

&ldquo;Let the symbol of Evita be a symbol for the unity of all Argentines,&rdquo; Mrs. Kirchner said at the unveiling of the portrait, which was her idea.        

Mrs. Kirchner may never achieve the popularity of Mrs. Peron, an actress who married President Juan Per&oacute;n and became beloved for fighting for social justice before dying of cancer in 1952. But she is fighting to be mentioned in the same breath one day and may have more of a chance now that she appears to be heading toward re-election in October, aided by a splintered opposition and a growing economy that is overshadowing previous concerns about her polarizing leadership style.        

The first real test of Mrs. Kirchner&rsquo;s chances &mdash; and of analysts&rsquo; predictions that she will win handily &mdash; will come Sunday, when the country holds a national primary. Voting is mandatory, and people are allowed to cast their ballots for members of any party, so the results should provide a good indicator of whether Mrs. Kirchner could win Oct. 23 and avoid a runoff.        

According to several recent polls, Mrs. Kirchner, 58, is expected to get enough votes to secure a second four-year term without going to a runoff. Her nearest competitor in the polls is Ricardo Alfons&iacute;n, a congressman from the Radical Civic Union Party, who appears to be trailing badly.        

&ldquo;The lack of a strong opposition candidate has created the feeling that she is invincible,&rdquo; said Graciela Romer, a political analyst in Buenos Aires.        

The change in perception represents a stunning turnaround for Mrs. Kirchner, who just two years ago seemed a long shot to be re-elected, in part because she clashed with one of the country&rsquo;s most powerful interests: farmers. But after her husband, former President N&eacute;stor Kirchner, died in October, Mrs. Kirchner rode a wave of sympathy and has seen her popularity surge to a record high.        

Still, recent losses by candidates from her center-left wing of the Peronist Party in municipal elections in Buenos Aires and Santa Fe &mdash; and an inability to field a candidate in an election for governor last Sunday in Cordoba &mdash; have shown that anti-Kirchner sentiment remains strong in some quarters, particularly among rural voters. The mayor of Buenos Aires, Mauricio Macri, won re-election last month with 64 percent of the vote, easily defeating Mrs. Kirchner&rsquo;s candidate, Daniel Filmus.        

The president has also lost backing from many traditional Peronists for steering to the left and for her antibusiness remarks. They have also been troubled that she has filled her ballot with young people who have risen out of her La C&aacute;mpora movement, run by her son M&aacute;ximo, and who support her policy of taxing exports to support social welfare programs. (In Argentina, during presidential elections, candidates for the legislature run on a party ticket with the presidential candidate.)        

Federico MacDougall, an economist and political analyst at the University of Belgrano in Buenos Aires, said that while Mrs. Kirchner was currently &ldquo;cruising&rdquo; toward victory, relying so heavily on La C&aacute;mpora could backfire if it drives away more conservative Peronists.        

In the end, most analysts believe that neither the loss of some party support nor the losses suffered by Mrs. Kirchner&rsquo;s candidates in local elections will significantly affect her chances.        

&ldquo;These are local elections defined mostly by local dynamics,&rdquo; said Daniel Kerner, an analyst with Eurasia Group, a political risk consulting firm.        

The bigger reason to bet on Mrs. Kirchner, analysts say, is the roaring Argentine economy, which has grown at an average of 8 percent in recent years, with low unemployment and with wage increases &mdash; thanks to unions closely aligned with the president &mdash; that continue to roughly keep pace with the high rate of inflation. (Private analysts have estimated the rate to be more than 20 percent, while the government says it is less than half as high.)        

Mrs. Kirchner effectively continued the economic policies set by her husband, including keeping a relatively cheap peso to make exports more competitive and retaining heavy subsidies on food and fuel to encourage consumer spending. Opposition candidates, including Mr. Alfons&iacute;n, the son of former President Ra&uacute;l Alfons&iacute;n, and former President Eduardo Duhalde, have so far failed to persuade Argentines they could offer a more successful economic strategy.        
Charles Newberry contributed reporting.
