
PARIS &mdash; President Nicolas Sarkozy of France said Monday that his government had &ldquo;underestimated&rdquo; the anger that drove Tunisian protesters to overthrow the government, and he promised that France would stand alongside a more democratic Tunisia.        

Mr. Sarkozy, in only the third full-scale news conference of his presidency, said it would be inappropriate for France, which ruled Tunisia as a colony until 1956, to meddle in its  affairs or exhibit &ldquo;colonial reflexes.&rdquo;        

Mr. Sarkozy and his foreign minister, Michele Alliot-Marie, had been criticized for their reticence to condemn the deaths of Tunisian protesters at the hands of the police before  President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali fled the country. Additional criticism came when they offered Mr. Ben Ali help in training his police in riot control just three days before he was forced from power.        

&ldquo;France did not take the full measure of the despair of the Tunisian people,&rdquo; Mr. Sarkozy said. &ldquo;We in France probably underestimated the aspirations of the Tunisian people for freedom.&rdquo; He argued that France had to act &ldquo;with a certain reserve&rdquo; regarding its former colonies.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s very hard to heal these wounds,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The former colonial power should not be taking stances on the internal developments of former colonies.&rdquo;        

In his defense, he said that France had long been known as a haven for members of the Tunisian opposition, and that the French government had rebuffed Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s complaints about it.        

France, he said, is preparing a package of aid for the new Tunisian government.        

Mr. Sarkozy spoke on a variety of other topics during the news conference, which lasted for an hour and 45 minutes. He talked about the need to be tough in the face of terrorist demands, about France&rsquo;s support for the president who was recently elected in Ivory Coast and about Israeli-Palestinian peace talks, which he said were stalemated.        

He said that European nations should play a larger role in the Middle East peace discussions and that it &ldquo;was a mistake&rdquo; to focus on Israeli settlements.        

Much of the news conference, which was also attended by the diplomatic corps in Paris, was devoted to plans for the Group of 8 and Group of 20 summit meetings; France is president of both this year. Mr. Sarkozy spoke under a logo of a stylized Eiffel Tower in the French colors, with the slogan, &ldquo;New World, New Ideas.&rdquo;        

He has laid out an ambitious set of goals, which involve efforts to provide more global stability on exchange rates and commodity prices, as well as a global tax on financial transactions that is designed to help prevent speculation in the markets. He warned of food riots in the  poorest countries if speculation in food markets was not curbed.        

Mr. Sarkozy insisted that all markets must have rules and regulators, and he spoke of trying to reduce volatility in currencies by reducing the world&rsquo;s reliance on the United States dollar as a reserve currency.        

&ldquo;The dollar will remain the world&rsquo;s dominant currency,&rdquo; he said, adding, &ldquo;Dominant currency doesn&rsquo;t mean only currency.&rdquo;        

Mr. Sarkozy said he wanted tighter monitoring, with the International Monetary Fund assigned to watch global imbalances. He said he would propose a database on agricultural commodities markets, and he said the world needed an organization to provide data on agricultural stocks, which few countries other than the United States provide. &ldquo;We need to increase transparency on physical markets to give foreseeability. We need to know production, consumption and stock forecasts,&rdquo; he said.        
