
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Saddled with infighting and undermined by the occasionally ruthless and undisciplined behavior of its fighters, the six-month-old rebel uprising against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi is showing signs of sliding from a struggle to overthrow an autocrat into a murkier contest between factions and tribes.        

The increase in discord and factionalism is undermining the effort to overthrow Colonel Qaddafi, and it comes immediately after recognition of the rebel government by the Western powers, including the United States, potentially giving the rebels access to billions of dollars in frozen Libyan assets, and the chance to purchase more modern weaponry.        

The infighting could also erode support for the rebels among members of the NATO alliance, which faces a September deadline for renewing its air campaign amid growing unease about the war&rsquo;s costs and direction. That air support has been a factor in every significant rebel military goal, including fighting on Saturday in which rebel forces were challenging pro-Qaddafi forces in or near three critical towns: Brega, an oil port in the east, Zawiya, on the outskirts of Tripoli, and Gharyan, an important gateway to southern Libya. There were also clashes a few miles from the main border crossing into neighboring Tunisia, residents told Reuters.        

While the rebels have sought to maintain a clean image and to portray themselves as fighting to establish a secular democracy, several recent acts of revenge have cast their ranks in a less favorable light. They have also raised the possibility that any rebel victory over Colonel Qaddafi could disintegrate into the sort of tribal tensions that have plagued Libya for centuries.        

In recent weeks, rebel fighters in Libya&rsquo;s western mountains and around the coastal city of Misurata have lashed out at civilians because their tribes supported Colonel Qaddafi, looting mountain villages and emptying a civilian neighborhood. In the rebels&rsquo; provisional capital, Benghazi, renegade fighters assassinated their top military commander, Gen. Abdul Fattah Younes, apparently in revenge for his previous role as Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s security chief.        

In response, the chief of General Younes&rsquo;s powerful tribe threatened to retaliate against those responsible, setting off a crisis in the rebels&rsquo; governing council, whose members were dismissed en masse last week.        

The rebels&rsquo; Western backers have become alarmed at the growing rift between supporters of a group of rebels who have coalesced into a relatively unified army and the others who effectively remain a civilian band of militia fighters.        

In the short term, the retaliation can serve to fortify Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s power by reinforcing the fear that a rebel victory would bring reprisals against the many who participated in the colonel&rsquo;s political machine and enjoyed his patronage. More broadly, the moral clarity of six months ago, when Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces were bearing down on Benghazi and he was threatening to wipe out anyone who dared oppose him there, has been muddied.        

In an interview, Jeffrey D. Feltman, assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs, said that concerns about the rebels might be overblown. He acknowledged that there were some &ldquo;disturbing reports&rdquo; from Benghazi and the rebel front lines but credited the rebels&rsquo; governing Transitional National Council with swift steps to address the concerns. He noted that the rebel leadership &mdash; itself a heterodox mix of recent defectors and their former longtime foes &mdash; had ordered an end to abuses against loyalist tribes in the mountains, and he characterized the shake-up of the council as a move to establish a level of transparency and accountability without precedent in Libya.        

After some initial gunfire by fighters from the family of General Younes, the council appeared to have persuaded his tribe, the Obeidi, to put their faith in an investigation by the rebel authorities, Mr. Feltman said. &ldquo;They were able to avert a real cycle of violence,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I would give them a passing grade, given where they are starting from.&rdquo; He added, &ldquo;They have made commitments to us that you would never get out of Qaddafi.&rdquo;        

Still, questions remain about the rebel leadership&rsquo;s control over its fighters. &ldquo;I think that is a question they are asking themselves,&rdquo; Mr. Feltman said, noting recent moves by the council to rein in various freewheeling rebel militias, which often are formed along town, neighborhood or tribal lines.        
David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Tripoli, and C. J. Chivers from Zintan, Libya.
