
LONDON &mdash; Prime Minister David Cameron&rsquo;s plan to bring in an American &ldquo;supercop,&rdquo; as the tabloid newspapers here have called him, became a political hot potato over the weekend, with the mayor of London and an array of British police officials publicly opposing the idea, often in blunt terms.        

The suggestion that Britain needed the help of William J. Bratton, a former police commissioner in Boston, New York and Los Angeles, to sort out its policing problems in the wake of the recent rioting was never likely to go down easily. The tough measures Mr. Bratton adopted to deal with street crime in American cities are a poor fit with Britain&rsquo;s much less aggressive traditions of policing, critics are saying.        

But the proposal has now gotten caught up in a wider dispute between the government and senior police officers over the rioting, including the issue of who bears the primary responsibility for a slow response to the unrest, and whether the government&rsquo;s plans to save money by cutting police strength by thousands of officers continue to make sense.        

Mr. Cameron and other government ministers have criticized the police for standing back in the early days of the rioting, and they have implied that the decision to crack down came only when the government intervened. For their part, police commanders have said that it was they &mdash; and not Mr. Cameron or the home secretary, Theresa May &mdash; who decided to bolster police deployments, noting that Mr. Cameron and Ms. May were vacationing abroad when the riots started. As for the police&rsquo;s initial hesitation, the commanders said it was the product of years of &ldquo;mixed signals&rdquo; from political leaders, who have punished the police in the past for reacting too forcefully, but who say this time they should have responded sooner and with greater force.        

Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s first proposal last month was to appoint Mr. Bratton to the vacant post of commissioner at Scotland Yard, the country&rsquo;s top police post, but he backed off when he ran into opposition within his cabinet. On Friday, in a telephone call with Mr. Bratton, Mr. Cameron suggested that he work as a consultant on policing strategies to cope with the kind of violence that convulsed London and other major English cities last week.        

Mr. Cameron has said that a harsh crackdown on offenders is needed to prevent a recurrence of the violence, the worst in England for decades, while others called instead for a commitment to solving the social deprivation in the neighborhoods from which many of the looters came.        

Mr. Bratton, 63, who lives in New York and is the chairman of Kroll, an international security firm, has said he is ready to help in any way Britain favors.        

The harshest response to the idea of turning to Mr. Bratton came from Hugh Orde, president of the Association of Chief Police Officers, who is seen as a leading candidate for the Scotland Yard job. He came to prominence as the head of the police in Northern Ireland, where he managed the transition to peace in the province after 30 years of sectarian violence, and recruited large numbers of Catholics to a force that had been seen by many as a paramilitary arm of the province&rsquo;s dominant Protestant population.        

Mr. Orde made it clear in a newspaper interview that he saw few lessons for Britain in America&rsquo;s experience of quelling urban disorder. &ldquo;I am not sure I want to learn about gangs from an area of America that has 400 of them,&rdquo; he told The Independent on Sunday in remarks that appeared to refer to Mr. Bratton&rsquo;s tenure in Los Angeles. He added, &ldquo;If you look at the style of policing in the States, and their levels of violence, they are so fundamentally different from here.&rdquo;        

Similar comments came from other top police officers, citing what they called a tradition of heavy-handed policing in the United States. They were joined by Boris Johnson, the mayor of London. In a BBC interview on Sunday, Mr. Johnson implied that Britain had little to learn from the United States about police work. &ldquo;The read-across from America to the U.K. is not perhaps as obvious as some people think,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They have a murder rate in New York about four times the rate in London, the Los Angeles rate is even higher, the gang problem is considerably worse over there.&rdquo;        

Mr. Johnson did express approval of one part of Mr. Bratton&rsquo;s example, but doing so put him at odds with Mr. Cameron, his fellow Conservative. Over a barbecue at 10 Downing Street last week, Mr. Johnson argued strongly against the government&rsquo;s plan to lay off 16,000 police officers across the country, including about 9,000 from London&rsquo;s force of 32,000. Mr. Cameron has said he will stick with the police cuts, saying they will come mainly from desk jobs and there will be no effect on what he has called &ldquo;visible policing.&rdquo;        

Speaking of Mr. Bratton and referring to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Mr. Johnson said, &ldquo;I would point out one thing, which is that in New York, where he worked with Mayor Giuliani to bring down crime so much, you have a city roughly the same size as London, with comparable crime problems one way and another, and what he did was to put up police numbers to 42,000, from 30,000, so that in the numbers game I think that Bill Bratton would certainly side with having a healthy, robust force.&rdquo;        

Ms. May, the home secretary, was tepid in her remarks on Mr. Bratton in interviews over the weekend, suggesting that Mr. Bratton was just one of many foreign experts whom the British authorities might consult.        

Meanwhile, the crackdown on the rioters continued through the weekend, with courts in London, Birmingham and Manchester sitting through the night to process people who have been charged with criminal offenses &mdash; roughly 1,000 in all, about half of them teenagers. Sentences have in some cases been unusually stiff by normal British standards, with jail terms not just for those who set fires or stole expensive goods like flat-screen televisions, computers or bicycles, but also for people found guilty of stealing bottles of water or packs of chewing gum.        
