
Ctirad Masin, an anti-Communist fighter in the former nation of Czechoslovakia who eluded a massive East Bloc manhunt during the cold war in an effort to reach Berlin and join American troops, died on Saturday at a veteran&rsquo;s home in Cleveland. He was 81.        

His death was reported on Czech public radio and television.        

Mr. Masin, his brother Josef and Milan Paumer were part of a resistance cell after the Communists took power in 1948 in the Central European nation of Czechoslovakia. They killed two police officers while trying to capture weapons in a police station, and also killed a cashier during a robbery to raise funds for their sabotage operations.        

In 1953, they fled to the West, killing three police officers in East Germany during their escape as tens of thousands of police officers searched for them. Two other members of the cell were captured, sentenced to death and executed.        

In an interview in 2008, Mr. Paumer defended the killings of the police officers and the cashier as a justifiable response to a totalitarian regime. By the 1950s, he said, the Communists had imprisoned tens of thousands of opponents, confiscated private property and stifled free speech.        

&ldquo;We were waiting for an East-West conflict to break out,&rdquo; Mr. Paumer said. &ldquo;We expected World War III between Russia and the United States. We were desperate to get to the Americans so we could help fight the Communists.&rdquo;        

The three later settled in the United States and served in the Army. Mr. Paumer returned home after the fall of Communism and died last year in Prague. But the Masin brothers refused to return because, they said, the country had not fully rid itself of its Communist past.        

Czechs opinion of the Masins and Mr. Paumer are divided &mdash; while some consider them heroes, others call them murderers.        

In 1993, the nation split into two countries, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.        

Although Parliament&rsquo;s upper house in the Czech Republic, the Senate, has repeatedly proposed that the three be awarded a state medal for their fight against Communism, they never received anything besides a prime minister medal in 2008.        

Josef Masin told Czech public radio that his brother would be buried at a military cemetery in the United States.        
