
BANGKOK &mdash; A zookeeper was shot and killed as he was leaving work. An antigovernment demonstrator who sought shelter in a Buddhist temple was shot five times but lived, possibly because a coin in his satchel deflected a bullet. A soldier who rushed to help a fallen comrade after an explosion suffered severe brain damage from a second blast.        

The tales of the dead and wounded from the political violence last year in Bangkok could fill volumes. But they are not filling case dockets in the Thai courts.        

Eight months after troops swept through Bangkok and dislodged protesters from their barricaded encampment, investigations into who was responsible for about 90 deaths and nearly 2,000 wounds have faltered.        

A body set up by the government to investigate the violence, the Independent Fact-Finding Commission for Reconciliation, says the military and the police are refusing to cooperate.        

&ldquo;We need to interview soldiers who were in the field,&rdquo; said Somchai Homlaor, a member of the commission. &ldquo;We have sent them many letters and never heard back from them &mdash; at all.&rdquo; The commission, which on Monday postponed a meeting at which it had planned to issue an interim report, now says it is not sure when the report might be ready.        

The government&rsquo;s forensic department has not responded to requests for autopsies, and private telephone companies are not cooperating because they do not want to be &ldquo;dragged into the case,&rdquo; Mr. Somchai said.        

Victims of the violence are despondent.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m still hoping there will be justice,&rdquo; said Wasan Srithongaiom, an employee of the government electrical utility who was shot in the back as he was walking home from work in May. &ldquo;I want to know why I got shot and who did it.&rdquo;        

Col. Sansern Kaewkumnerd, a spokesman for the military, said military representatives met twice with the fact-finding commission last year and &ldquo;gave them all we have.&rdquo; He said he was not aware of further requests for information from the commission.        

&ldquo;With regard to the people who died during the clashes, our standpoint is clear: We will let the judicial system do its work,&rdquo; Colonel Sansern said. &ldquo;We cannot order anyone around.&rdquo;        

The Department of Special Investigations, roughly equivalent to the F.B.I., has vigorously pursued court cases against leaders of the antigovernment demonstrations, who are accused of terrorism, but it says it is still investigating the military&rsquo;s role in deaths and injuries.        

One of the main complaints of protesters was a lack of justice in Thailand, so the delays in the investigations are further hindering efforts to reconcile the polarized electorate, especially among rural northeastern voters who complain of a double standard for the elites and for the rest of the country.        

Critics accuse the government of stalling the investigations for political purposes. Teera Suteewarangkurn, a law professor at Thammasat University in Bangkok, said the military leadership feared it would face a public outcry if it admitted that soldiers had killed civilians.        

The government is concentrating on winning elections, which must be called by the end of the year. &ldquo;The government needs to drag its feet,&rdquo; Mr. Teera said.        

The chaotic violence of April and May was particularly bloody and hard to decipher because it had elements of an insurrection: a shadowy group that mingled among the protesters was armed with grenades and other weapons and fought the military. Doctors treated wounds that would normally be suffered in battle, not in street protests.        

Col. Noppasit Sithapongsophon, the commander of a unit deployed to disperse protesters, said 21 of the 24 men in his unit were wounded during the protests; one soldier was killed.        

&ldquo;Soldiers didn&rsquo;t want to get involved in this,&rdquo; Colonel Noppasit said. &ldquo;We would have much preferred to stay home.&rdquo; He himself was wounded in the leg by an explosion, possibly from a grenade.        

Political analysts concede that soldiers operated in unusually difficult conditions. But the lopsided death toll &mdash; 9 soldiers were killed compared with 80 civilians, many of them bystanders &mdash; and video footage of soldiers firing wildly in the direction of protesters suggest that the military violated its own rules about firing on civilians only in self-defense.        

Leaked reports from the Department of Special Investigations seem to come to the same conclusion. Soldiers were responsible for the deaths of at least 13 people, according to documents reported in The Nation, a Thai newspaper.        

In one case, investigators concluded that Mana Ajran, a zookeeper in Bangkok who was responsible for feeding the turtles, was &ldquo;likely&rdquo; to have been killed by soldiers passing in a pickup truck who panicked. The soldiers ran into the zoo and fired at Mr. Mana, who was later found dead with a bullet wound in the back of his head, the leaked report concluded.        

A separate report by Reuters cited internal documents from the Department of Special Investigations saying that a Reuters cameraman who was killed during protests on April 10 &ldquo;collapsed as gunfire flashed from the direction of soldiers.&rdquo;        

The cameraman, Hiro Muramoto, was from Japan, and Japanese officials have been frustrated by the lack of progress in the case. They have pressed the Thai government to release more information on his death. Thai authorities have responded by saying they are still investigating.        

&ldquo;The legal process here has had unusual delays,&rdquo; said Jaran Cosananand, a professor of law at Ramkhamhaeng University in Bangkok. &ldquo;Political power undermines the law in Thailand.&rdquo;        

The military&rsquo;s refusal to cooperate in the investigations underlines the ascendance of military power in Thailand.        

The military&rsquo;s budget and overall influence in Thai politics have risen sharply since 2006, when the army took power in a coup, removing the prime minister at the time, Thaksin Shinawatra, and angering his millions of supporters.        

The government has accused Mr. Thaksin of backing a &ldquo;terrorist&rdquo; group that hid among the protesters last year and may have been responsible for attacks on soldiers and the police.        

Among the 1,898 people wounded in the protests, according to the Thai Ministry of Health, about 400 were soldiers and the rest civilians.        

Some of the wounded have returned to work, their bullet and shrapnel wounds sealed with scar tissue. Others limp in and out of hospitals and rehabilitation centers, still shaken by doctors&rsquo; prognoses &mdash; that they will probably never again lead normal lives.        

Doctors have told Seksit Changthong, 28, a former motorcycle taxi driver, that he will live the rest of his life with a bullet lodged behind his eyes. Mr. Seksit, who was blinded by a gunshot during the protests, is bitter. &ldquo;I am sorry that I lost my eyesight, but I feel even more sorry for Thailand, that there&rsquo;s no justice here.&rdquo;        
Poypiti Amatatham contributed reporting.
