
MOSCOW &mdash; Wearing a bulletproof vest and a leash held by a police guard, Anders Behring Breivik returned this weekend to the pristine Norwegian island where, he has admitted, he slaughtered 69 people last month, leading the police through a simulation of his actions, Oslo police officials said Sunday.        

For eight hours on Saturday, Mr. Breivik showed the police how he had stalked his victims, at times holding up his arms as if pretending to take aim at fleeing members of a political youth camp who were his targets on the island of Utoya.        

The simulation, parts of which were recorded and broadcast by the Norwegian news media, offered a chilling glimpse of Mr. Breivik in action, recalling a measure of the terror from that rainy afternoon on July 22.        

Mr. Breivik, 32, a self-described Christian crusader, was calm, cooperative and in control of his emotions, whatever they might have been, Paal-Fredrik Hjort Kraby, a police prosecutor, said Sunday in Oslo.        

&ldquo;The suspect showed he was not unmoved by being back on Utoya,&rdquo; Mr. Kraby said in a statement broadcast by the Norwegian broadcaster NRK. &ldquo;But he did not show any remorse for his actions.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kraby said the simulation was needed to clarify details of the attack that would be presented at Mr. Breivik&rsquo;s trial, which is expected to begin sometime next year. But he offered little new information to a nation struggling to come to terms with the deadliest act of violence on Norwegian soil since World War II.        

Mr. Breivik has admitted to plotting and carrying out the attack on Utoya, as well as detonating a bomb a few hours earlier that killed eight people in Oslo. In a 1,500-page manifesto, posted on the Internet hours before the attacks, he wrote that the violence was meant as a declaration of war on Norwegian multiculturalism.        

Most of his victims were affiliated with the Labor Party, the leader of the country&rsquo;s governing coalition, which has helped turn Norway into a haven for asylum seekers from many of the world&rsquo;s war-torn regions. Mr. Breivik wrote that Muslim immigrants were undermining Norway&rsquo;s traditional Christian values.        

The camp on Utoya, which was organized by the youth wing of the Labor Party, was a symbol of the diversity that Mr. Breivik despised. Among the nearly 600 participants were children of immigrants who were preparing to start political careers.        

With a police helicopter circling and armed commandos at the ready, Mr. Breivik returned to Utoya aboard a ferry similar to the one he took the day of the attacks. He was wearing a tether affixed to a harness around his body, as opposed to handcuffs, to give him greater freedom of movement during the simulation, Mr. Kraby said.        

Video of the simulation posted on the Web site of the newspaper VG shows him taking police officials to the rocky shore and pointing an imaginary rifle into the water to demonstrate how he shot his victims as they tried to swim for safety.        

The police have begun to wrap up their investigation on Utoya, which has been closed to the public since the attacks, Mr. Kraby said. He said officials planned to turn control of the island back over to the Labor Party youth at the end of the week.        

On Friday, Mr. Kraby also confirmed reports in the Norwegian news media that Mr. Breivik had called the police several times during the attack on Utoya, but provided no other details.        

A Norwegian newspaper, Aftenposten, reported earlier that Mr. Breivik had called the police offering to surrender, but that they failed to respond. The police have been criticized for their seemingly slow response to the attack. Mr. Breivik stalked the island for about an hour and a half before a commando team arrived, at which point he surrendered without resistance.        

Also on Friday, the government appointed an independent commission to investigate the attacks. Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg said the nine-member panel would be asked to discover &ldquo;the plain truth&rdquo; about what happened so that &ldquo;it would never happen again.&rdquo;        
Henrik Pryser Libell contributed reporting from Copenhagen.
