
CAIRO &mdash; A top Libyan security official arrived unexpectedly in Cairo on Monday apparently in a high-level defection, as the rebels challenging Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s rule fought to hold ground in a strategic oil port just 30 miles from the capital.        

The Libyan official, Nassr al-Mabrouk Abdullah, landed in Cairo in a private plane with nine family members who were traveling on tourist visas and headed for a local hotel, according to Egyptian security officials at the airport.        

The Qaddafi government&rsquo;s ambassador, Ali Maria, said in short telephone interview that he had &ldquo;no information&rdquo; about Mr. Abdullah&rsquo;s arrival or defection.        

The defection of Mr. Abdullah would signal a new crack in the Qaddafi government after months of seeming stability since Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s right-hand man, Moussa Koussa, and a handful of others deserted after the start of the Libyan uprising and the NATO bombing campaign supporting it.        

Mr. Abdullah arrived in Egypt amid rumors of fresh negotiations between the rebels and representatives of the Qaddafi government in Tunisia and a visit to Tunis, the capital, by the United Nations envoy to Libya. The envoy, Abdelilah al-Khatib, said that he discussed the conflict with Tunisia&rsquo;s prime minister and that he would meet with some Libyans in Tunisia, although he did not offer specifics.        

&ldquo;I confine my official talks to the two parties to the crisis,&rdquo; he said.        

Successive rounds of negotiations, most of them conducted in secret, have borne little fruit. But they are growing in urgency, with concerns mounting that the Libyan conflict will become bloodier as the front lines approach Tripoli, the capital. Two senior diplomats with knowledge of the talks, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said Colonel Qaddafi had given no sign that he was serious about negotiating an end to the conflict. At the same time, the rebels,  emboldened by their gains in recent days, are losing incentive to make concessions.        

&ldquo;There are no serious talks between the two parties,&rdquo; one of the diplomats said.        

Colonel Qaddafi gave every indication on Monday that he intended to continue the fight. Hours before Mr. Abdullah&rsquo;s flight to Cairo, Colonel Qaddafi urged his countrymen to &ldquo;liberate Libya.&rdquo; Reuters reported. State television broadcast the audio of his speech, his first public address since rebel fighters started their latest offensive.        

&ldquo;The Libyan people will remain, and the Fateh revolution will remain,&rdquo; he said, referring to the movement that brought him to power in 1969. &ldquo;Move forward, challenge, pick up your weapons, go to the fight for liberating Libya inch by inch from the traitors and from NATO.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Get ready for the fight,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;The blood of martyrs is fuel for the battlefield.&rdquo;        

Also Monday, U.S. defense officials said that Libyan government forces fired a surface-to-surface Scud missile for the first time in the conflict but that it hurt no one, according to The Associated Press. The launching was detected by U.S. forces shortly after midnight Sunday, and the Scud landed harmlessly in the desert about 50 miles outside Brega, said an official who spoke on condition of anonymity. &nbsp; &nbsp;        

According to the U.S. military, the Scud missile was launched from a location about 50 miles east of Sirte, a city on the Mediterranean about 230 miles east of Tripoli. Noting that Scuds are not precision-guided missiles, officials said they could not determine if Brega had been the target. Two senior U.S. officials said it was too soon to tell whether the Scud strike was an isolated incident or if it represented a new phase in the fighting.         

The Libyan rebels appear to have broken a stalemate to make their first major advance in weeks, occupying parts of the strategic city of Zawiyah over the weekend with the help of fighters who had gone underground inside the city.        

On Monday, rebel leaders said Tripoli was surrounded after their fighters seized the city of Gharyan in the Nafusah Mountain region, which straddles one of two supply lines leading to the capital. That assertion could not be confirmed.        

The road through Gharyan connects Tripoli with Algeria and southern Libya.        

The other major supply line to Tripoli, from the Tunisian border, was shut down on Monday because of fighting in Zawiyah, which lies on the route.        

Snipers loyal to Colonel Qaddafi are still active in Zawiyah, which came under heavy shelling.        

Zawiyah&rsquo;s strategic prize, its oil refinery, remained under government control, Reuters reported. A medic told the news agency that six rebels and three civilians died in the fighting, including a 15-year-old girl who was struck by shrapnel.        
David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Cairo, and Kareem Fahim from Djerba, Tunisia.
