
ISTANBUL &mdash; Turkey released details on Monday of its own report about the seizure last year of a Turkish aid ship bound for Gaza by Israeli commandos. The government contended that two of the activists who were killed on the ship had been shot by Israeli forces from a helicopter before the commandos landed on the vessel.        

In all, nine people were killed in the clash on May 31, when the Israeli military stormed a flotilla that had been organized by an Islamist charity in Turkey. Eight of the dead were Turks and one held dual Turkish and American citizenship.        

The military had ordered the ships to turn back when they tried to breach an Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip. The flotilla ignored the order.        

&ldquo;During the attack, Israeli soldiers have applied excessive, random and disproportionate power against civilian passengers,&rdquo; said the report, parts of which were published on Monday by the semi-official Anatolian News Agency.        

The report also said that Israeli commandos physically and psychologically abused passengers after taking control of the ship. &ldquo;Most of the passengers were kept handcuffed, strip searched, and women were subject to discriminative behavior by the male Israeli soldiers,&rdquo; the report said.        

An Israeli commission concluded in a  report released Sunday that the Israeli military had acted in accordance with international law. The report, which will form the core of Israel&rsquo;s submission to United Nations investigators, cleared the Israeli government and military of wrongdoing and said the operation had been legal and justified.        

It concluded that the Israeli military had not fired any rounds from a helicopter and that the commandos had resorted to guns only after other, less lethal weapons failed to drive back passengers who attacked them as they boarded the ship.        

The Israeli report outraged the Turkish government, which responded by publishing details of the report it submitted in September to the United Nations investigators.        

&ldquo;While it had the possibility of intercepting the convoy carrying unarmed civilians without causing bloodshed, Israel opted for a course which made loss of life inevitable,&rdquo; Turkey&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry said in a statement late Sunday night.        

President Abdullah Gul of Turkey told reporters in Ankara on Monday: &ldquo;The report issued by Israel is nothing more than a document of its own that has no credibility in the face of international law, no legality or no persuasiveness. It actually clearly indicates that the Israeli government has such a spoiled attitude in disregarding the world and international law.&rdquo; .        

The reports also offered differing conclusions on the methods used to intercept the flotilla.        

&ldquo;Israel could have tied a rope around the ship&rsquo;s propeller to make it stop, without firing bullets, or it could have used water on activists,&rdquo; a Turkish Foreign Ministry official said. The report from the Israeli commission said that the authorities had used less force than would have been permissible under international law, and that tactics like entangling a ship&rsquo;s propeller were dangerous.        
