
LONDON &mdash; With neighborhoods across a wide array of English cities and towns still resounding with the clamor of cleanup crews and with police reinforcements cautiously drawing down, Britain&rsquo;s top two politicians ventured Monday into a political landscape profoundly altered by last week&rsquo;s rioting and offered competing prescriptions that seemed to rupture an uneasy consensus that has prevailed in British politics for a generation.        

Radically different speeches by Prime Minister David Cameron and Ed Miliband, the leaders of the Conservative and Labour Parties, appeared to set the stage for the kind of gloves-off, left-versus-right politics Britain has not seen since Margaret Thatcher&rsquo;s heyday in the 1980s. Both in their early 40s and both previously characterized by cautious efforts to command the center, the two men signaled that the riots had girded each of them for a new battle that could determine Britain&rsquo;s future for years.        

Mr. Cameron promised an uncompromising across-the-board reworking of the social policies he blamed for &ldquo;the slow-motion moral collapse&rdquo; across Britain in recent generations, while Mr. Miliband assailed the government&rsquo;s punitive approach, saying &ldquo;tough action against gangs&rdquo; and other steps favored by Mr. Cameron needed to be complemented by action to &ldquo;show young people there&rsquo;s another way.&rdquo;        

The mood was captured by a headline for a column on the left-of-center Guardian newspaper Web site, proclaiming that Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s effort had heralded &ldquo;the return of the nasty party,&rdquo; meaning the Conservatives of the 1980s and 1990s. Conservative-supporting columnists responded in kind, saying Mr. Cameron had at last spoken up for a majority in Britain, addressing moral issues too long avoided by politicians.        

&ldquo;Social problems that have been festering for decades have exploded in our face,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said in a speech in his home constituency in rural Oxfordshire. &ldquo;Irresponsibility. Selfishness. Behaving as if your choices have no consequences. Children without fathers. Schools without discipline. Reward without effort. Crime without punishment. Rights without responsibilities. Communities without control. Some of the worst aspects of human nature tolerated, indulged, sometimes even incentivized, by a state and its agencies that in parts have become literally de-moralized.&rdquo;        

The &ldquo;responsible majority&rdquo; of Britons, he said, were &ldquo;crying out for their government&rdquo; to confront these issues. Accordingly, he said, his government would set out over coming weeks to &ldquo;review every aspect&rdquo; of social policy. &ldquo;On schools, welfare, families, parenting, addiction, communities, on the cultural, legal, bureaucratic problems in our society, too; from the twisting and misrepresenting of human rights that has undermined personal responsibility to the obsession with health and safety that has eroded people&rsquo;s willingness to act according to common sense.&rdquo;        

Mr. Miliband spoke at his boyhood school in north London, a state school in a working-class neighborhood, as if to accentuate his differences with Mr. Cameron, who had attended the exclusive Eton College. He spoke derisively of the prime minister having chosen the &ldquo;easy and predictable path&rdquo; by blaming &ldquo;criminality, pure and simple,&rdquo; words Mr. Cameron used at the height of the looting and pillaging, and condemning him for suggesting, in reply to those who pointed to social deprivation as the cause of the disorder, &ldquo;that to explain is to excuse.&rdquo;        

The speech took more direct aim at Mr. Cameron and his top ministers, who have announced an array of tough new measures to deal with the rioters and encouraged the courts to hand out stiff jail terms. &ldquo;A new policy a day, knee-jerk gimmicks rushed out without real thought, will not solve the problem,&rdquo; Mr. Miliband said. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve heard it all in the last few days. Water cannon. Supercops. A daily door knock for gangs. And today, more gimmicks.&rdquo;        
John F. Burns reported from London, and Alan Cowell from Paris.
