
CAIRO &mdash; The spectacle of Hosni Mubarak lying in a cage at his criminal trial will no longer be televised, the Egyptian judge hearing the case ruled Monday.        

The ruling ends the trial&rsquo;s extraordinary immediacy for Egyptians. The broadcast of the trial&rsquo;s first day, Aug. 3, served as a catharsis for post-revolutionary Egypt and electrified the Arab world with the image of an autocrat brought down by his own people, for the first time, to the standing of an ordinary criminal.        

On Monday, the second day of the trial, Judge Ahmed Refaat said without explanation that he was turning the cameras off &ldquo;to protect the public interest.&rdquo;        

The Mubarak family was evidently pleased. For most of the day in court, Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s sons, Gamal and Alaa, who are facing charges of corruption, tried to shield him from the cameras. But they left smirking and waving. Gamal, once his father&rsquo;s heir apparent, lifted a bound hand to flash a victory sign.        

The former president, 83, entered and left on a gurney, though his face maintained the frown and wrinkled lip and sneer of cold command from the height of his power. The metal cage the Mubaraks shared is standard in Egyptian criminal trials, and it imparts an unmistakable aura of guilt on defendants before any verdict is rendered.        

Some Egyptians complained Monday that the judge had robbed them of seeing their former ruler behind the bars. &ldquo;Did we spend 23 days on the streets so that they show us Mubarak twice?&rdquo; Salma Said, an activist, wrote on Twitter.        

Yousry Abdel Razik, a volunteer Mubarak lawyer, said removing cameras would stop crowds of civil rights lawyers jostling for attention. &nbsp;&ldquo;If there were no cameras, you wouldn&rsquo;t find 10 lawyers there,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They want to enter history, and they don&rsquo;t know they&rsquo;re entering it from its filthiest door.&rdquo;        

In a parking lot outside the courtroom &mdash; a refitted police academy auditorium &mdash; crowds of Mubarak supporters clashed with detractors there to watch the proceedings on a large-screen television, as on the trial&rsquo;s first day. This time, witnesses said, the detractors had prepared, stacking rocks in neat piles to hurl at his supporters. But hundreds of riot police officers, three armored personnel carriers and 10 police officers on horseback rapidly broke up the melee.        

On Sunday, the military council now ruling Egypt charged a liberal activist, Asmaa Mahfouz, 26, with inciting insurrection and insulting the military because of criticism she posted online.        

&ldquo;If the judiciary doesn&rsquo;t get us our rights, no one should be upset if armed groups carry out assassinations, because there is no law and no judiciary,&rdquo; Ms. Mahfouz wrote.        

Ms. Mahfouz, who has also criticized the military in television interviews, was charged in a military court and released on bail of about $3,400. She could face years in jail.        

Mr. Mubarak has been charged with criminal counts of corruption along with his sons, and also with ordering the killing of unarmed protesters challenging his rule. If convicted in the civilian court, he could face the death penalty.        

A crowd of lawyers for the families of those killed during the protests that ended his rule bickered, sometimes even scuffling. The judge ultimately told them to combine their demands into a single written list.        

Farid el-Deeb, the leader of the Mubarak defense team, requested access to documents related to accusations that the ailing former president and his sons had received expensive Red Sea villas in exchange for helping an associate win a lucrative land deal. The lawyers also requested ambulance records for those who died during the February protests that brought down Mr. Mubarak.        

The judge agreed to a request from the families of the slain protesters to combine Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s trial with that of his former interior minister, Habib el-Adly. The two are accused of conspiring to order the killings; each could provide evidence against the other.        

At the first day of the trial, Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s lawyers asked to hear the testimony of more than 1,000 witnesses. On Monday, the judge announced the names of four police officers to be called at the next session. And he revoked a pledge that the trial would meet every day until completion, scheduling that session for Sept. 5.        
Heba Afify contributed reporting.
