
MADRID &mdash; The Rev. Eubilio Rodr&iacute;guez&rsquo;s church is a prefabricated building in an area of this city hard hit by Spain&rsquo;s economic crisis. In front of the altar are a few scraggly potted plants. Behind it, some plastic chairs.        

How, he asks, can the Roman Catholic Church be getting ready for a lavish $72 million celebration in this city &mdash; some of it paid for with tax dollars &mdash; when Spain is in the midst of an austerity drive, the unemployment rate for young people is 40 percent and his parishioners are losing their homes to foreclosure every day?        

&ldquo;It is scandalous, the price,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It is shameful. It discredits the church.&rdquo;        

Father Rodr&iacute;guez, 67, is among the 120 clergymen working among the poor here who have signed a lengthy petition deploring the pope&rsquo;s visit this week on many grounds &mdash; from its cost to what they see as an inappropriate melding of church and state.        

Madrid is girding itself for the arrival of perhaps one and a half million pilgrims. Its lampposts are gaily decorated with banners. Retiro Park has been decked out with 200 portable confessional booths. But bitter debates are raging over the festivities and the role of the church in Spanish politics.        

The priests, along with dozens of left-leaning groups demanding a secular state and young people who occupied many of Spain&rsquo;s main squares for months to protest the government&rsquo;s handling of the economy, are planning at least one major protest march on Wednesday.        

Pope Benedict XVI is coming here on Thursday to meet hundreds of thousands of young people celebrating a World Youth Day event in this capital. Some 450,000 have already registered, and three times as many are expected, organizers say. To accommodate their activities &mdash; which will include a daylong vigil at the airport, with temperatures likely to reach nearly 100 degrees, and an all-night procession with priceless works of religious art &mdash; some of Madrid&rsquo;s main avenues will be closed to traffic for up to six days.        

Government and church officials insist the cost to taxpayers will be minimal and the lift to local businesses substantial. Spain&rsquo;s businesses community came up with $23 million to pay for various events and the pilgrims will pay $44 million themselves. Other donations should cover the rest, the officials say.        

&ldquo;The public administration helped us in only two ways,&rdquo; said Fernando Gim&eacute;nez Barriocanal, the financial director of World Youth Day 2011. The pilgrims will be allowed to sleep in public buildings like schools. And businesses will be able to get tax deductions for their contributions, he said.        

But critics are calling the claims ridiculous. Father Rodr&iacute;guez and others who signed the 10-page petition say the costs are always fuzzy when the pope comes to town. They suspect that the cost of extra security, of collecting trash and of stress on health systems will add up to millions for taxpayers. For one thing, the pilgrims have been granted an 80 percent discount on public transportation, which some find particularly galling because subway fares just went up by 50 percent.        

The priests are not alone in making such claims. &ldquo;They still can&rsquo;t tell us how much the pope&rsquo;s visit cost two years ago,&rdquo; said Esther L&oacute;pez Barcel&oacute;, youth coordinator for the small United Left party. Ms. L&oacute;pez initiated a Twitter campaign this month against the pope&rsquo;s visit. &ldquo;Every time he comes here, the figures become opaque,&rdquo; she said.        

Spain is less solidly Catholic than it once was. A government survey released in July found that 71.7 percent of Spaniards declared themselves Catholics, compared with 82.1 percent in 2001. Of those, 13 percent attend Mass on Sundays, compared with 19 percent 10 years ago.        

But the church is eager to keep a spiritual hold on this country, where people can still check a box diverting up to seven-tenths of a percent of their taxes to the church.        
Rachel Chaundler contributed reporting.
