
BERLIN &mdash; There is no one whose thoughts European officials would rather read than Chancellor Angela Merkel, who meets Tuesday at the &Eacute;lys&eacute;e Palace with France&rsquo;s president, Nicolas Sarkozy, as they struggle to find a lasting solution to the European debt crisis.        

The most common critique of Mrs. Merkel is that she lacks the necessary sense of urgency to restore confidence in the euro and calm the crisis. But a stroll through summertime Berlin makes clear why she remains so cool-headed. The streets are quiet and the cafes are full. Deeply tanned residents are returning to their jobs after vacations in fiscally compromised nations, like Greece and Portugal.        

Germany may be the only European nation that is large enough and rich enough to cover the debts of its struggling neighbors, but its citizens are reluctant to be the source of the bailout. Germany is in many ways in the eye of the storm, with barely a hint of the winds swirling nearby. There is no tear gas, as in Athens; no tires burning, as in London; no chanting crowds packing public squares, as in Spain. While much of the rest of Europe is struggling to pass harsh austerity packages, Germany is in the midst of a debate over cutting taxes by as much as $14.2 billion.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s as if there&rsquo;s this black cloud floating overhead but nothing has fallen on us,&rdquo; said Markus Ponick, 38, a teacher in Berlin, who on Monday was strolling down a tree-lined stretch of Bleibtreustrasse with a cup of coffee in his hand. The government had made cuts, Mr. Ponick said, but they had been &ldquo;cleverly chosen&rdquo; to spare the public pain. &ldquo;The effects of this crisis are imperceptible here,&rdquo; he said.        

The only major protests to strike Germany have been over tearing down an old train station in Stuttgart or calling for the end of nuclear power. Animal rights and affordable Internet, rather than jobs and spending cuts, are more likely to cause people to take to the streets right now, and even then not in terribly great numbers.        

The simplest explanation is jobs.        

By one government measure, 706,000 more Germans were employed in May of this year than the year before, of which 415,000 were full-time positions and 289,000 part time. In terms of relative size, that would be roughly comparable in the United States to nearly 2.7 million more people with jobs in 2011 versus 2010.        

With strong unions and legal protections for workers, Germany&rsquo;s labor market for years&nbsp;was compared unfavorably with the more flexible American one. Even after embarking on painful reforms, it suffered from&nbsp;high structural unemployment. In July, German unemployment was 7 percent, compared with 9.1 percent in the United States.        

As Germany&rsquo;s population shrinks, some economists and policy makers are more concerned about a shortage of qualified workers than joblessness.        

As for the young, the unemployment rate is the third lowest in Europe, behind only the Netherlands and Austria. Only 9.1 percent of people between the ages of 15 and 24 are unemployed here, less than half the 20.5 percent average in Europe.        

&ldquo;I wouldn&rsquo;t protest because I&rsquo;m very content with my situation,&rdquo; said Kristina Kuhn, 21, a student out shopping on the upscale Kurf&uuml;rstendamm boulevard on Monday afternoon. &ldquo;Young people can study, find jobs on the side and have opportunities for careers.&rdquo;        

A recent report in the daily newspaper Bild said that government experts expect the job boom to continue for another four years. In a survey of 1,800 Germans prepared for the business magazine WirtschaftsWoche by the Allensbach Institute for Public Opinion Research, a majority spoke of an era of increased insecurity, but a full 53 percent said they were optimistic about the next 12 months. Only 12 percent were pessimistic.        

&ldquo;They hear it on the news but for most Germans what they experience in their lives is completely different. The crisis is virtual,&rdquo; said Renate K&ouml;cher, the institute&rsquo;s director. &ldquo;What&rsquo;s decisive for most people is their own situation and for many people that has improved noticeably in the past three or four years.&rdquo;        

Still, for a country reliant on exports for growth, the possible slowdown in the global economy could have drastic and fairly sudden repercussions. No one can predict how the inward-looking Germans would react if things get worse here, as would happen if there were less of a market for their exports, but if the past is any guide, Ms. K&ouml;cher said, they are likely to be even stingier toward their neighbors and even less inclined toward the European Union in general.        

In France, the second-largest economy in the European Union after Germany and that country&rsquo;s largest trading partner, consumer spending fell 0.7 percent in the second quarter, and growth was flat. Industrial production for the entire 17-nation euro area fell 0.7 percent in June.        

&ldquo;Germany is very dependent on its export markets and very dependent on world growth,&rdquo; said Stefan Bach, an economic researcher at the German Institute for Economic Research in Berlin. &ldquo;But for now the job market continues to develop strongly in contrast to many other European countries.&rdquo;        

In some ways Germany has already been down the bumpy road toward economic restructuring its European partners now find themselves on. Its competitiveness came at a cost. Under the government of Gerhard Schr&ouml;der, Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s predecessor, large-scale protests broke out in response to difficult labor-market reforms, including making it easier to fire workers. German workers suffered through offshoring and layoffs, and even many who kept their jobs saw years of stagnant wages. But now, from the looks of things, the pain has paid off.        

Germany&rsquo;s strength is not an anomaly but rather evidence of how the euro plays to its advantage. Now that less efficient economies like Greece and Portugal are locked into using the same currency, and cannot devalue to make their products more competitive in terms of price, Germany can keep selling to them.        

As a result, Mrs. Merkel is under increasing pressure from abroad to buoy the weaker states, facing accusations that she is risking the financial stability of the bloc and with it the world by endorsing only half-measures. At home, she faces sharp criticism for inching closer to what critics here call a transfer union, sending German funds to wastrel neighbors.        

The struggles and sorrows of their fellow Europeans are all over the nightly news. Yet so far, German trust in the euro appears steady. A survey of 2,366 people conducted by the Enmid polling institute in early August and published in Sunday&rsquo;s Bild found that 65 percent of Germans expect the euro to still be there in 2021, versus 31 percent who do not.        

Ms. K&ouml;cher from the Allensbach Institute said that one result from the survey had truly surprised her. Of those questioned, 52 percent said they felt empathy for the protesters in Greece, while 39 percent said they did not.        

&ldquo;You always hear in the media and even in private discussions that Germans have no sympathy for the Greeks,&rdquo; Ms. K&ouml;cher said. &ldquo;But people remember the difficult transition they went through in the last decade, and they know it isn&rsquo;t easy.&rdquo;        
