
BEIJING &mdash; More than international prestige or even economic might, the top priority of China&rsquo;s leadership is to maintain stability among this nation&rsquo;s vast and varied population. President Hu Jintao explicitly reaffirmed that goal just last month, telling a Communist Party celebration that &ldquo;without stability, nothing can be accomplished.&rdquo;        

In the aftermath of a large protest on Sunday in a major metropolis in northeast China, Dalian, that craving for rigid orderliness appears increasingly ephemeral. In the face of ever more sophisticated efforts to control and guide expression, significant protests &mdash; and visceral public shows of unhappiness with government &mdash; appear to be becoming regular features of life.        

By official estimates, 12,000 demonstrators marched in Dalian &mdash; by other estimates, many more &mdash; to demand the removal of the expensive new Fujia chemical factory, whose Pacific coast sea wall had been breached a week earlier in a typhoon. The plant makes paraxylene, a toxic chemical used to make polyester products. It can cause illness and, if concentrated, death.        

The mostly peaceful protest was one of the largest reported in nearly three years. It included the extraordinary scene of the city&rsquo;s Communist Party secretary standing atop a car, pleading with demonstrators to go home and promising to close and move the $1.5 billion plant. Some responded by demanding a date.        

China&rsquo;s embrace of wireless communications &mdash; first cellphone text messages, then Internet chat rooms and Twitterlike microblogs &mdash; has fueled such protests, allowing the disaffected to share grievances in a way never before possible. Dalian&rsquo;s protesters flooded microblogs with photos, reposting them as fast as censors could delete them.        

&ldquo;Once it was happening, I could follow everything through the pictures,&rdquo; said one person in Dalian, Ma Lei, who considered joining the demonstration but was deterred by the police.        

The protest mirrored one in mid-2007, when thousands of demonstrators in Xiamen, in southeast China, forced local officials to abandon plans for a plant making the same chemical.        

But more broadly, scholars speak of a revolution of rising expectations in which Chinese citizens, growing more educated and wealthier, think their government should better protect their health, safety and other interests.        

&ldquo;People are more aware of their rights, and they are demanding more rights and better protection of their interests,&rdquo; said Yiyi Lu, an Asia scholar in Beijing with the research institute Chatham House.        

The government is more responsive, she said, but it is still &ldquo;not reacting fast enough,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;That is why there is growing discontent.&rdquo;        

Some question whether China&rsquo;s middle class is eager to assert itself. &ldquo;The power of civil society is growing, but it is still very weak,&rdquo; said Hu Xingdou, a professor of economics at Beijing Institute of Technology.        

By the last available official count, so-called mass incidents &mdash; a term that appears to cover group actions ranging from minor work stoppages to serious riots &mdash; numbered 74,000 in 2004, up from 10,000 in 1993.        

In a February article in Economic Observer, a Chinese weekly publication, Sun Liping, a sociologist at Tsinghua University, wrote that a government academy estimated that such cases had doubled between 2006 and 2010, reaching 180,000 last year.        

In one of the biggest protests, about 30,000 people demonstrated in Guizhou Province in 2008 over what the government said was a bevy of grievances with local officials. Thousands more took part in ethnic riots in the Xinjiang region in 2009.        

This year, at least 2,000 Yunnan Province residents demonstrated in March against their evictions to make way for a power station. In April, 2,000 Shanghai residents flipped a police car and set motorcycles afire after urban security guards beat a migrant worker and his wife.        
Adam Century, Edy Yin and Shi Da contributed research.
