
LONDON &mdash; Rioters and looters convicted following the violent unrest that convulsed Britain this month will wear orange jumpsuits and help clean up areas affected by their actions, Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg said Tuesday, as part of a &ldquo;riot payback scheme.&rdquo;        

Mr. Clegg, the leader of the Liberal Democrat Party, the junior partner in the coalition government, also announced an &ldquo;independent communities and victims panel&rdquo; to examine the causes of the widespread violence, burning and looting that left scars across London and several other major cities. &ldquo;It won&rsquo;t be a public inquiry, it won&rsquo;t be established under the Inquiries Act, but it will serve as a way in which victims and communities can have their voice heard,&rdquo; he said at a news conference.        

The measures have been widely seen here as a compromise between Prime Minister David Cameron&rsquo;s Conservative Party, pushing a tough law-and-order response, and the opposition Labour Party, under Ed Miliband, which has urged the government to concentrate on the root causes of the unrest and declare a wider, judge-led public inquiry with the power to call witnesses.        

There was growing discord, however, over harsh sentences handed down to convicted rioters. Last week a 23-year-old engineering student with no previous convictions was sentenced to six months in prison for looting $5 worth of bottled water. On Tuesday, two young men from the outskirts of Manchester were each given four years in prison for inciting others to riot via Facebook postings.&nbsp;The Guardian newspaper reported that the postings by the defendants,&nbsp;Jordan Blackshaw, 20, and&nbsp;Perry Sutcliffe, 22, did not in fact lead to any violence.        

While judges and the police say those stiff sentences send an unmistakable message of deterrence, critics said they reeked of a double standard. Some compared them cynically to the more lenient punishments handed out in the 2009 expense account scandal involving members of Parliament, or the conspicuous absence of prosecutions over irresponsible banking practices that helped lead to the world financial crisis.        

&ldquo;Maybe I missed it, but during the M.P.s&rsquo; expenses scandal I just can&rsquo;t recall any M.P.s demanding eviction, loss of benefits, maximum jail terms, naming and shaming and everyone held on remand,&rdquo; Roger Clarke, a columnist for The Birmingham Mail, wrote Tuesday in blog post titled &ldquo;Is it Just Me?&rdquo;        

The London police also disclosed on Tuesday that they had sent officers to guard the 2012 Olympic Village and two higher-end shopping malls on Aug. 8, the third day of the rioting, after having intercepted cellphone and social network communications by rioters intent on pillaging those sites. Scotland Yard&rsquo;s assistant commissioner, Lynne Owens, told lawmakers that because the police had monitored the messaging, &ldquo;we were able to secure all those places, and indeed there was no damage.&rdquo;        

New evidence of the ferocity of the unrest continued to emerge.        

The police charged a 16-year-old boy with murder over the death of a 68-year-old retiree who was attacked during the turmoil. The boy&rsquo;s 31-year-old mother, arrested at the same crime scene, was charged with seeking to pervert justice, according to state prosecutors. Under British judicial rules, the boy&rsquo;s identity was kept secret.        

He was charged with murdering Richard Manning Bowes, who died Thursday after being assaulted during the unrest that swept through the west London district of Ealing on Aug. 8. A postmortem examination showed that he died of head injuries. He was the fifth person reported killed.        

Mr. Cameron and Mr. Miliband gave radically different speeches Monday on how to address the riots. Their responses suggested that Britain&rsquo;s political landscape would shake off a longtime uneasy consensus and take a form closer to that of Margaret Thatcher&rsquo;s heyday in the 1980s.        

On Tuesday, Mr. Cameron toured the north London neighborhood of Tottenham, where the four days of rioting started Aug. 6 after a peaceful protest about the death of Mark Duggan, a 29-year-old man of Afro-Caribbean descent who was shot and killed by a police officer under circumstances being investigated by the police regulator.        

Mr. Cameron visited a recreation center used by 200 people made homeless by fires that tore through their apartments after rioters burned the stores below. At the same time, Theresa May, the home secretary, who is responsible for the police, said at a public meeting in central London that the police might be given powers to impose curfews. But Ms. May again rejected demands by senior police officers for their forces to be exempted from the government&rsquo;s deep cuts in public spending because of the country&rsquo;s debt crisis.        

The ability of the rioters to coordinate their mayhem via Twitter, Facebook and instant messaging has emerged as a major theme in the four-day spree, and has led to government suggestions that it may exert temporary powers to suspend the use of Internet messaging services to thwart rioting in the future &mdash; a step fiercely opposed by civil rights proponents.        
John F. Burns reported from London, and Alan Cowell from Paris. Ravi Somaiya contributed reporting from London.
