
TEHRAN (AP) &mdash; Iran&rsquo;s top nuclear negotiator said Tuesday that a Russian proposal could be &ldquo;a basis to start negotiations&rdquo; on Iran&rsquo;s disputed nuclear program.        

The proposal calls for the other countries to make limited concessions to Iran for each step it takes toward opening its nuclear program fully to international inspection and giving up activities that could yield nuclear weapons.        

&ldquo;The proposal by our Russian friends can be a basis to start negotiations for regional and international cooperation, specifically in the field of peaceful nuclear activities,&rdquo; the Iranian negotiator, Saeed Jalili, said on Iranian state television.        

Mr. Jalili made the comments after two rounds of talks in Tehran on Tuesday with the chief of the Russian government&rsquo;s security council, Nikolai P. Patrushev, who also met with President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, according to Iran&rsquo;s official news agency IRNA.        

A spokesman for the State Department, Victoria Nuland, said that American diplomats had worked with the Russians on the proposal. &ldquo;What we are looking for from Iran has not changed,&rdquo; Ms. Nuland said Monday. &ldquo;We welcome any Russian effort to persuade Iran that it&rsquo;s time to change course and meet its international obligations.&rdquo;        

Talks between Iran and six world powers over its nuclear program stalled in January without producing an agreement even on when to meet again.        

The six powers &mdash; the United States, Britain, France, Russia, China and Germany &mdash; have been pushing Iran to comply with the United Nations Security Council&rsquo;s demands that it stop its uranium enrichment, which many in the West say is intended to go far beyond the level needed for reactor fuel and to produce weapons instead.        

Iran has said it will never give up its right under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty to enrich uranium, and has insisted that it does so only for peaceful purposes.        

Iran has dismissed Western intelligence reports suggesting that it has worked on testing a crucial component of a nuclear bomb, saying the reports are based on &ldquo;fabricated documents.&rdquo;        

But the Iranians have repeatedly refused to cooperate with United Nations investigations into possible military dimensions of its nuclear program.        
