
TUNIS &mdash; After days of antigovernment protests, dozens of Tunisians marched in the capital on Tuesday to demonstrate their patience with the interim government that replaced the ousted dictator Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, pleading with their fellow citizens to give the temporary leadership time to hold elections.        

But the pro-government demonstrators remained vastly outnumbered by more than a thousand others who were demanding the dissolution of the government, angry at its continued domination by former members of Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s ruling party. The two groups scuffled briefly.  The state news agency also reported that another Tunisian had attempted to set himself on fire in the impoverished interior city of Gefsa. It was the first instance of an attempt at self-immolation since a peddler burned himself to death, setting off the country&rsquo;s revolt. More than a dozen people in North Africa and the Middle East have set themselves on fire since the Tunisian revolution started.        

The interim government, which has pledged to hold free elections in six months, appeared to be attempting to wait out the protests. In efforts to placate the demonstrators, the government announced a plan to spend over $350 million compensating those injured in the unrest, the families of people who were killed, and craftsmen and traders whose businesses have suffered during the revolt.        

A spokesman said that on Wednesday the interim government would announce replacements for several ministers from outside the old governing party who had resigned to protest the continued dominance of that party. They are expected to be replaced by people from outside the party.        

The state news agency also reported that a Tunisian had attempted to set himself on fire in the impoverished interior city of Gefsa. It was the first instance of an attempt at self-immolation since a peddler burned himself to death, setting off the country&rsquo;s revolt. More than a dozen people in North Africa and the Middle East have set themselves on fire since the Tunisian revolution started.        

There was also sporadic evidence that not all of the police were abiding by the interim government&rsquo;s pledges to respect press freedoms. Moises Saman, a freelance photojournalist with the Magnum agency, working in Tunis for The New York Times, was mildly injured when he was assaulted by about a half-dozen police officers Tuesday evening at dusk. He was attempting to photograph a group of police officers beating a man in an alley.        
