
SINGAPORE &mdash; The Malaysian government has pledged to establish a committee to review the country&rsquo;s electoral system, after thousands rallied in the streets of the capital last month demanding changes in voting procedures. Election reform advocates welcomed the move, but some analysts expressed skepticism that it would result in significant revisions in time for the next election.        

In a statement Tuesday, the office of Prime Minister Najib Razak said an independent committee of government and opposition representatives would be formed &ldquo;as soon as possible&rdquo; to study the election system.        

&ldquo;For whatever reason, some people have expressed doubts about elements of that system, leading to calls for change,&rdquo; Mr. Najib said in the statement. &ldquo;I have always been deeply committed to parliamentary democracy and to all it can achieve &mdash; after all, in democratic nations we settle our differences in Parliament, not on the streets.&rdquo;        

The statement noted that the government was &ldquo;&lsquo;already taking steps to ensure elections are as fair as possible,&rdquo; for example by introducing biometric fingerprinting of voters.        

The announcement came after nearly 1,700 protesters were arrested during a rally on July 9 in Kuala Lumpur. The police fired tear gas and water cannons to disperse crowds at the rally, a response condemned as excessive by rights groups.        

The Coalition for Clean and Fair Elections, the group known as Bersih, or &ldquo;clean&rdquo; in Malay, which organized the rally, called the committee a &ldquo;positive step forward.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I would like to give this process a chance,&rdquo; Ambiga Sreenevasan, the chairwoman of Bersih, said in an e-mail. &ldquo;This is the first time we have ever had a process set up to look at electoral reform.&rdquo;        

Bersih later released a statement calling on the committee to submit a report within three months outlining changes to be implemented before the next election. It warned the government not to use the committee as a &ldquo;delay tactic to stall electoral reforms.&rdquo;        

Malaysia holds regular national elections, but Bersih maintains that they are open to manipulation and favor the coalition that has governed Malaysia since independence from Britain in 1957. The changes the group wants to see enacted before the next election include the use of indelible ink on fingers to ensure people vote only once, an assurance that all political parties have equal access to print and broadcast media, and the introduction of a minimum 21- day campaign period before elections.        

Analysts questioned whether the new committee would lead to substantial reforms.        

Ong Kian Ming, a political science lecturer at UCSI University in Kuala Lumpur, said it would be difficult to achieve a consensus because the governing coalition representatives would be &ldquo;much more conservative in proposing recommendations&rdquo; than opposition members.        

&ldquo;Past experiences of select committees and even royal commissions &mdash; on the police force, for example &mdash; have not led to concrete reform steps being taken by the government,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t see how this will be any different, especially given the sensitivity of the topic at hand.&rdquo;        

James Chin, a political scientist and director of the School of Arts and Social Sciences at Monash University Malaysia, said that there was &ldquo;no way&rdquo; that the panel would be able to effect legislative changes before the next election, because the legislative process usually takes 12 months.        

Elections are not due until mid-2013, but many analysts expect that they will be held by mid-2012.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a P.R. exercise,&rdquo; Mr. Chin said of the government&rsquo;s announcement. &ldquo;They realize that the depth of public support for Bersih was much deeper than they thought. They feel that they have to do something like this to make them look more reasonable.&rdquo;        

The opposition alliance, known as Pakatan Rakyat, said that the decision to establish the committee validated the issues it and Bersih had raised. &ldquo;We consider it a huge feat and win for democratic forces in Malaysia,&rdquo; the alliance said, and it called for a member of the opposition to be appointed head of the committee.        
