
Ali Abdullah Saleh, the embattled president of Yemen, promised his supporters on Tuesday that he would &ldquo;see you soon in the capital, Sana,&rdquo; in his third television appearance in less than a week.        

The crisp video clip of Mr. Saleh in a swooping tan head covering, seated at a flower-covered desk beside a Yemeni flag, was shown on state-run television in Yemen. It appeared to be part of an intensified campaign to re-establish Mr. Saleh in the center of Yemeni politics after two months abroad.        

Mr. Saleh has been in Saudi Arabia recovering from serious burns and injuries suffered in a bomb attack on his presidential palace on June 3. Both his political opponents and some in his ruling party have hoped that his absence will open the way to end the six-month political stalemate in Yemen, the poorest country in the Middle East.        

But the latest television appearances have shown Mr. Saleh looking increasingly healthy &mdash; and increasingly defiant. Mr. Saleh was shown last week walking and talking with ministers, and then on Tuesday was seen staring into the camera and promising to return to Yemen.        

Speaking fluidly and with confidence in the latest video, Mr. Saleh railed against his political opponents and the protesters who have demanded his immediate ouster, calling them &ldquo;exploiters, war merchants and street looters,&rdquo; according to a translation by The Associated Press. As he spoke, the video image switched to a shot of supporters watching him speak on a projection screen at a gathering in Yemen, before returning to a direct view of Mr. Saleh.        

In a television appearance last month, Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s face appeared darkened and possibly disfigured. But more recently his complexion has looked normal with no obvious signs of discoloration. Mr. Saleh was released from a Saudi hospital last week, but he has remained in Saudi Arabia to recuperate.        

No date has been given for when he planned to return to Yemen.        

The United States and many of Yemen&rsquo;s regional neighbors are backing a plan for a transition of power in Yemen under which Mr. Saleh would step down in exchange for immunity from prosecution. He has agreed to similar plans several times, only to back out again.        
