
LONDON &mdash; In the wake of Britain&rsquo;s brief exploration of the possibility of appointing a former New York City police commissioner to the country&rsquo;s top police post, the government settled Wednesday on a short list of four senior police commanders &mdash; all of them British nationals.        

The appointment to fill the vacant post of commissioner at Scotland Yard is expected to be made within two weeks, hastened by a sense of urgency after the rioting that convulsed many cities and towns last week. The position opened up last month when the two top officers at Scotland Yard resigned in the phone hacking scandal that had shaken the nation for weeks before the rioting.        

Prime Minister David Cameron had proposed that the job go to William J. Bratton, who gained a reputation as a formidable crime buster during his time as police commissioner in Boston and Los Angeles as well as New York City. But Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s preference ran into strong opposition from one of the most powerful figures in his cabinet, Home Secretary Theresa May, who cited the Scotland Yard chief&rsquo;s responsibilities for national security issues on Wednesday as her main reason for deciding to exclude foreigners as candidates.        

Ms. May&rsquo;s responsibilities involve frequent contact with the country&rsquo;s top police officers, several of whom had spoken out strongly against an American&rsquo;s taking a job that centers on overseeing the 32,000 police officers in London, as well as exercising some powers over national policing. The officers had asserted, in some cases bluntly, that Britain had little to learn from the United States, with its far higher incidence of murder, a more prevalent gang and drug culture and a tradition of more aggressive policing.        

Faced with such stiff opposition, Mr. Cameron began backing away from his plan to appoint Mr. Bratton. Last week, he suggested instead that Mr. Bratton come to Britain in the fall as an unpaid consultant, a suggestion that the American accepted. But it remains unclear whether Mr. Cameron has abandoned the idea of a more permanent post for Mr. Bratton.        

The issue of who runs Scotland Yard has been caught up in the bitter debate under way in Britain about the police&rsquo;s handling of the rioting, with the Cameron government and top police officers skirmishing publicly over the hesitant tactics used by riot squads in the opening 48 hours of the mayhem. Police commanders have said that the delay in massing reinforcements until the rioting had exploded in a score of cities and towns beyond the capital was partly a result of &ldquo;mixed messages&rdquo; over many years from governments that have held the police to account for acting too forcefully in the face of violent disorder.        

The four men who will now compete for the Scotland Yard job include the current acting commissioner, Tim Godwin; Sir Hugh Orde, president of the Association of Chief Police Officers and a former chief of police in Northern Ireland; Stephen House, the former chief of police in Strathclyde, near Glasgow; and the former police chief in Liverpool, Bernard Hogan-Howe, who is on temporary assignment as Mr. Godwin&rsquo;s deputy.        

The early favorites appear to be Mr. House, who has a reputation for success in dealing with gangs, and Mr. Hogan-Howe, with a record for cracking down on street crime in Liverpool. Sir Hugh has scrapped publicly with the government, most recently over Mr. Bratton, and Mr. Godwin is thought to have been damaged by the slow police response to the rioting in London.        

The job of police commissioner had been held by Sir Paul Stephenson, until he and his deputy, John Yates, resigned because of the phone hacking scandal. Scotland Yard has been roundly criticized for its failure to fully investigate the allegations of criminality in the newsroom of the now-defunct News of the World tabloid owned by Rupert Murdoch.        

In an announcement that appeared to have been timed to coincide with the government&rsquo;s choice of candidates to succeed Sir Paul, the Independent Police Complaints Commission said Wednesday that an inquiry of its own, based on police documents and testimony, found no evidence of criminal misconduct in the hacking scandal by Sir Paul or Mr. Yates.        

A separate inquiry into Mr. Yates&rsquo;s role in giving a Scotland Yard job to the daughter of a former News of the World editor will continue.        
John F. Burns reported from London, and Alan Cowell from Paris. Ravi Somaiya contributed reporting from London.
