
MOSCOW &mdash; Anna Mashutina hated compliments. When praised for her plays, she would look down in embarrassment, or respond by listing their shortcomings. She was so bashful about her success that she sometimes seemed to be apologizing for it.        

When Ms. Mashutina was late to accept an award in Moscow on Monday for a screen adaptation of her play, &ldquo;Pagans,&rdquo; at first it seemed there were reasonable explanations for her delay; the master of ceremonies promised to keep it for her, a friend said.        

By then, though, Ms. Mashutina&rsquo;s husband was repeatedly dialing her Ukrainian cellphone number to make sure she was all right. It rang and rang, and then a Russian man picked it up and answered, identifying himself as an agent of the Federal Security Service. That is how he found out she was dead, said Natalia Antonova, a friend.        

At least 35 people were killed at Domodedovo Airport on Monday when a suicide bomber set off an enormous explosion in the international arrivals hall. By Tuesday, it was clear that most of the dead were middle-age men who lived in Moscow, but others were passengers who had just threaded their way through customs into the crowded hall and paused for some reason.        

Among the youngest was Ms. Mashutina, who had just flown in from her home in the Ukrainian port city of Odessa. At 29, she had the rippling blond hair and perfectly arranged features of &ldquo;one of those fairy tale characters,&rdquo; relieved by a lazy eye that signaled mischief, said Ms. Antonova, a Moscow journalist and playwright.        

&ldquo;I fell in love with her,&rdquo; Ms. Antonova, 26, said. &ldquo;I think a lot of people did.&rdquo;        

Using the pen name Anna Yablonskaya, Ms. Mashutina wrote plays that had drawn rapt admiration in Moscow, though not in her hometown, Odessa, where she joked that cultural grandees &ldquo;cross themselves at the mention of new writing.&rdquo;        

She depicted modern life with a severity that could be lacerating, but somehow in her plays, &ldquo;the depressive, dehumanizing world reverses itself, like a falling cat, and lands solidly on its feet,&rdquo; wrote the theater critic Pavel Rudnev. Even after her plays had been performed in Moscow and St. Petersburg, after she won an international residency in London, she had the diffidence of a neophyte, friends said.        

&ldquo;She could never believe that Moscow would so easily accept and understand her &ndash; a provincial woman, a non-resident, a foreigner,&rdquo; Mr. Rudnev wrote. &ldquo;The terrible city of Moscow, that has now played such a tragic part in her life, somehow favored her, though according to all laws it should not have. She had the shyness of a provincial woman, the bashfulness.&rdquo;        

Ms. Mashutina was increasingly reluctant to leave Odessa, not only because she was afraid of flying but because she hated to be away from her daughter, Masha. The girl&rsquo;s birth three years ago had ushered in a period of extraordinary productivity in her work, Ms. Antonova said.        

Ms. Mashutina said that when she became a mother, &ldquo;this whole question about the meaning of life became completely irrelevant,&rdquo; Ms. Antonova said. Mikhail Ugarov, the director of Moscow&rsquo;s Teatr.doc, said each of her recent plays was more interesting than the one before, culminating in &ldquo;Pagans,&rdquo; which will be featured at London&rsquo;s Royal Court Theater in April. &ldquo;Something opens up in your life when you have a child,&rdquo; Mr. Ugarov said. &ldquo;You begin to understand much more about people, especially in terms of drama.&rdquo;        

Ms. Mashutina had seemed somber and preoccupied recently, Ms. Antonova said, and on Dec. 21 she set down this entry in her blog: &ldquo;It seems to me that I have very little time left.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;To her, it wasn&rsquo;t sudden, somehow,&rdquo; Ms. Antonova said. &ldquo;Her intuition maybe told her something was going to happen.&rdquo;        
