
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The United Nations-backed tribunal investigating the assassination of a former Lebanese prime minister in 2005 released the full indictment on Wednesday against members of Hezbollah named in the killing, a move that could deepen tensions in a country polarized by the repercussions of the investigation.        

Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shiite Muslim movement that is the most powerful single actor in the country, has long denied involvement in the assassination of the former prime minister, Rafik Hariri, which redrew the country&rsquo;s political map and led to years of strife. But many in Lebanon have feared that details of the indictment &mdash; how the assassination was actually carried out on a seaside road in the capital &mdash; would deepen divisions here.        

The 47-page indictment will provide fodder for all sides. It relies heavily on phone records and offers circumstantial evidence, and prosecutors acknowledged that they had no smoking gun in the case. Still, they argued, circumstantial evidence &ldquo;is often more reliable than direct evidence, which can suffer from firsthand memory loss or eyewitness distortion.&rdquo;        

Hezbollah and Lebanese officials have long said that Israel had penetrated Lebanon&rsquo;s telecommunications network; two senior employees of one cellphone company were arrested last year for spying.        

In Lebanon, reactions to the release of the indictment broke predictably along the fault lines that split the country not only over the investigation but also over broader questions of identity, relations with foreign patrons, and the country&rsquo;s posture toward Israel.        

Hezbollah&rsquo;s leader, Hassan Nasrallah, was dismissive, saying the indictment presented no proof that members of his group were involved in the assassination.        

&ldquo;The text in our hands now is based on analysis and not clear evidence,&rdquo; Mr. Nasrallah said in a speech hours after the indictment was made public. &ldquo;Those who were indicted should not be called &lsquo;charged&rsquo; but unjustly treated.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s son, Saad Hariri, also a former prime minister, repeated his calls for Hezbollah to cooperate with the tribunal, which is based in the Netherlands.        

&ldquo;What is required of Hezbollah&rsquo;s leadership is simply to announce their disengagement with the accused,&rdquo; Mr. Hariri said in a statement. &ldquo;This stance will go down in history, and all the Lebanese and Arabs will acknowledge it.&rdquo;        

The tribunal&rsquo;s prosecutor, Daniel A. Bellemare, said in a statement that unsealing the indictment &ldquo;answers many questions.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The full story will, however, only unfold in the courtroom, where an open, public, fair and transparent trial will render a final verdict,&rdquo; he added.        

The court issued arrest warrants on June 30 for four Hezbollah members. None of the four have been detained by Lebanese authorities, and Hezbollah says they will never be arrested.        

Hezbollah has contended that the tribunal is a sham, manipulated by Washington and Israel.        

The most prominent of the four is Mustafa Amine Badreddine, a brother-in-law of Imad Moughnieh, the shadowy Hezbollah commander who was killed in 2007. Mr. Moughnieh was believed responsible for some of the group&rsquo;s biggest acts of violence, including the 1983 bombing of the American Marine barracks in Beirut, which killed 241 people.        

The three others are Salim Jamil Ayyash; Hussein Hassan Oneissi, known as Hassan Issa; and Assad Hassan Sabra.        

The court said that Mr. Badreddine was the overall commander of the mission to assassinate Rafik Hariri, and that Mr. Ayyash managed the team that carried it out. Mr. Oneissi and Mr. Sabra were conspirators and prepared a false claim of responsibility, the court said.        

Mr. Hariri, a Sunni Muslim billionaire, was killed along with 22 others when his six-car motorcade was struck by a van loaded with 2.5 tons of explosives on Feb. 14, 2005. He was admired by his supporters for helping rebuild Lebanon, especially Beirut, after its 15-year civil war ended in 1990. To detractors, he was as wily as he was unprincipled, cultivating the corruption that seems to infuse public life in Lebanon.        
