
MAIDUGURI, Nigeria &mdash; A shadowy Islamist insurgency that has haunted northern Nigeria &mdash; surviving repeated, bloody efforts to eliminate it &mdash; appears to be branching out and collaborating with Al Qaeda&rsquo;s affiliates, alarming Western officials and analysts who had previously viewed the militants here as a largely isolated, if deadly, menace.        

Just two years ago, the Islamist group stalking police officers in this bustling city seemed on the verge of extinction. In a heavy-handed assault, Nigerian soldiers shelled its headquarters and killed its leader, leaving a grisly tableau of charred ruins, hundreds dead and outmatched members of the group, known as Boko Haram, struggling to fight back, sometimes with little more than bows and arrows.        

Now, insurgents strike at the Nigerian military, the police and opponents of Islamic law in near-daily assaults and bombings, using improvised explosive devices that can be detonated remotely and bear the hallmarks of Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, Western officials and analysts say. Beyond the immediate devastation, the fear is that extremists bent on jihad are spreading their reach across the continent and planting roots in a major, Western-allied state that had not been seen as a hotbed of global terrorism.        

In the past two years, Boko Haram has met and trained with Qaeda affiliates outside the country, American and Nigerian officials and analysts say, and the group has begun waging a propaganda campaign that includes conference calls with reporters &mdash; another sign of its growing sophistication.        

&ldquo;Where are they getting this knowledge of I.E.D.&rsquo;s?&rdquo; said Kashim Shettima, the new governor here. &ldquo;Some of them went as far as Sudan. Why? I believe they are making efforts to reach out to the global terrorism network.&rdquo;        

The Nigerian government appears to have only a shaky grasp of how to confront the threat, responding with such a broad, harsh crackdown that many residents see the military as more of a danger than Boko Haram. Shops are shuttered, vans laden with refugees can be seeing heading out of town and the normally wide, traffic-choked streets lined with neem trees are unexpectedly clear.        

About 140 people have died in the violence since January, according to Amnesty International, including dozens of civilians killed by the military. Most of Boko Haram&rsquo;s attacks have occurred here in this city at the edge of the Sahara, but there have also been blasts farther south in Kaduna and outside the national police headquarters in the capital, Abuja.        

Several dozen civilians were killed in June when bombs were hurled into the rudimentary outdoor beer parlors that exist furtively on the Christian-minority fringes here. Shariah law exists in this overwhelmingly Muslim region, but in a relatively loose form. Not all women are veiled, and beer and wine can be obtained &mdash; apparently an affront, the authorities here say, to the group&rsquo;s goal of imposing strict Islamic law in this country&rsquo;s restive and impoverished north.        

Boko Haram&rsquo;s militants fade into the warrens of sandy alleys, protected, officials say, by supporters in the population and even in the security services. The brutal Nigerian military tactics &mdash; shoot first, ask questions later &mdash; are creating more sympathizers on the ground, analysts and residents here suggest.        

&ldquo;You are Boko Haram!&rdquo; said Saude Maman, recounting how soldiers yelled at her husband on July 9 after a patrol vehicle was bombed and the military cordoned off Kaleri, a district of low cement houses and courtyards.        

When her husband denied it, &ldquo;they dragged him to the courtyard and shot him,&rdquo; said Ms. Maman, sitting with a group of women in front of a scorched house. Four of them said they had lost their husbands that night.        

Ms. Maman, dressed in black from head to foot, told of holding her spouse as he died and then having to pay about $20 to recover his body. At least 25 people died in that operation alone, Amnesty says. A week later, the neighborhood still showed the scars of the military&rsquo;s nocturnal onslaught: burned-out vehicles, charred walls, melted cookware.        
Mark Mazzetti contributed reporting from Washington.
