
BERLIN &mdash; German voters may be willing to tolerate a politician&rsquo;s having an affair with a teenager, but not when that politician &mdash; a leading conservative, no less &mdash; met her on Facebook, where he also flaunted immodest details of his life.        

Christian von Boetticher, 40, the successful state legislator at the top of the Christian Democratic Union&rsquo;s ticket in the northern state of Schleswig-Holstein, resigned as head of the party there during a tearful news conference on Sunday. He admitted to the affair with a 16-year-old girl, which was legal under German law, and to making a misjudgment, but insisted that he had nothing to be ashamed of because it was &ldquo;a very unusual love.&rdquo;        

It is also an unusual scandal &mdash; not only because of the girl&rsquo;s age, which was at the border of permissible and punishable, but also because of the role played by the social networking site.        

In some ways, the fact of her youth was less strange to conservative voters and colleagues &ldquo;than that a grown man with more important things to do would spend so much time playing around on this network with nothing better to do than trade messages with a young girl,&rdquo; said Rudolf K&ouml;tter, director of the Center for Advanced Ethics and Science Communications at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg.        

Long before news of the affair became public, colleagues expressed concerns that Mr. Boetticher dallied on the site too much, sharing information about his social life in status updates the party might have preferred remained private.        

He posted about polo parties and expensive bottles of Brunello di Montalcino wine he had just opened. Der Spiegel magazine reported that he had skipped a political discussion to watch a lunar eclipse, then posted about it on his wall.        

German voters usually ignore politicians&rsquo; sex lives, but they also tend to value privacy and modesty more than Americans do. This month, a German regulator asked Facebook to disable new photo-tagging software over concerns that it amounted to unlawful data collection on individuals. Facebook has an estimated 20 million users here out of a population of 82 million.        

Technology continues to redraw the border between the public and private spheres for everyone, but perhaps most noticeably in the heavily scrutinized lives of politicians. (In the United States, Representative Anthony D. Weiner of New York demonstrated all too clearly that politicians had as much to lose as they did to gain on social media.)        

According to Mr. Boetticher, the girl&rsquo;s parents as well as his friends knew about the relationship. The girl, now 17, who has not been named, defended her former lover in newspaper interviews. &ldquo;To this day I can&rsquo;t say anything bad about Christian,&rdquo; she told Cologne&rsquo;s Express newspaper. &ldquo;Behind the politician there is also a person with feelings.&rdquo;        

But she probably also embarrassed him as she described the hundreds of Facebook and text messages he sent her before that first meeting, not to mention the fact that they spent two straight days in the Steigenberger Hotel in D&uuml;sseldorf, having sex the first time they met face to face.        

For Chancellor Angela Merkel, struggling with the European debt crisis and falling poll numbers at home, the sight of Mr. Boetticher wiping his tears away in front of a C.D.U. logo Sunday evening &mdash; a clip now with its own life on the Internet &mdash; could hardly have come at a worse moment. Already, her party&rsquo;s brightest young star and federal minister of defense, Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg, had resigned in March after it emerged that he plagiarized his doctoral dissertation.        

Mrs. Merkel hoped Mr. Boetticher would help the party reverse recent setbacks in state elections. Instead he has further damaged its reputation at a time when conservative voters were losing faith in the chancellor&rsquo;s centrist approach.        

Adding to the sense that the real problem was Mr. Boetticher&rsquo;s use of social media, a number of German commentators disputed the importance of the affair itself.        

In the Berliner Zeitung, the columnist Jutta Kramm expressed surprise that Mr. Boetticher thought it necessary to step down over the affair, which she described as a very American phenomenon. American morals are often viewed with indulgent condescension here in Germany, where nude sunbathing and explicit sexual scenes on public television are widely considered normal.        

&ldquo;Extramarital affairs, illegitimate children, first and second wives or husbands, libidinous escapades or particular sexual preferences indeed may provide fodder for rumors and offer excellent material for gossip and scandal but they have almost never been a reason to resign,&rdquo; Ms. Kramm wrote.        

Or as the Hamburger Abendblatt put it, &ldquo;Leading a double life has not been cause to step down for some time.&rdquo; Even the socially conservative Christian Social Union, the Bavarian sister party to Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s Christian Democrats, elected Horst Seehofer as party leader after it was revealed that he had impregnated his girlfriend in an adulterous affair.        

Schleswig-Holstein, located between the North Sea and the Baltic Sea on the Danish border, is also known for the island resort of Sylt, where Mr. Boetticher enjoyed the beaches and the polo matches, all of which he shared on Facebook. Last year he wrote a status update that said he &ldquo;has been sitting since 9 o&rsquo;clock in the Statehouse in Kiel!!! One meeting after another. That&rsquo;s enough!&rdquo; The Hannoversche Allgemeine Zeitung reported that a fellow politician said, &ldquo;I think I need to register with Facebook so I can communicate with him.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;He was always seen as something of the dandy type, and he liked to play the role, and Facebook was a part of that&rdquo; said Rainer Burchardt, professor of media studies at the University of Applied Sciences in Kiel, the state capital. &ldquo;But he must have known quite clearly that what he did with this girl was unacceptable and that it was not politically tenable.&rdquo;        

The scandal refuses to go away. On Monday, Mr. Boetticher also resigned as the party&rsquo;s leader in the state Parliament. On Tuesday, German newspapers published photographs of a Nevada marriage certificate from October 2010 in Mr. Boetticher&rsquo;s name, suggesting that the ostensibly single politician may in fact have married his 34-year-old girlfriend a few months after ending the affair with the girl.        

As he stepped down Sunday night, Mr. Boetticher conceded that &ldquo;although legal in a judicial sense many people would have understandable moral reservations&rdquo; about his relationship with the girl less than half his age.        

Shortly before he gave that resignation speech on Sunday night Mr. Boetticher deleted his Facebook profile. His successor, Jost de Jager, does not have one.        
