
ISTANBUL &mdash; Turkish warplanes bombed suspected Kurdish insurgent positions inside northern Iraq late Wednesday for the first time in a year, news services in Turkey reported, hours after an insurgent ambush on a military convoy in southeast Turkey left at least eight dead.        

There was no immediate official confirmation of the bombing assaults, which Turkish news services said were carried out by at least 15 warplanes. But Turkish leaders, infuriated by the attack on the convoy earlier in the day, had promised a punishing response and said their tolerance for the long-simmering Kurdish insurgency had been exhausted.        

The ambush was carried out by the Kurdistan Workers Party, or P.K.K., the Anatolia News Agency reported. The militant group operates from bases and hide-outs along northern Iraq&rsquo;s mountainous border with Turkey. Turkish warplanes last bombed inside Iraqi territory in the summer of 2010.        

The insurgent ambush, in Turkey&rsquo;s largely Kurdish-populated Hakkari Province, was the deadliest single attack on the Turkish military since it began a new crackdown in mid-July on the Kurdish autonomy movement, a step that officials said was justified by an insurgent attack on July 13 that killed 13 Turkish soldiers. In all, at least 30 Turkish soldiers have died in the last month of fighting with the insurgents, who seek autonomy for Turkey&rsquo;s nearly 12 million Kurds.        

The Anatolia News Agency said that militants detonated four explosions on the Hakkari-Cukurca highway as the convoy was passing, killing seven soldiers and a security guard and wounding at least 14.        

President Abdullah Gul of Turkey, noting that the ambush took place during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, had said that the military would not wait for the end of the holiday to retaliate. &ldquo;Whoever thinks that he can bring Turkey into line with terror, violence and weapons is greatly misled,&rdquo; Turkish news services quoted him as saying. &ldquo;The cost of this will also be very heavy.&rdquo;        

Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said in a statement that &ldquo;Turkey will not be tolerant towards the terror organization that targets our country&rsquo;s unity and integrity, as well as the safety of our citizens&rsquo; lives and commodities.&rdquo;        

Speaking to reporters about the ambush while in Istanbul, Mr. Erdogan also hinted at a stern response. &ldquo;Our patience has finally run out,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Those who do not distance themselves from terrorism will pay the price.&rdquo;        

Kurdish autonomy has loomed as an important issue confronting Mr. Erdogan, whose Justice and Development Party won an election in June for a third term. Kurdish activists in Turkey have complained that Mr. Erdogan has ignored them while upholding the rights of others, like the Palestinians and, more recently, Syrians who are fleeing a repressive crackdown by their government.        

Hundreds of Kurdish political activists remain in jail on charges of supporting terrorism, and the only pro-Kurdish party in Parliament has refused to take part in debates unless some of its imprisoned but elected members are released to take their seats.        

&ldquo;Kurds have been struggling for freedom and autonomy in Turkey for decades, often in the face of violent state repression,&rdquo; Sebahat Tuncel, a Kurdish member of Turkey&rsquo;s Parliament, wrote in an Op-Ed page article in The New York Times on June 18 after Mr. Erdogan&rsquo;s re-election. &ldquo;We will no longer accept the status quo.&rdquo;        

The P.K.K., classified as a terrorist organization by the European Union and the United States, refuses to lay down its arms unless its demands, including use of the Kurdish language in public education and an amnesty for militants hiding in northern Iraq, are met by Turkey.        
Sebnem Arsu reported from Istanbul, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
