
BEIJING &mdash; Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Chinese leaders emphasized on Thursday the need for economic cooperation at a time when the global economy is struggling with new crises. But a fistfight at an American-versus-Chinese good-will basketball game at night cast a shadow on the day&rsquo;s diplomacy.        

The American delegation had arrived anxious that the Chinese might express concerns over the country&rsquo;s large holdings of American debt. But United States officials present at Mr. Biden&rsquo;s meetings said Chinese leaders told him they still had confidence in the United States&rsquo; financial system and did not show worry over their country&rsquo;s investments. Chinese officials did not provide a briefing for foreign reporters, so it was not immediately possible to get their version of what was said.        

Recent commentaries from official Chinese news organizations had expressed alarm about China&rsquo;s holdings after the debt ceiling crisis in the United States.        

Mr. Biden, meanwhile, returned to an old theme: that China needed to build a more sustainable economy that would put greater weight on domestic consumption rather than exports. He emphasized that such a rebalancing was a way that China could help spur growth in the United States and other countries and address structural flaws in its own economy.        

&ldquo;That&rsquo;s the overwhelming reason I&rsquo;ve come: to talk about jobs and growth, and as was phrased this morning, the reordering of our economies &mdash; yours and ours,&rdquo; Mr. Biden said in an afternoon meeting with Wu Bangguo, the head of the National People&rsquo;s Congress and officially the second-ranking official in China.        

As the world&rsquo;s two largest economies during an uneasy time, Mr. Biden said, both nations &ldquo;hold the key together to not only our own prosperity, but to generating growth and jobs worldwide.&rdquo;        

American officials have emphasized that a crucial aspect of rebalancing the economies is allowing the Chinese currency, the renminbi, to appreciate in value. It has gone up by 7 percent since June 2010, but that is not enough, American officials say.        

It was unclear if the melee at the basketball game would have any lasting effect on the trip, but it was evident that the news was spreading fast, with videos and photos quickly posted on the Web. The fisticuffs erupted at a close-fought game in Beijing between the Georgetown Hoyas and the Bayi Rockets, a team made up of members of the People&rsquo;s Liberation Army.        

Sarah E. Burton, an American spectator, described the fight as a &ldquo;fist-furious brawl&rdquo; that erupted after at least five on-court scuffles. The game was called off.        

The Hoyas&rsquo; trip to China was not related to Mr. Biden&rsquo;s mission, but after arriving Wednesday, Mr. Biden did attend a game in which the Hoyas crushed a team from Shanxi Province.        

It was Mr. Biden&rsquo;s first trip to China since taking office. A main purpose of the trip, which includes three full days of meetings in Beijing and the western city of Chengdu, is for Mr. Biden and other American officials to build a relationship with Vice President Xi Jinping, who is expected to become China&rsquo;s leader next year. On Thursday, Mr. Biden had two meetings with Mr. Xi in the Great Hall of the People and attended a dinner hosted by Mr. Xi.        

American officials said the two discussed a broad range of issues, including matters of deep disagreement, in a frank manner. Topics included American arms sales to Taiwan, policy toward Pakistan and the nuclear programs of North Korea and Iran.        

Mr. Biden and Mr. Xi arrived at the Great Hall together at 10:30 a.m., striding under blue skies made unusually clear from a night of rain. Inside, the pair walked on a red carpet past an honor guard that first played &ldquo;The Star-Spangled Banner&rdquo; and then the national anthem of the People&rsquo;s Republic of China.        

The men exchanged opening remarks at a conference table. Mr. Xi was the first to speak, and he underscored the main theme of Mr. Biden&rsquo;s visit, which was the increasingly intertwined interests, particularly economic interests, of both countries: &ldquo;I, too, believe that under the new situation, China and the United States have ever more extensive common interests, and we shoulder ever more important common responsibilities,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Biden spoke nostalgically of his first visit to China in 1979, when he was a senator. Before he could finish his opening remarks, which had been prepared for officials and journalists to hear, Chinese security officers forcefully shoved foreign reporters and some White House employees from the meeting room. It was unclear whether there had been some sort of misunderstanding for the disturbance, rare during such a high-level meeting, but American officials declined to comment on the matter.        

The morning meetings with Mr. Xi ran 45 minutes late, which American officials later said they took as a good sign. Mr. Biden then went with his granddaughter Naomi and the new United States ambassador, Gary F. Locke, and Mr. Locke&rsquo;s wife, Mona, to Yao Ji Chao Gan, a small restaurant north of Tiananmen Square that specializes in fried liver and bowls of intestine.        

The restaurant, tucked away behind the ancient building known as the Drum Tower, was crowded with Chinese patrons at lunchtime. An owner of the restaurant spoke to Mr. Biden about her relatives in Minnesota.        

Some patrons clapped as Mr. Biden strode among tables, and one yelled out &ldquo;Beijing welcomes you!&rdquo; in Mandarin Chinese. Mr. Biden&rsquo;s group ate pork buns, but did not order the house specialty.        
