
BAGHDAD &mdash; While Western leaders including President Obama called on President Bashar al-Assad of Syria to step down, Iraq&rsquo;s prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, warned Arab leaders in a speech on Thursday that Israel would benefit the most from the Arab Spring.        

&ldquo;There is no doubt that there is a country that is waiting for the Arab countries to be ripped and is waiting for internal corrosion,&rdquo; he said in Baghdad. &ldquo;Zionists and Israel are the first and biggest beneficiaries of this whole process.&rdquo;        

Mr. Maliki, the leader of Iraq&rsquo;s Shiite government, rarely mentions Israel in speeches. But he warned that those Arab countries experiencing democratic revolutions should be wary of Israel&rsquo;s taking advantage of the turmoil.        

&ldquo;We must take notice and be careful not to be the prey of the ambitions of this usurping country,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Maliki, who has maintained a far friendlier tone toward the Assad government than many Arab leaders, did not refer to Syria in the speech. He said that Arabs deserved to have more rights, but that they should gain them through the electoral process.        

Since the uprising in Syria began, Mr. Maliki has invited many Syrian officials to Baghdad to discuss stronger economic ties between the two countries. He has also said far less about the Syrian government&rsquo;s bloody crackdown on dissent than he did when there was similar unrest earlier in Bahrain, where a Sunni monarchy holds sway over a predominantly Shiite population.        

Many analysts have said that Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s stance on Syria reflects Iraq&rsquo;s increasing tilt toward Iran, a Shiite theocracy and a strong supporter of Syria. In 2010, Mr. Maliki relied heavily on Iran&rsquo;s political support to gain a second term as prime minister. Others have said that Mr. Maliki is concerned that unrest in Syria could spill over the border into Iraq and further destabilize the country.        
