
BEIJING &mdash; High-ranking Chinese officials purged for wrongdoings have a habit of resurfacing in other top government jobs. But for many critics, the overnight re-emergence of Wang Yongping, the Ministry of Railways spokesman fired this week, seemed particularly tone-deaf to the national mood.        

Mr. Wang, who was dismissed Tuesday after public outrage over a deadly high-speed train crash worsened with his ham-handed public utterances, is heading to Poland, where he will represent China in an international railway association, the official Xinhua news agency said Thursday.        

Mr. Wang is widely viewed as having been relieved of the ministry post because of his performance after the train collision near the coastal city of Wenzhou in July that killed at least 40 people.        

Mr. Wang was the fourth ministry official to lose his job in the wake of the crash, which has exposed flaws in China&rsquo;s ambitious effort to construct the world&rsquo;s most extensive high-speed rail network. Officials initially blamed a lightning strike for the accident, but in recent days the ministry has acknowledged that design and construction flaws played a role.        

 Mr. Wang faced an unusually combative news conference  during which reporters asked why government workers had hastily buried a damaged rail car rather than preserve it for investigators (it made rescue work easier, he said) and why an unconscious 2-year-old girl was found in the wreckage long after officials had abandoned the search for survivors (he called the belated discovery &ldquo;a miracle&rdquo;).        

Then he hurried away from reporters as they pelted him with questions. In the days that followed, his remarks became fodder for Internet mockery, particularly his insistence that the government&rsquo;s version of events was unimpeachable: &ldquo;Whether you believe it or not, I believe it anyway,&rdquo; he said with a confident wave of his hand.        

If Mr. Wang&rsquo;s firing and prompt reassignment to Europe were meant to be viewed as a form of exile, the message was clearly lost on the Chinese public. &ldquo;His ranking stays the same, which proves that the party never forgets its good cadres,&rdquo; said one posting on Weibo, the Chinese equivalent of Twitter.        

Most comments, however, took the form of barbed humor. &ldquo;Quick! Sell all your Polish high-speed rail stocks,&rdquo; read one post. &ldquo;Why does the government hate Poland so much?&rdquo; asked another.        

Numerous cartoons and even a music video ridiculing him have emerged.        

But other commentators have come to see him as the scapegoat for a dysfunctional behemoth. &ldquo;The fact is that no matter what he said, in the absence of other high-level officials and given the department&rsquo;s culture of not allowing people to speak the truth, Wang was always going to be criticized,&rdquo; Wen Shuping wrote in The Economic Observer.        

Mr. Wang could not be reached for comment on Thursday, but The Oriental Morning Post, a Shanghai-based newspaper, quoted him as saying he was fed up with pushy reporters.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to deal with media anymore,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I want a peaceful life.&rdquo; His new job at the Organization for Cooperation of Railways, an obscure group dedicated to improving links between Asia and former members of the Soviet bloc, may grant his wish.        
Mia Li contributed research.
