
ISTANBUL &mdash; Turkish warplanes attacked 60 targets in the mountains and border areas of northern Iraq early Thursday in pursuit of Kurdish separatist rebels suspected of responsibility a day earlier for a deadly quadruple bombing ambush on a military convoy in southeast Turkey, the army headquarters said.        

Turkish news reports and Kurdish officials in northern Iraq reported more Turkish warplane sorties late Thursday night.        

The Kurdish officials in northern Iraq also reported shelling of a Kurdish village near the border with Iran, apparently by Iranian forces, which have periodically lobbed artillery at suspected members of an Iranian Kurdish rebel group known as PJAK that operates in Iran but takes refuge in Iraq.        

It was unclear whether the Iranian shelling was a coincidence.        

The Turkish airstrikes followed an artillery barrage by Turkish forces targeting 168 locations in northern Iraq, which military intelligence showed were frequented by the P.K.K., or Kurdistan Workers Party, the insurgent group that has been fighting for autonomy in Turkey&rsquo;s southeast since the early 1980s.        

&ldquo;Similar actions of the Turkish Armed Forces inside and outside the country will continue in a determined way until the North of Iraq would be turned into a secure residential area and the terror organization that uses the area as a launch pad for attacks would be eliminated,&rdquo; a statement by the army command said.        

The bombardment of the Qandil and Zap regions in northern Iraq came after Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan warned that his patience with the Kurdish rebels had run out. He was reacting to news of the convoy ambush on Wednesday, when eight Turkish soldiers and a village guard were killed and 15 others wounded by four bombs.        

Turkish news accounts on Thursday suggested that Mr. Erdogan was planning further military steps.        

The P.K.K. has intensified its attacks since July, when talks for a political resolution to the Kurdish autonomy issue stalled over a dispute between the government and the only Kurdish party in Parliament, the Peace and Democracy Party.        

Mr. Erdogan&rsquo;s pro-Islamic Justice and Development Party, which won a third term in power in elections held in June, considers Peace and Democracy the political wing of the P.K.K., because it has refused to repudiate the rebel group as a terrorist organization.        

Peace and Democracy politicians have been boycotting parliamentary sessions, demanding the release of hundreds of Kurdish activists kept in jail on terrorism-related charges &mdash; including some Peace and Democracy lawmakers elected in June.        

The P.K.K. has said it will not lay down its arms until its demands, including the use of Kurdish in public education, amnesty for its militants and the release of Abdullah Ocalan, its imprisoned leader, are met.        

In northern Iraq&rsquo;s Kurdistan region, security officials said the Turkish bombings Thursday night caused fires in two villages. They also said that later in the evening, shells began to fall on a village northeast of Erbil near the Iran border, an area that has been subject to periodic shelling by Iran.        

Iraq has complained about Turkish violations of its territory before in Turkey&rsquo;s long-running fight with Kurdish militants.        

Jabbar Yawar, the secretary general of the official pesh merga militia forces in Iraq&rsquo;s Kurdistan region, said he was not concerned by the military actions of either Turkey or Iran.        

&ldquo;We do not feel that there is any danger to us,&rdquo; Mr. Yawar said. &ldquo;We have solid diplomatic relations with Turkey and Iran and strong economic ties. The Turkish government did not notify us about these operations, but they have threatened before not to stand silent toward the P.K.K. attacks inside of Turkey.&rdquo;        
Michael S. Schmidt contributed reporting from Baghdad, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
