
WASHINGTON &mdash; The United States and several of its major allies on Thursday called on Syria&rsquo;s president, Bashar al-Assad, to give up power. The carefully choreographed announcements came after months of popular protests and increasingly deadly reprisals that the United Nations commissioner for human rights said amounted to crimes against humanity by the Syrian authorities.        

President Obama, who had faced criticism for not acting more assertively, ordered the freezing of all Syrian assets within American jurisdiction, banned imports of Syrian oil and barred American citizens from having any business dealings with the Syrian government, which the administration once courted in the hopes of improving relations.        

He called on other countries to impose their own sanctions, focusing on Syria&rsquo;s oil and gas industry, and European leaders suggested those were now under consideration.        

The ultimate effect of the chorus of international condemnation and sanctions remains to be seen, and the United States and its allies risked highlighting their relative powerlessness to alter events inside Syria. But their decision to turn up the pressure substantially could have a profound psychological effect on a government that has survived for decades by retrenching during crises and manipulating relations in the region &mdash; from Turkey to Israel, Lebanon to Iran &mdash; to keep itself relevant, if not admired.        

Diplomatically, at least, Syria now appears more isolated than at any other time in the 41 years that Mr. Assad or his father, Hafez, has led the country. Administration officials and diplomats said they hoped that fact alone could break open fissures among the political and business elite cosseted under Mr. Assad&rsquo;s rule. Until now they appear to have bet on the government&rsquo;s somehow surviving.        

It was Mr. Obama&rsquo;s first explicit call for the Syrian leader to resign, and it came after weeks of divisions within the administration and mounting criticism from many in Congress, advocates of Syrian democracy and others that the United States and other nations had responded too tepidly to the violent suppression of protests that have swept Syrian cities for five months. It also followed behind-the-scenes diplomatic maneuvering in which Turkey took the lead in an unsuccessful effort to persuade Mr. Assad to halt the violence.        

&ldquo;We have consistently said that President Assad must lead a democratic transition or get out of the way,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said in a written statement released Thursday morning after coordination with allies in Europe. &ldquo;He has not led. For the sake of the Syrian people, the time has come for President Assad to step aside.&rdquo;        

Almost simultaneously, Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain, President Nicolas Sarkozy of France and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany issued a joint statement urging Mr. Assad &ldquo;to face the reality of the complete rejection of his regime by the Syrian people and to step aside in the best interests of Syria and the unity of its people.&rdquo; Canada made a similar appeal, as did the European Union. The United Nations human rights office in Geneva issued a damning, 22-page report that concluded that Syrian government forces might have committed crimes against humanity by carrying out summary executions, torturing prisoners and harming children.        

The United Nations report, overseen by the high commissioner for human rights, Navanethem Pillay, accused Syria of grossly violating its citizens&rsquo; rights and carrying out &ldquo;numerous summary executions, including 353 named victims.&rdquo; It also said that members of the security forces &ldquo;posed as civilians in order to cause unrest and portray an inaccurate picture of events.&rdquo;        

The office recommended that the United Nations Security Council consider referring Syria to the International Criminal Court for prosecution. In New York, the Security Council met later on Thursday and discussed potential steps against Syria.        

The United States and European members of the Security Council pressed for a resolution condemning Syria and were debating sanctions that could include an arms embargo, a freezing of assets and a ban on travel by the country&rsquo;s leaders, diplomats there said. They would not say whether the Council would consider referring the matter to the international court, but did say that Council members expressed a desire to hold accountable those responsible for the violence. At the United Nations, Syria said&nbsp;the United States was trying to use the Security Council as an &ldquo;instrument&rdquo; to instigate further instability.        

Even Russia, which has resisted punitive measures against Syria so far and appears likely to veto an embargo, has sounded increasingly frustrated with Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government, which has ignored repeated calls to halt the violence, including those from countries like Turkey with which it had closer relations. While Mr. Assad told the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, on Wednesday that the crackdown had in fact ended, activists within Syria said the violence continued unabated.        
Reporting was contributed by Mark Landler and Brian Knowlton from Washington, Neil MacFarquhar from New York, Nada Bakri from Beirut, Lebanon, Alan Cowell from Paris, Nicholas Kulish from Berlin and Sebnem Arsu from Istanbul.
