
NEW DELHI &mdash; In a &ldquo;new&rdquo; India often obsessed with wealth and status, where cricket batsmen and Bollywood movie stars are wildly idolized, Anna Hazare is a figure from an earlier, seemingly discarded era. His pointed white cap and simple white cotton clothes evoke a Gandhian simplicity. His rural, homespun demeanor ordinarily might elicit snickers from India&rsquo;s urban elite.        

Yet Mr. Hazare, 74, has emerged as the unlikely face of an impassioned people&rsquo;s movement in India, a public outpouring that has coalesced around fighting corruption but has also tapped into deeper anxieties in a society buffeted by change.        

His arrest on Tuesday, made while he was en route to a park in New Delhi where he intended to commence a hunger strike as part of his anticorruption campaign, drove thousands of people onto city streets across India. Under public pressure, government officials tried to release him within hours, but Mr. Hazare refused to leave jail unless the government released him unconditionally. On Thursday, the two sides reached a compromise, and Mr. Hazare is expected to leave jail on Friday to lead a hunger strike and mass protest in central New Delhi to push his demand that the government create a powerful, independent anticorruption agency.        

The popular outpouring he has set off has inevitably drawn comparisons with the democratic uprisings of the Arab Spring. Most analysts agree, though, that India&rsquo;s moment is a different one. But in its own way it may prove to be no less important.        

India already has the democratic freedoms sought by protesters in the Middle East and North Africa and has enjoyed rising global influence after two decades of fast economic growth. Yet India is also experiencing what one observer has called a &ldquo;churning&rdquo; period, as public frustrations are boiling over about poor roads, shoddy schools, inflation, rising inequality and the pervasive reach of official corruption.        

Running through each of these issues is a deepening public disillusionment with India&rsquo;s political process and a growing disconnectedness between the governing class and the governed, making the corruption issue especially explosive. As the crowds supporting Mr. Hazare grew larger and more passionate this week, person after person seemed to arrive on the New Delhi streets carrying their own tale of official graft.        

&ldquo;It is the middle class who is worst affected by corruption,&rdquo; said Asha Bhardaaj, a woman who traveled more than 30 miles from the suburbs to join a rally. &ldquo;The upper class is not affected. The upper classes can get what they need by paying money.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s appeal seems partly rooted in the traditional values he embodies. He is a longtime social activist who has campaigned against corruption for nearly two decades in the state of Maharashtra, living off a military pension and financing charitable work through donations. If his clothes evoke Mahatma Gandhi, India&rsquo;s founding father, then so do his protest tactics of nonviolent hunger strikes and peaceful marches.        

Yet Mr. Hazare and his advisers have also proved adept at the necessities of modern politics: they have adroitly outmaneuvered the police and government officials who sought to defuse the anticorruption movement, after the decision to arrest him backfired dramatically. They also have exploited the nonstop, often sensationalistic coverage on India&rsquo;s television news outlets to build public support for their cause. Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s face is now visible in almost every corner of India.        

Mr. Hazare and his advisers &mdash; a group of prominent lawyers and social activists nicknamed Team Anna &mdash; have spent months campaigning across the country. His aides distribute a flurry of daily e-mail updates to journalists, and his close advisers have used social media to connect with young followers. Early Thursday, one adviser, Kiran Bedi, used Twitter to announce a breakthrough in negotiations with the authorities.        

Later on Thursday, Ms. Bedi released a video of Mr. Hazare made inside Tihar Jail, where he is being held. &ldquo;I got my energy after seeing the young protesters,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Today is only the third day of protest. I can continue like this for another 10 or 12 days more.&rdquo;        

The governing Indian National Congress Party, by contrast, has seemed rattled, unprepared for the public anger against the government and incapable of delivering a consistent counterargument. One party spokesman personally attacked Mr. Hazare, describing him as a corrupted figure, while another spokesman blamed the United States for supporting the anticorruption movement.        

&ldquo;This is a moral moment,&rdquo; said Jayaprakash Narayan, a social activist in the city of Hyderabad. &ldquo;Everybody is sick and tired of corruption. And in dealing with this, the government has shown no political sense at all. There is a lot of anger in the country, not only to end corruption but to end politics as it is conducted today.&rdquo;        
Hari Kumar and Nikhila Gill contributed reporting.
