
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Militants attacked a British cultural relations agency in a residential neighborhood of Kabul early Friday, setting off huge car bomb explosions and killing at least eight people in a standoff with the police that lasted several hours while agency employees hid inside, British and Afghan officials said. At least one international soldier was among the dead, officials said.        

The violence was the latest in a series of high-profile attacks in the capital region that have added to a growing sense of unease here, far from the Taliban&rsquo;s strongholds in the south and east. It underscored the Taliban&rsquo;s shifting focus toward nonmilitary targets in the face of intense pressure from American and NATO forces.        

Despite the recent attacks, NATO officials say violence in the country is starting to decline from last year&rsquo;s levels, which were the highest since 2001. But the attack in Kabul, coming on the same day a suicide bomber killed more than 40 people at a mosque in Pakistan, underscored the persistent instability of the region, where American forces have been engaged for nearly decade as the 10th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks approaches.        

In Kabul, Afghan and coalition quick-reaction forces rescued the three trapped employees about five hours after the siege began, British officials said. The agency, the British Council, conducts cultural diplomacy by promoting education, culture and the arts in countries across the world. The compound housed both offices and living quarters for its foreign staff members, all of whom survived, British officials said.        

By the time the last of the militants was killed, about nine hours after the attack began, four Afghan police officers, a New Zealand commando and at least three security guards were dead, Afghan officials said, though there were still conflicting accounts about the numbers and nationalities of those killed. An additional 22 people were wounded, Afghan officials said.        

The Taliban immediately claimed responsibility. The attack came on the day Afghans celebrate gaining independence from Britain in 1919, though the timing appeared to be a coincidence, said Britain&rsquo;s ambassador to Afghanistan, Sir William Patey.        

&ldquo;This was a dastardly, cowardly attack designed to attack British interests but ultimately ending in the deaths of many Afghans,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and we regret the death of the Afghans in this.&rdquo;        

The attack began around 5:40 a.m. when a militant drove a vehicle packed with explosives into the front gate of the compound in the Karte Parwan area of the city, detonating the vehicle and killing at least two security guards. A second vehicle blew up outside the compound moments later, as four gunmen wearing burqas and armed with suicide vests stormed in, said Sediq Sediqi, a spokesman for the Ministry of Interior.        

Awakened by the blasts, the agency&rsquo;s two female staff members &mdash; one British, one South African &mdash; fled into a &ldquo;panic room&rdquo; in the main villa of the compound along with their bodyguard.        

The twin explosions rattled buildings and shattered windows nearly a mile away as hundreds of Afghan police officers swarmed into the area. Shards of metal and debris, including the skeletal remains of destroyed vehicles, littered the road outside the smoking complex.        

Sporadic gunfire and small explosions continued into the afternoon as NATO helicopters flew overhead. A small contingent of coalition troops assisted in the operations, officials said.        

The last of the attackers was killed around 2:30 p.m., officials said.        

At a news conference in London, Martin Davidson, the British Council&rsquo;s chief executive, said that there had been no specific threat against its Kabul office, and that the attack came as a complete surprise.        

He said he had spoken to the two women who were trapped inside the compound. &ldquo;Clearly they are deeply shocked,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They were inside the compound for a very long period of time.&rdquo;        

If there could be a fortunate note in the attack, it was its timing, coming before more than two dozen local staff members would have arrived for work, said Paul Smith, the council&rsquo;s director for Afghanistan, who was in New York when the attack occurred.        

&ldquo;Thank God on one sense that this was one of those early-morning attacks and there was only three people in the compound,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;apart from the security people, who have been so tragically affected.&rdquo;        

The neighborhood where the attack occurred is near the Intercontinental Hotel, which armed gunmen attacked in June, leaving at least 21 people dead, including the 9 suicide bombers who managed to penetrate several rings of security to carry out the attack. Friday&rsquo;s attack and other recent Taliban attacks on the governor&rsquo;s compound in neighboring Parwan Province and the Aug. 6 shooting down of an American Chinook helicopter, which led to 38 American and Afghan deaths, have given many in the capital the sense that the insurgency is closing in on Kabul, one of the country&rsquo;s safest cities.        

NATO officials, however, say that despite appearances, the Taliban&rsquo;s promised uptick of violence in the warmer months has largely not emerged. Violence was still up in the first part of the year, according to Western military and intelligence officials. But since May overall insurgent activity has begun to decline from last year&rsquo;s levels, even as improvised explosive device attacks have risen, taking a major toll on civilians.        

In the first six months of the year, civilians suffered more casualties &mdash; 1,462 &mdash; than in any comparable time period since the war began. At a news conference in Kabul last week, Brig. Gen. Carsten Jacobson of the German Army, a lead NATO spokesman, said complex attacks like the one on Friday were down 20 percent during the first half of the year from the same period last year.        
Rod Nordland contributed reporting from Kabul, and Ismail Khan from Peshawar, Pakistan.
