
CAIRO &mdash; A cross-border terrorist attack and an Israeli retaliation that left three Egyptian officers dead are threatening to undermine a decades-old cold peace between the two countries that had already begun to fray since the revolution that ousted President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt.        

After the deadly attack on Israel on Thursday, with militants making their way close to the resort town of Eilat from the Egyptian-controlled Sinai, Israeli security forces fired into Egypt as they chased down the attackers, killing the Egyptians, officials said. The series of events led some Israeli officials to call on Egypt to do a better job policing the North Sinai, and Egypt to demand an investigation and say it will recall its ambassador to Israel.        

While Israel tried not to aggravate tensions with its crucial strategic neighbor, Cairo exploded in anger, reflecting a postrevolutionary dynamic where the leadership is more responsive to the sentiments of citizens. The cabinet met in an emergency session and issued a statement condemning the killing of the soldiers and demanding an apology from Israel. Presidential candidates took turns criticizing Israel, and one political leader called for the Israeli ambassador to be expelled. Thousands of demonstrators gathered outside the Israeli Embassy and burned a mock Israeli flag.        

&ldquo;More and more in a democratic Egypt, that is not going to be acceptable &mdash; shooting across the border and leading to casualties,&rdquo; said Nabil Fahmy, the former Egyptian ambassador to the United States, who accused the Israelis of frequently responding with &ldquo;excessive force.&rdquo;        

For Israel, the day after the attack proved especially troubling. As the nation mourned the deaths of six civilians and two soldiers, killed by the militants, it was forced to confront the challenges of an emerging new order in Egypt, unleashed by a popular revolution.        

President Mubarak was an autocrat who presided over the deterioration of his nation, but he also preserved the peace with Israel and stayed close to Washington. Since his fall, Egypt has improved relations with Hamas, the militant group controlling the Gaza Strip, and has instituted a far more lenient border policy with Gaza.        

At the same time, the northern Sinai has devolved into a lawless outpost where saboteurs have repeatedly bombed a pipeline funneling natural gas to Israel, undermining its energy supply. Egypt has flirted with restoring full diplomatic ties to Iran, and Islamists have emerged, so far, as the most powerful, and organized, political force.        

All of this has added strain to the ties with Israel.        

&ldquo;Israel has to realize that the days in which our sons are killed without an appropriate and strong reaction are forever gone,&rdquo; said Amr Moussa, the former foreign minister and head of the Arab League, on his personal Twitter account.        

Abdel Moneim Abou el-Fotouh, a liberal Islamist and former member of the Muslim Brotherhood, issued a statement asking the ruling military council to treat the episode as a matter of national security, to expel the Israeli ambassador and halt Egyptian gas supplies to Israel.        

&ldquo;The Israeli enemy has to realize that the Egyptian blood is the most valuable thing we possess, and that all treaties and agreements are not worth the ink they&rsquo;re written with if the blood of our citizens is spilled and the sovereignty of our land and sky is breached,&rdquo; he said.        

While the events uncorked the popular anti-Israeli sentiment in Egypt, Israeli officials worked to play down the notion of a crisis in relations with its neighbor, saying there were continuing contacts between the countries&rsquo; militaries at a tactical level. &ldquo;We are meeting and talking all the time,&rdquo; an Israeli senior military officer said, speaking to reporters on the condition of anonymity under army rules.        

The officer acknowledged that some Egyptian soldiers might have been killed accidentally by Israeli fire during the battles with the assailants on Thursday night.        

&ldquo;It is a possibility that it happened by mistake,&rdquo; he said, adding, &ldquo;We are sorry that Egyptian soldiers and officers died in any case.&rdquo;        

The Israeli military said an investigation was still at an initial stage.        

Israeli military officials described Thursday&rsquo;s battlefield as complex and confusing as Israeli soldiers rushed to the scene of the initial attacks and spent hours in pursuit of an unknown number of assailants.        

The attacks on two Israeli buses, several civilian cars and military forces took place close to the Egyptian border in a sparsely populated desert area north of the popular Red Sea resort of Eilat. Israeli officials said the attackers were Palestinians from Gaza who had crossed into Israel from the Egyptian Sinai, an assertion Egypt has rejected.        
Heba Afify reported from Cairo, and Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem. David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from Cairo, and Fares Akram from Gaza City.
