
MOSCOW &mdash; Belarus said Friday that it would suspend an agreement to give up its supply of highly enriched uranium, torpedoing, at least temporarily, what was considered a significant victory by the Obama administration in curtailing the spread of dangerous nuclear material.        

The move comes in response to the latest wave of economic sanctions imposed by Washington this month as punishment for a ruthless crackdown on government opponents, including widespread arrests, that has continued unabated for months.        

&ldquo;The imposition of new American economic sanctions goes contrary to the spirit of interaction and cooperation,&rdquo; the Belarus Foreign Ministry said in a statement. &ldquo;As a result, Belarus has decided to freeze projects with the United States for exchanging highly enriched uranium fuel within the framework of initiatives for decreasing global threats.&rdquo;        

The State Department expressed disappointment in the announcement and called on Belarus to &ldquo;meet its stated objective of the elimination of all of its stocks of highly enriched uranium.&rdquo; A spokeswoman, Heide Bronke Fulton, said that the United States would continue to press for human rights and democratic freedoms in Belarus and reiterated American calls for the release of political prisoners.        

The announcement by Belarus is sure to complicate the country&rsquo;s already rocky relations with the United States. Belarus expelled the American ambassador in 2008, and the embassy in Minsk has been working with a skeleton crew of five diplomats.        

Under the original nuclear deal, signed at a security summit meeting in Kazakhstan in December, Belarus had agreed to transfer its supply of nuclear fuel by 2012. The material was to be shipped to Russia, where it was to be changed to a less purified grade. In exchange, the United States agreed to provide Belarus with some financial aid.        

Belarus is the only country from the former Soviet Union outside of Russia to possess large stocks of highly enriched uranium, and the agreement, which was signed by Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and the Belarus foreign minister, Sergei Martynov, was hailed at the time as a major foreign policy success.        

After the Soviet collapse 20 years ago, the United States moved quickly to secure the nuclear stockpiles left largely unguarded in the newly independent countries, which were reeling under political and social upheaval. But Belarus, a highly authoritarian and extremely poor former Soviet republic, had long resisted giving up its nuclear fuel. Its stockpile is one of its few bargaining chips in negotiations with the United States and regional power brokers for the loans and handouts it needs to sustain its Soviet-style command economy.        

The Foreign Ministry said on Friday that it would continue to abide by international regulations in securing its stockpile. American officials say Belarus possesses about 485 pounds of highly enriched uranium, though outside experts give varying numbers and it is unclear how much of the material has been enriched to weapons grade.        

Matthew Bunn, an associate professor at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard who specializes in research of nuclear theft and terrorism, said he saw little or no risk that the material, which is housed in a secure site, could fall into the wrong hands. Still, Mr. Bunn said, the issue needs to be addressed because &ldquo;it&rsquo;s one of only a few stocks that are enough for a crude terrorist nuclear bomb.&rdquo;        

Belarus said it would restart the transfer program only when the United States removed the sanctions.        

The latest sanctions, imposed last week, single out four government-owned companies and augment measures adopted earlier this year, including a ban on travel to the United States by the president of Belarus, Aleksandr G. Lukashenko, and several dozen other government officials.        

The earlier American sanctions and similar measures put in place by the European Union, were imposed after the arrests of opposition activists who gathered for a protest against what they said were tainted presidential elections in December.        

The police violently dispersed the protest, and dozens of opposition leaders have since been handed lengthy prison sentences. Meanwhile, human rights groups and independent journalists continue to face almost daily harassment by the Belarusian security services, called the K.G.B.        
Steven Lee Myers and Matthew L. Wald contributed reporting from Washington, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
