
YANGON, Myanmar (AP) &mdash; The democracy leader Daw Aung San Suu Kyi met with Myanmar&rsquo;s president on Friday, state-run television reported, her highest contact with the new, nominally civilian government since her release from house arrest in November.        

Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi and President Thein Sein held &ldquo;frank and friendly discussions&rdquo; to &ldquo;find ways and means of cooperation,&rdquo; the state-run broadcast reported, showing video of them greeting each other.        

The meeting lasted nearly an hour and was &ldquo;significant,&rdquo; a government official said.        

Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate, has repeatedly called for political dialogue with the government since her release from seven years of house arrest. If her party reaches an accommodation with the government, it could encourage Western nations to lift political and economic embargoes on Myanmar, formerly known as Burma.        

Nyan Win, the spokesman for her party, the National League for Democracy, said the meeting &ldquo;could be the first step toward national reconciliation,&rdquo; but declined to elaborate until details were available.        

In Washington, a State Department spokesman, Mark Toner, said the United States welcomed news of the meeting.        

&ldquo;These are positive steps, and we continue to call for the Burmese government to follow its rhetoric with concrete action towards national reconciliation and progress on core issues of concern to the international community, including the release of political prisoners,&rdquo; he said.        

It remains unclear if the government is committed to a dialogue with Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi and whether it would be willing to discuss the kinds of reforms that would restore its legitimacy with the international community.        

Mr. Thein Sein took power in March after an election that critics dismissed as a sham to create a nominally civilian government while entrenching the country&rsquo;s military rulers. The Constitution ensures that the military retains dominance.        
