
TOKYO &mdash; Prime Minister Naoto Kan has scrapped plans to meet with President Obama in Washington next month as pressure builds on the unpopular Japanese leader to resign in the coming weeks.        

The top government spokesman said on Friday that Japan had stopped trying to organize the trip, which was to have taken place in early September. The spokesman, Yukio Edano, the chief cabinet secretary, said the trip was impossible, given &ldquo;Japan&rsquo;s current political situation.&rdquo;        

The statement seemed to be a reference to growing speculation in political circles that Mr. Kan could soon step down &mdash; as early as the end of next week, according to some local news media reports. That would open the way for an election within his governing Democratic Party to choose a successor.        

Some politicians say that the internal party election could happen on Aug. 28 or Aug. 29, though others are calling for the party to hold a longer, American-style primary in order to foster a healthy policy debate. Jockeying has begun to succeed Mr. Kan, with a half-dozen Democratic lawmakers already putting up their hands.        

Mr. Kan has faced growing criticism for what many here see as his ad hoc and inconsistent response to the earthquake, tsunami and nuclear accident in March. Mr. Kan, who took office just over a year ago, is also blamed for his perceived inability to chart a new direction for the nation, which was already gripped by economic and political stagnation before the triple disaster.        

In the face of such criticism, Mr. Kan promised in June to step down once he won passage in Parliament of a series of key bills, which political analysts say he hopes to be the legacy of his short-lived administration. These include a measure to foster green energy use, and another to finance the costly reconstruction of the tsunami-ravaged northeast, where about 20,000 people are dead or missing.        

Mr. Kan has tried to make a late comeback by calling for a phasing out of nuclear energy in Japan, hoping to tap the deep misgivings about atomic power after the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi plant. But he has run into resistance within his own party, where the nuclear industry holds strong political influence, and skepticism among the Japanese public, which views him as unable to fulfill his promises.        

Mr. Kan&rsquo;s successor would be the sixth new prime minister in five years, and most of the candidates to replace Mr. Kan have been younger, untested and relatively unknown lawmakers who seem to lack a strong base of support within the party or with the public. This has raised the specter of yet another weak, short-lived prime minister, which may only prolong Japan&rsquo;s stagnation.        

Some candidates have begun calling for a &ldquo;grand alliance&rdquo; with the largest opposition party, the Liberal Democrats, in the hope of ending the stalemate in Parliament, where the opposition controls the upper house. But the formation of such a large and unwieldy coalition could also add to paralysis by yielding watered-down compromises instead of the bolder action many Japanese voters seem to want.        

On Friday, Mr. Edano, the spokesman, said Japan&rsquo;s foreign minister had told the American ambassador, John V. Roos, about Mr. Kan&rsquo;s cancellation of the meeting with Mr. Obama. Mr. Edano told reporters that Mr. Roos had &ldquo;showed understanding.&rdquo;        

Japanese news reports said the Japanese government was now trying to arrange a meeting between the American president and whoever becomes Mr. Kan&rsquo;s successor, on the sidelines of a United Nations General Assembly meeting in New York in late September.        
