
OSLO &mdash; Relatives of victims killed on the Norwegian island of Utoya last month traveled to the site of the massacre for the first time on Friday, and with the aid of the police, clergy members and counselors, were able to walk through their loved ones&rsquo; last moments.        

It was a painful step in the grieving process, compounded by the behavior of the killer, Anders Behring Breivik, who complained Friday at his second court appearance that his detention in solitary confinement amounted to &ldquo;sadistic torture.&rdquo;        

Mr. Breivik, an avowed right-wing, anti-immigrant extremist, has admitted to killing 77 people, mostly teenagers, on July 22, first by bombing the government headquarters in Norway&rsquo;s capital, Oslo, and then by attacking a summer youth camp on Utoya.        

Under a light drizzle, about 500 relatives wandered the island with candles and flowers, guided by police officers through the forests and rocky shores to the places where their daughters and sons had fallen.        

Speaking to Norwegian radio ahead of the trip, Unni Espeland Marcussen, whose 16-year-old daughter, Andrine, was killed on Utoya, said the family needed to see for themselves where their daughter&rsquo;s life had ended.        

&ldquo;We get to see the place where Andrine was last, the houses she was in, the paths she walked and the place she died,&rdquo; Ms. Marcussen said.        

As difficult as it was, many welcomed the opportunity to visit the island. Family members have grown frustrated with investigators, whom they have accused of withholding details about the attacks, said John Christian Elden, whose law firm is representing the family members of 90 victims.        

&ldquo;They are interested to know what did my son or daughter do at this time?&rdquo; Mr. Elden said in a telephone interview from Oslo. &ldquo;Who did he or she try to protect? How did they get attacked? When did they die? What way did they die?&rdquo;        

In recent days, information has become more readily available, he said. The police released transcripts this week of a phone conversation Mr. Breivik held with an emergency dispatcher while on Utoya. Mr. Breivik, who in the transcript referred to himself as the commander of something called the Norwegian Anti-Communist Resistance Movement, twice called the police offering to surrender. He continued his killing for 28 minutes after his last call, according to a copy of the transcripts posted to the Web site of Norway&rsquo;s VG newspaper.        

The police have been accused of being slow to respond to the attack, which continued for about 90 minutes before SWAT commandos could reach the island.        

At the hearing on Friday, the judge ruled that Mr. Breivik would remain in solitary confinement for four more weeks, despite his protests.        

&ldquo;The accused described his isolation as boring and monotonous, as well as sadistic torture,&rdquo; the judge, Hugo Abelseth, told journalists outside court.        

Prosecutors have expressed concern that Mr. Breivik could contact possible accomplices if freed from isolation. Though investigators believe he plotted and carried out the attacks alone, they have not ruled out the possibility that he had help.        

Mr. Breivik had requested permission to wear a dress coat and tails to Friday&rsquo;s hearing &mdash; a sign, he said through his lawyer, that he was taking the court seriously. The judge rejected the request, calling it &ldquo;unnecessarily disturbing and offensive.&rdquo;        
Henrik Pryser Libell reported from Oslo, and Michael Schwirtz from Moscow.
