
NEW DELHI &mdash; After walking out of jail into the cheering embrace of thousands of supporters, the anticorruption crusader Anna Hazare arrived on Friday at a vast public ground in the heart of India&rsquo;s capital. He said a few words, waved a national flag and nodded as others gave speeches. Then he sat down.        

And with that simple gesture Mr. Hazare continued a hunger strike that has turned into a high-stakes confrontation with India&rsquo;s national government. Buoyed by an outpouring of support across the country, Mr. Hazare has unexpectedly become the face of what one television commentator described as &ldquo;a national catharsis on corruption.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This is the beginning of a second freedom struggle,&rdquo; he told people at the public ground, known as the Ramlila Maidan. &ldquo;Whether Anna Hazare lives or not, this torch should keep burning.&rdquo;        

With his penchant for dramatic statements and his talent for India&rsquo;s indigenous style of tactical politics, Mr. Hazare, along with his advisers, has so far outmaneuvered government efforts to defuse his anticorruption campaign, but his arrival at Ramlila Maidan moves the drama to a new stage. Under an agreement with the city police, Mr. Hazare may stage his fast for 15 days. To maintain the momentum of his movement, he must mobilize thousands of supporters for each of those days.        

Beneath the political theatrics is a fight over the shape of a proposed new independent anticorruption agency, known as a Lokpal. Mr. Hazare and his advisers say the current Lokpal legislation pending in Parliament is too weak to be effective, especially since it excludes the prime minister and the higher judiciary from scrutiny. On Friday, Mr. Hazare told reporters that he would end his hunger strike only if Parliament passed his version of the legislation, which he calls the Jan Lokpal bill, or People&rsquo;s Lokpal bill.        

Detractors have accused Mr. Hazare of trying to subvert the parliamentary process. The government&rsquo;s Lokpal legislation has already been introduced before a special parliamentary committee that is empowered to review and amend it. Under this process, advocates are entitled to propose changes. Yet in the case of the Lokpal, Mr. Hazare and his advisers have opted to make their case through public protest, arguing that the government had snubbed them in earlier attempts to reach a compromise.        

&ldquo;We have said that what we say is not the final word,&rdquo; Harish Rawat, a junior minister with the governing Indian National Congress Party, said on Friday on the CNN-IBN news network. &ldquo;We say that what Parliament says is the last word.        

&ldquo;We want that you change your stand that it is either your bill or no bill,&rdquo; he said, addressing Mr. Hazare. &ldquo;You change that, and then we can talk. My prime minister is of an open mind.&rdquo;        

Harsh Mander, a prominent social advocate, said the hard line both sides had taken on the issue was part of a worrisome trend. He said Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s seeming refusal to compromise or take part in the parliamentary review was matched by the authorities&rsquo; decision to arrest him rather than initially let him protest.        

&ldquo;Now part of this dispute has shifted to the right of democratic dissent,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Hazare was arrested on Tuesday, hours before he had intended to stage an outdoor hunger strike. Later that night, faced with public anger, officials offered to release him from Tihar Jail, but Mr. Hazare refused to go unless authorities agreed that he could follow through on his earlier fasting plans.        

As negotiations went on through the week, and Mr. Hazare remained in jail, thousands of people took to the streets in Indian cities and villages in an outpouring of public support for him that quickly became a political crisis for the Indian National Congress Party.        

For months, party leaders have been besieged by corruption scandals and have struggled to convince the public that their Lokpal bill is a tough, effective response. Government officials also have been criticized for initially attacking Mr. Hazare with accusations of personal corruption. On Friday, perhaps having gauged the public mood, Mr. Rawat, the junior Congress Party minister, signaled a softer approach.        

&ldquo;Everybody who is a freedom fighter, social worker and who fights for social issues is our hero,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Anna Hazare is a hero&rsquo;s hero for us. We salute him.&rdquo;        

Friday began with the dramatic scene of Mr. Hazare walking triumphantly out of Tihar Jail and being engulfed by pressing crowds of supporters. With news networks broadcasting the scene live around the nation, Mr. Hazare was helped onto the back of an open-air truck, which slowly moved down a road lined with enthusiastic supporters. People waved Indian flags or wore &ldquo;I Am Anna&rdquo; caps or T-shirts, some pressing toward the truck, trying to touch him.        

After a stop to pay respects at the cremation site of Mahatma Gandhi, India&rsquo;s pacifist founding father, Mr. Hazare arrived at Ramlila Maidan as several thousand supporters stood under a monsoon rain. As Mr. Hazare sat on an elevated platform overlooking the grounds, a team of doctors periodically appeared to check his pulse and his blood pressure. Mr. Hazare, who has conducted numerous hunger strikes over the years, has been fasting since Tuesday, and his aides said he had already lost about seven pounds.        

Yet he seemed energetic, waving flags and even running at one point. His supporters also seemed energized, despite the rain. &ldquo;Our country is being eaten by our leaders,&rdquo; said Gopal Jha, 38, a businessman who had an &ldquo;I Love India&rdquo; bandanna tied around his head. &ldquo;They have eaten millions and millions, and all that money belongs to the people. We want all that money to come back to the people.&rdquo;        

Gesturing toward the platform and Mr. Hazare, Mr. Jha added: &ldquo;He is doing good work. That&rsquo;s why people are following him.&rdquo;        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
