
LONDON &mdash; Prime Minister David Cameron&rsquo;s coalition government received a sharp political jolt on Tuesday with the release of official figures showing that Britain&rsquo;s economy contracted slightly in the last three months of 2010, prompting some economists to warn that the country was at increased risk of a &ldquo;double dip&rdquo; recession after four consecutive quarters of modest growth.        

While the economic figures are subject to revision, the 0.5 percent shrinkage fell well short of the 0.5 percent growth many economists had predicted. And the wider message seemed clear: The slowdown placed the Cameron government&rsquo;s $128 billion, four-year program of spending cuts and tax increases &mdash; policies on which it has staked its survival &mdash; at sharply heightened political risk.        

The net effect of the new figures was to blunt the government&rsquo;s momentum and to recast &mdash; at least until economic growth resumes &mdash; the role Britain has played in the global debate about the best way back to prosperity.        

Under Mr. Cameron, Britain has led the way in embracing fiscal retrenchment, while President Obama&rsquo;s administration has warned Britain and other European countries that they are at risk of tipping their economies, and possibly the Western world&rsquo;s, back into recession by cutting deficits too soon and too steeply.        

Spokesmen for the opposition Labour Party and trade union officials leapt on the new figures, saying they showed that the government had lost its gamble that it could impose the harsh austerity measures and still keep the economy growing. &ldquo;Now, we are seeing the first signs of what the Conservative-led government&rsquo;s decisions are having on the economy,&rdquo; said Ed Balls, the principal economic spokesman for Labour. It has urged easing the cutbacks, with some of its lawmakers suggesting that their full impact should be spread over a longer period, perhaps as much as 10 years.        

The government responded by placing blame for the contraction on the economic disruptions caused by the severe snowstorms that hit Britain last month, the country&rsquo;s coldest December in 100 years. That message offered little cheer to the markets, especially since the Office for National Statistics, in announcing the figures for October to December, said the economic growth in the fourth quarter would have been flat even without the storms.        

But George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, said any retreat on the measures, the harshest adopted in any major Western economy, would endanger the &ldquo;international credibility&rdquo; the policies had earned Britain in global financial markets.        

His stay-the-course approach did little to calm nerves in the markets. &ldquo;This is a stunningly bad outcome,&rdquo; said Howard Archer, an economist at IHS Global Insight in London. &ldquo;Given that the contraction in G.D.P. in the fourth quarter occurred even before the fiscal tightening had really kicked in, it reinforces already serious concern over the economy&rsquo;s ability to grow significantly in the face of the spending cuts and tax hikes.&rdquo;        

The immediate impact of the new figures was a fall in the pound&rsquo;s value against all major currencies including the dollar, and a retreat in Britain&rsquo;s leading share index.        

While adamant about the spending cuts, Mr. Osborne pledged that spending plans in his budget next month would include measures to stir growth in the private sector. The government has said it is relying on private enterprise to carry Britain back to prosperity as the austerity measures reduce the jobs and spending power of the state, which accounts for about half of all economic activity in Britain.        

It is that formula that has stirred allegations from the political left in Britain that Mr. Cameron and Mr. Osborne are embarked on an ideological crusade, using Britain&rsquo;s indebtedness, the worst in Europe, as an excuse to roll back the power of the state.        

The government&rsquo;s rebuttals were not helped this week when a spokesman for the Confederation of British Industry accused the government of being driven as much by political objectives as by economic ones. Richard Lambert, the group&rsquo;s director general, said Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s administration had &ldquo;been careless of the damage they might do to business and to job creation&rdquo; with the cuts, and added, &ldquo;It is not enough just to slam on the spending brakes.&rdquo;        

At home, the Cameron government was already facing a tough year politically before the latest economic figures. After boasting that the modest growth in the British economy that began in the last six months of the previous Labour government had continued and strengthened after the shift of power in the May election, it entered 2011 facing a much tougher test.        

The harshest of its new tax increases, in which Britain&rsquo;s valued-added tax rose to 20 percent from 17.5 percent, took effect with the new year. This will also be the first year in which an across-the-board reduction of 20 percent in the budgets of most government departments begins to bite. And recent figures showed a sharp rise in inflation, to 3.7 percent, nearly double the official target and enough to prompt some economists to warn that Britain risks entering a prolonged period of &ldquo;stagflation&rdquo; &mdash; little or no growth, accompanied by sharply rising prices.        

As long as the governing coalition holds together &mdash; another uncertainty, given the deep unhappiness at the depth of the spending cuts among many Liberal Democrats, who are junior partners to Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s Conservatives in the coalition &mdash; the government will hope to weather its sinking popularity and emerge in time for the next election, expected in 2015, vindicated by a new era of prosperity.        

Recent polls, taken before the latest economic figures, have showed that Labour, after a bad beating in May, has surged ahead of the Conservatives by a narrow margin, with the Liberal Democrats a distant third.        

Much may depend on what happens this spring and summer in the streets of London and other major cities. The government has already faced student protests in London, some of them turning violent, and union leaders have said they plan to turn up the pressure with &ldquo;coordinated strikes,&rdquo; including transit shutdowns, that could produce Britain&rsquo;s widest labor unrest since the heyday of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s.        
