
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; North Korea said Friday that it had agreed to talks with the United States on searching for and returning the remains of American soldiers killed during the Korean War in the early 1950s.        

About 8,000 American service members remain unaccounted for from the war, and about 5,500 of them are believed to be buried in North Korea. The United States has no diplomatic ties with North Korea, with the two nations technically still at war after they suspended three years of fighting with a truce rather than a formal peace treaty.        

This month, the Pentagon said it had proposed a meeting with the government in Pyongyang to restart the search for American remains after a six-year hiatus.        

&ldquo;In light of humanitarianism, we have positively accepted the proposal,&rdquo; the North&rsquo;s official Korean Central News Agency quoted an unidentified Foreign Ministry spokesman in Pyongyang as saying. He added that work was already under way by the militaries of the two countries to arrange formal talks.        

Between 1996 and 2005, American experts and North Korean workers uncovered more than 220 sets of remains from battle sites in North Korea. The joint search missions ended after Washington became concerned about the safety of its workers amid tensions over the North&rsquo;s development of nuclear weapons.        

North Korea also said on Aug. 11 that it might help arrange temporary reunions between aging Korean-Americans and the North Korean relatives they have not seen since the war. Washington indicated that it was not opposed to such a step.        

Both sides&rsquo; efforts to engage one another on humanitarian issues come after a visit to New York by Kim Kye-gwan, a senior North Korean diplomat, in late July. Mr. Kim met American officials examining the possibility of resuming six-nation talks aimed at ending North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear weapons work.        

The United States and South Korea had previously tried to smooth the path for thornier negotiations with North Korea over security and political issues by first engaging it on humanitarian issues. Through those humanitarian contacts, North Korea has invariably sought food aid.        

On Thursday, Washington offered up to $900,000 in emergency relief supplies for flood victims in North Korea, but said it had made no decision yet on a broader request for humanitarian food aid for the North.        

Meanwhile, the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-il, was said to have arrived by train to Russia for a visit, The Associated Press reported, citing South Korean news reports. North Korea said last week that President Dmitri A. Medvedev of Russia sent a letter calling for greater energy cooperation among Russia and the two Koreas, saying it would enhance regional security.        
