
TOKYO        

ONE is a self-effacing lawyer with an upbeat outlook and an easy smile, the other a firebrand lawmaker willing to stare down the rich and the powerful. Together, Yuichi Kaido and Mizuho Fukushima are perhaps the country&rsquo;s most prominent pair of antinuclear activists.        

For three decades, the couple were at the forefront of an often futile fight against the utilities that operated the nation&rsquo;s reactors, the corporations that built and maintain them and the politicians and bureaucrats who enabled them. Yet in case after case, judges rejected Mr. Kaido&rsquo;s claims that Japan&rsquo;s nuclear reactors were dangerous. In Parliament, the nuclear lobby routinely carried the day, casting aside the antinuclear platform of Ms. Fukushima&rsquo;s Social Democratic Party.        

That stasis was shattered by the tsunami that wrecked the reactors at the Daiichi power plant in Fukushima. An overwhelming number of Japanese, for years ambivalent about nuclear power, are now calling for the country&rsquo;s remaining reactors to be shut down. Politicians, even those backed by the nuclear industry, are scrambling to reposition themselves.        

Once a proponent of building more reactors, Prime Minister Naoto Kan has called for nuclear power to be phased out. In a perverse way, the tragedy represents an opening of sorts for Mr. Kaido and Ms. Fukushima, who applaud the prime minister for backing their cause. Yet after years of frustration and mindful that change comes slowly in Japan, where consensus-building is critical, Mr. Kaido and Ms. Fukushima are far from declaring victory.        

&ldquo;I understand that the decision that Prime Minister Kan made carries special importance,&rdquo; Mr. Kaido said. &ldquo;The direction is correct, but I wish he would complete the proper process. He should share his ideas with the public.&rdquo;        

The rising antinuclear tide in Japan, they said, came at great expense. As a result, they feel humility, not pride.        

&ldquo;I thought my life was a failure right after March 11,&rdquo; Mr. Kaido said, referring to the date of the earthquake and tsunami. &ldquo;I have devoted myself to legal cases and antinuclear activities to prevent this kind of accident, but I could not prevent the worst from happening. It was an agonizing feeling.&rdquo;        

BUT Mr. Kaido and Ms. Fukushima, who were both born in 1955, also take the long view, a necessity for anyone trying to change the way the country&rsquo;s most powerful companies and lawmakers do business. &ldquo;Although I won&rsquo;t be able to change the past, I think I can change the future,&rdquo; Ms. Fukushima said. &ldquo;We must change decision-making in politics.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kaido and Ms. Fukushima decided long ago to devote themselves to this goal. Both came from comfortable homes and attended top schools that could have provided an entree into more lucrative professions (although according to public records, they had a combined $3.1 million in assets in 2009). But both were growing up during the late 1960s, when Japan&rsquo;s fledgling environmental movement was taking shape. The events of the times led them to left-wing causes and a lifetime of bucking the establishment.        

Always drawn to the sciences, Mr. Kaido&rsquo;s interest in progressive politics grew in 1970, after he entered the law department at the University of Tokyo, a steppingstone for the country&rsquo;s elite. While there, he joined a study group that focused on public interest issues. Guest speakers included Jinzaburo Takagi, the spiritual leader of Japan&rsquo;s antinuclear movement.        

The study group is also where Mr. Kaido met Ms. Fukushima. Though she grew up in Miyazaki, one of the more conservative corners of the country, Ms. Fukushima&rsquo;s horizons were broader than most &mdash; her grandparents emigrated to America and her father was born in Hawaii. As a teenager, Ms. Fukushima learned of the perils of industrial pollution and deadly mercury and cadmium poisoning at the movies, where newsreels were shown before feature films.        

&ldquo;The news was a cue for me to become a lawyer,&rdquo; Ms. Fukushima said. &ldquo;At that time, I thought Ralph Nader was hip. I admired him as an activist and an attorney.&rdquo;        

While their classmates took jobs at bastions like the Ministry of Finance and the nation&rsquo;s top banks, Mr. Kaido and Ms. Fukushima chose to fight those powers. Mr. Kaido has also represented immigrants, prisoners and, more recently, Greenpeace activists.        
Kantaro Suzuki contributed reporting.
