
NEW DELHI &mdash; With his hunger strike reaching a fifth day, the protest leader Anna Hazare maintained pressure on the government on Saturday as his advisers demanded that their version of legislation to create a national anticorruption agency be introduced in Parliament on Tuesday and passed by the end of the month.        

Mr. Hazare, 74, spent the day fasting at the Ramlila Maidan, a public ground in the capital where thousands of people came to support his demand for an anticorruption agency, known as a Lokpal. Meanwhile, his advisers made television appearances to rally public support and defend themselves against criticism that their protest campaign and refusal to compromise is undermining India&rsquo;s parliamentary processes.        

Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, whose government has been criticized for mishandling the crisis, spoke in a conciliatory tone on Saturday and said there &ldquo;is a lot of scope for give and take&rdquo; in deciding the final shape of a Lokpal. But Mr. Singh expressed doubt that new legislation could be passed by the Hazare team&rsquo;s deadline, given the deliberative nature of the legislative process.        

&ldquo;We are open to discussion, dialogue,&rdquo; Mr. Singh told reporters after stepping out of a meeting of the country&rsquo;s planning commission. &ldquo;We would like a broad national consensus. We are all in favor of a Lokpal that is strong, that is effective.&rdquo;        

For months, Mr. Hazare and the government have been debating the shape of a possible Lokpal. Negotiations between the two sides broke down at the end of June. Now, a government Lokpal bill is pending before a standing committee of Parliament, a measure that Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s team has belittled as weak and ineffective. Citing his popular support, Mr. Hazare has demanded that his bill be introduced and passed by Parliament.        

A fundamental difference between the competing pieces of legislation is that Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s bill would include the prime minister and higher judiciary under the scope of the Lokpal, while the government bill excludes them from such scrutiny. During television appearances on Saturday, Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s advisers proposed that the government call a national referendum to let voters decide which Lokpal legislation should be passed, while also denying that Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s hunger strike was unwarranted.        

&ldquo;He&rsquo;s exerting pressure on them by going on a fast, which is his constitutional right,&rdquo; said Prashant Bhushan, an adviser and prominent lawyer who practices before India&rsquo;s Supreme Court. He added: &ldquo;Is Anna Hazare not entitled to express his views and express his views strongly?&rdquo;        
