
JERUSALEM &mdash; Palestinian militants from Gaza fired rockets at cities deep inside Israeli territory on Saturday, killing one person. And Israel struck a squad that was firing mortars from northern Gaza as violence continued in the wake of an attack on Thursday that killed eight Israelis, Israeli officials said.        

The Popular Resistance Committees militant group in Gaza claimed responsibility for rocket fire on Beersheba that killed the Israeli civilian and wounded another six, one critically. But in a new development late Saturday, the military wing of Hamas, the group that rules Gaza, took credit for firing four rockets at the Israeli town of Ofakim, its first claim of participation in this round of violence. The move pointed to a possible escalation with Israeli security forces.        

Israel blamed The Popular Resistance Committees for Thursday&rsquo;s attack and killed its top commanders in an airstrike later that day, igniting cross-border exchanges after months of relative quiet under an informal cease-fire with Hamas.        

It also indicated a possible split between the military and political wings of Hamas, with the political echelon having tried earlier in the day to restore calm. The Popular Resistance Committees and another group, Islamic Jihad, said they rejected the efforts to renew the cease-fire.        

An Islamic Jihad member was killed late Friday in an Israeli airstrike in Gaza City. A boy, 5, and another civilian were killed in that attack, according to Gaza medical officials. Islamic Jihad&rsquo;s military wing said that it would force Israel &ldquo;to pay a high price.&rdquo;        

At least 14 Palestinians, four of them civilians, have been killed in Israeli airstrikes on Gaza since Thursday. The Israeli military says it has been striking at Hamas training facilities, weapons manufacturing sites, smugglers&rsquo; tunnels, and rocket and mortar teams preparing to attack.        

Some 50 rockets have been fired at Israel since Thursday. Three Palestinian laborers were wounded Saturday morning by a rocket that exploded on the outskirts of the port city of Ashdod. In the evening, a rocket that hit a house in Ofakim wounded three, including an infant and a child.        
Isabel Kershner reported from Jerusalem and Ashdod, and Fares Akram from Gaza.
