
The Revolutionary Court in Iran sentenced two American hikers imprisoned since July 2009 to eight years in jail for espionage and entering the country illegally, Tehran&rsquo;s prosecutor, Abbas Jafari Dolatabadi, told a news conference Sunday.        

Although the Islamic Republic presented no evidence in public to back up the espionage charge, Mr. Dolatababi said it had been &ldquo;proven&rdquo; in court, according to news reports carried by the Iran&rsquo;s official media. The two have 20 days to appeal the sentence, he said.        

The sentence, five years for spying and three for entering the country illegally, seemed unexpectedly severe coming not long after senior Iranian officials said that the men might be released soon, perhaps as a humanitarian gesture during the current holy month of Ramadan. Ali Akbar Salehi, the foreign minister, was quoted by local news media as saying he hoped the end of the trial on July 31 would lead to their freedom.        

The two Americans, Shane M. Bauer and Joshua F. Fattal, both 29, have spent two years in Tehran&rsquo;s Evin Prison after being arrested along the border with Iraqi Kurdistan. A third hiker, Sarah E. Shourd, was released on $500,000 bail in September 2010.        

Mr. Dolatabadi said the case of Ms. Shourd, who is Mr. Bauer&rsquo;s fiance&eacute;, remained open and that she will be tried in absentia, the reports said.        

Masoud Shafiei, the lawyer for the hikers, said he would pursue an appeal, maintaining that his clients are innocent.        

In Washington, Hillary Rodham Clinton, the secretary of state, issued a statement saying that the United States is &ldquo;deeply disappointed&rdquo; by the verdict.        

&ldquo;We continue to call and work for their immediate release &mdash; it is time for them to return home and be reunited with their families,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said, adding that she and President Obama reiterated their &ldquo;unflagging support&rdquo; for the three hikers and their families.        

The families of the two men said the verdict brought the roughest day in their ordeal so far and asked people around the world to appeal to Iran for their release.        

&ldquo;Of the 751 days of Shane and Josh&rsquo;s imprisonment, yesterday and today have been the most difficult for our families,&rdquo; the statement said. &ldquo;Shane and Josh are innocent and have never posed any threat to the Islamic Republic of Iran, its government or its people.&rdquo;        

It noted that Mr. Salehi had said he hoped the case would proceed in a manner that would result in freedom for the two men. &ldquo;We appeal to the authorities in Iran to show compassion and allow them to return home to our families without delay.&rdquo;        

The three Americans, all graduates of the University of California, Berkeley who were either studying or traveling in the Middle East, say they made a harmless mistake in wandering over the unmarked border, crossing when a soldier of unknown nationality waved to them to approach. They were only then told they had crossed into Iran and were arrested, Ms. Shourd has said.        

Mr. Bauer and Mr. Fattal had entered a plea of not guilty.        

Mr. Shafiei had anticipated previously that the two might be convicted only of entering the country illegally and sentenced to time served.        

But the case has also been caught up in the longstanding tension between Washington and Tehran. Iran&rsquo;s government is notoriously split by internal rivalries, with the hardline judiciary, which reports directly to the Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khomenei, often at odds with the Foreign Ministry, which has to deal with the international fallout from the case. The Iranian government maintains its judiciary is independent.        

Speculation about the sentences pointed to several issues.        

First, Iran has said it seeks the freedom of about 10 Iranians it says are jailed in the United States, some for trying to break the arms embargo against Iran. A heavy sentence, analysts said, would give the two Americans more weight as bargaining chips.        

Iran has never given a full accounting of who it suspects is here, and a few might be Iranian officials or others who sought asylum. One case Iran has mentioned is that of Shahrazad Mir Gholikhan, a mother of twin girls living in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., who was sentenced to more than five years in federal prison in 2009 for helping to try to smuggle 3,500 pairs of military night-vision goggles to Iran.        

Second, another theory holds that the sentences could be a reaction to a recent letter to President Obama signed by 92 senators demanding that Washington seek sanctions against the Iranian Central Bank as a way to curb Iran from developing nuclear weapons.        

Finally, the case has attracted negative publicity for Iran, with all the attention focused on the distressed mothers of the two men.        

If Tehran is still planning to make a &ldquo;humanitarian gesture&rdquo; in releasing them, then a harsher sentence would make the move appear all the more magnanimous, Iranian analysts said.        
Neil MacFarquhar reported from New York, and Artin Afkhami from Washington. Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Washington.
