
BAGHDAD &mdash; One of the most powerful insurgent groups in Iraq, Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, released a statement on Saturday, warning that it had launched a 100-attack campaign to exact revenge for the United States&rsquo; killing of Osama bin Laden.        

The statement did not explicitly refer to a string of over 40 attacks on Monday that killed more than 90 people and was the most violent day in Iraq this year. But the statement said the campaign had begun in the middle of this month &mdash; Monday was Aug. 15 &mdash; and would continue until there had been 100 attacks.        

&ldquo;We began this stage with an invasion we have called the battle of revenge for Sheik Osama bin Laden and other senior leaders,&rdquo; said a statement posted on the Internet.        

Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia has long claimed an affiliation to Bin Laden&rsquo;s group, and has clearly been inspired by it. Bin Laden died in May in an American raid on his compound in Pakistan.        

The statement said the campaign would include attacks on buildings, suicide bombers, roadside bombs and snipers and would be carried out in cities and rural areas. &ldquo;The enemies of God should know we do not forget and that pure blood will not go in vain,&rdquo; it said.        

The group has increased its attacks as Iraqi and American officials have begun discussions to keep some American troops here after the end of the year. The 48,000 troops in Iraq are scheduled to leave as part of a 2008 agreement between the two countries.        

Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, a group made up of Iraqi Sunnis and foreign fighters, is not nearly as strong as it was at the height of the sectarian violence in 2006 and 2007, according to American military officials. Nevertheless, American officials say, the group still has the capability to carry out devastating attacks.        

This year, gunmen with the group wearing suicide vests have attacked several provincial council offices, killing scores of people. The group has also taken credit for some of the most deadly bombings, including some inside mosques and police training centers, and others that singled out Shiite pilgrims.        

While Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia takes aim at civilians, politicians, Iraqi security forces and American troops, Iranian-backed Shiite militants here typically focus on American troops.        
Yasir Ghazi and Duraid Adnan contributed reporting.
