
MOSCOW &mdash; North Korea&rsquo;s reclusive leader, Kim Jong-il, rumbled across the border into Russia aboard an armored train early Saturday amid growing hopes for a resumption of talks over ending his country&rsquo;s nuclear weapons program.        

It was Mr. Kim&rsquo;s first visit to Russia in nearly a decade, part of a return to the international stage that experts say may have been prompted by an urgent need for economic aid to assuage a spiraling food crisis at home.        

Yet, as in past visits abroad, Mr. Kim, who reports say lives in constant fear for his security, has kept the details of his trip secret. The Kremlin released a terse statement on Saturday, saying the North Korean leader would visit sites in Russia&rsquo;s Far East and Siberia, and meet with the president, Dmitri A. Medvedev.        

Russian news media reported that the two leaders would meet this week, though the day and place were not announced.        

Mr. Kim stopped Saturday morning in the Russian border town of Khasan, meeting briefly with the governor of the Primorsky Krai region, according to media reports.        

His visit comes after several meetings among high-ranking North Korean officials and their counterparts in South Korea, China and the United States, who, along with negotiators from Japan and Russia, have been locked for years in on-again-off-again negotiations over ending North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear weapons program.        

The so-called six-party talks stalled in 2008 amid an impasse over measures to verify North Korea&rsquo;s compliance with an agreement to halt its nuclear activities. Since then, the country has detonated a nuclear device, launched a long-range nuclear-capable missile and unveiled a large-scale uranium enrichment program.        

But Mr. Kim&rsquo;s defiance, at times unshakeable, has been known to soften when politically expedient. In the past he has used his country&rsquo;s nuclear activities as leverage to gain concessions, particularly economic aid from his negotiating partners.        

In recent months, North Korea has been reeling under the effects of a food shortage brought on by a combination of bad weather and years of economic negligence. The European Commission recently said that the situation there had grown so severe that people had resorted to eating grass.        

On Friday, Russia&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry announced that Russia had made the first delivery of an expected 50,000 tons of food aid to North Korea. The United States and South Korea have also pledged assistance.        

&ldquo;We view this humanitarian operation as a contribution to the strengthening of our traditional neighborly relations between the peoples of our countries,&rdquo; the Foreign Ministry said in a statement.        

Though Moscow and Pyongyang were allies during the cold war, relations faltered after former President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union established diplomatic ties with South Korea on Sept. 30, 1990, and cut back economic and military subsidies to the North.        

But ties between the countries revived under Vladimir V. Putin, Russia&rsquo;s paramount leader and currently its prime minister. Mr. Kim made his first visit to Russia in 2001, early in Mr. Putin&rsquo;s first term as president, spending three weeks on a train trip from Russia&rsquo;s Far East to Moscow and St. Petersburg.        

He visited again in 2002, touring factories and a bakery in eastern Russia.        

The visit this week offers a chance for Mr. Medvedev to flex his diplomatic muscles ahead of presidential elections scheduled for 2012. It remains unclear whether he or Mr. Putin, his mentor and predecessor, will run, though he has indicated an interest in keeping his job.        

The trip will also offer an opportunity for Mr. Kim, whose health is waning, to shore up support from Moscow for his heir apparent, Kim Jong-un, his youngest son.        

Mr. Kim left lasting impressions on his previous trips to Russia, amazing his hosts with his opulence. He is said to be enamored of expensive whiskey and other luxury goods, despite his country&rsquo;s grueling poverty.        

After Mr. Kim&rsquo;s first trip to Russia, a Siberian official wrote of being impressed by the leader&rsquo;s affinity for platform shoes, fine dining and Russian women.        
