
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; An armored train carried the North Korean leader Kim Jong-il to a hydroelectric plant in Siberia on Sunday, according to news reports and two South Korean officials, amid signs that Mr. Kim might be seeking a lucrative role in relaying Russian energy sources to South Korea and Japan.        

Mr. Kim is making his first trip to Russia since 2002. After raising international tensions with nuclear tests and by firing artillery at a South Korean island, his isolated government has begun reaching out. He visited China in May, and last month he allowed his diplomats to meet with American and South Korean officials to discuss a resumption of talks over ending North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear weapons program.        

The two South Korean officials who confirmed Mr. Kim&rsquo;s visit to the Russian power plant could provide no additional details. They insisted on anonymity until either Russian or North Korean authorities made an official announcement.        

As in past visits abroad, Mr. Kim, who according to reports lives in constant fear for his security, has kept secret the details of this trip. The Kremlin released a terse statement on Saturday that only confirmed his visit and a meeting with President Dmitri A. Medvedev.        

The two are expected to meet on Tuesday in the eastern Siberian city of Ulan Ude, near Lake Baikal in the Buddhist region of Buryatia and about 3,450 miles east of Moscow, according to the South Korean news agency Yonhap.        

Mr. Kim&rsquo;s train traveled to the small Bureya station in the Amur region in eastern Siberia on Sunday, according to news reports. After receiving a warm welcome from the Russian president&rsquo;s envoy to the region, Viktor Ishayev, and by Russian women carrying the traditional offering of a loaf of bread and salt, Mr. Kim traveled by Mercedes to the nearby Bureiskaya hydroelectric plant.        

Mutual economic and political interests are bringing the leaders of Russia and North Korea together, analysts in Seoul said. Mr. Kim&rsquo;s efforts to pull his country out of its economic crisis depend largely on finding access to hard currency and relatively cheap energy.        

For years, officials in Moscow and Seoul have urged North Korea to let the two countries build a pipeline through the North to carry Russian natural gas to meet the rising demand in South Korea and perhaps to also supply Japan. North Korea can expect to earn as much as $500 million a year in transit fees from the pipeline, according to South Korean analysts.        

With South Korea&rsquo;s support, Russia and North Korea have also discussed the idea of extending the Trans-Siberian Railway through the North into the South and building high-voltage power lines to sell surplus Russian electricity from plants like Bureiskaya to both Koreas.        

Russian officials have said that such deals will help develop the country&rsquo;s sparsely populated Far East.        

After years of hesitation, North Korea has recently shown interest in the proposals. Executives from the Russian gas firm Gazprom visited Pyongyang, North Korea&rsquo;s capital, in July. This month, the Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, said that North Korea was &ldquo;positive&rdquo; about the pipeline project, and North Korea&rsquo;s media acknowledged last week that Mr. Medvedev had called for greater cooperation involving energy and railways among Russia and the two Koreas.        

Even if Mr. Kim and Mr. Medvedev agree in principle on the energy deals, the dispute over North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear weapons program will complicate the negotiations.        

South Korean analysts disagreed about whether the proposed pipeline would present an economic and security risk or whether it would help the North rebuild its economy and encourage it to be more flexible concerning its nuclear ambitions.        

Mr. Kim has told his people repeatedly that he will &ldquo;open the door for a strong and prosperous nation&rdquo; in 2012, said Kim Yong-hyun, a professor at Dongguk University in Seoul, and the North Korean leader needs to &ldquo;present them with something that will give them hopes and expectations.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Russia&rsquo;s abundant oil fields and natural gas reserves,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;seem to give it some of the power leverage it had lost in Northeast Asia since the cold war.&rdquo; Because of international sanctions led by the United States, North Korea&rsquo;s economy is dependent on China more than ever. That has spawned a fear among the North&rsquo;s xenophobic elite, who harbor a deep suspicion of any big power, and may have led them to try to compensate for their weakening leverage with China by bolstering ties with Russia, analysts in Seoul said.        

Nuclear diplomats and economic policy makers like Pak Bong-ju &mdash; a former premier who was demoted to a factory manager after pushing for change but who was reinstated to an influential post last year &mdash; are with Mr. Kim on his trip to Russia.        
Michael Schwirtz contributed reporting from Moscow.
