
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The beleaguered election commission here declared on Sunday, after months of intense political pressure, that it would change the results of the latest parliamentary elections.        

The Independent Election Commission announced at a news conference that nine members of Parliament would be removed and that nine candidates, previously disqualified over electoral irregularities, would have their seats restored. In a previous ruling, the panel had said that the election results were final and that even it could not change the outcome.        

&ldquo;We did not willingly get involved in this case, but it was our obligation to end this crisis,&rdquo; said the commission&rsquo;s chairman, Fazil Ahmad Manawi.        

The controversy has paralyzed the Afghan government since the election 11 months ago, provoking street demonstrations by losing candidates and counterdemonstrations by the declared winners. The uncertainty prevented President Hamid Karzai from appointing a cabinet or nominating Supreme Court justices.        

Mr. Manawi in effect acknowledged that the commission&rsquo;s latest decision was as much a political compromise as a legal solution, although he insisted that the agency had acted independently. &ldquo;We did not accept any pressure, and our decision was based on our legal authority,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and there was no one else involved in our decision, neither from the palace nor any other entity or individual.&rdquo;        

Afghanistan&rsquo;s election agencies had earlier invalidated nearly a fourth of all votes recorded in the elections, which meant that many of the apparent winners were stripped of their seats.        

Responding to public pressure, especially from his fellow Pashtuns, who were particularly affected by the invalidated votes, Mr. Karzai had the Supreme Court convene a Special Court to review the election results. That move was widely condemned internationally and by many Afghans, who said the country&rsquo;s Constitution made the election commission the final word on the results.        

That Special Court declared that 62 of the candidates should have their victories restored, which in turn led to protests in Parliament. Many of the lawmakers conspicuously armed themselves and their squadrons of bodyguards, vowing to resist efforts to change the assembly&rsquo;s makeup.        

In addition, the attorney general brought a series of criminal charges against the election commission, including Mr. Manawi and the panel&rsquo;s chief electoral officer, Abdullah Ahmadzai, and other officials.        

The president finally broke the impasse by affirming this month that the commission was the final arbiter and dissolving the Special Court. At the same time, he suggested that the election commission should review some of the cases, which apparently paved the way for Sunday&rsquo;s compromise.        

&nbsp;The new ruling may still not go far enough to resolve the crisis, however, with some members of Parliament insisting that they will not let even nine of their members be replaced. Some candidates who were not restored to office promised to continue to agitate against the composition of Parliament.        

A losing candidate from Ghazni, Abdul Jabar Sholgari, claimed that the compromise was worked out with the United Nations in Afghanistan and Western embassies, and said he and others would ask their followers to force the United Nations offices to close. He even raised the specter of another attack like the one that led to the deaths of  seven United Nations workers on April 1 in Mazar-i-Sharif. &ldquo;We will warn them if any incident similar to Mazar-i-Sharif happens,&rdquo; Mr. Sholgari said. &ldquo;We are not responsible for it.&rdquo;        

The members of Parliament whom the commission ruled against were also angry. &ldquo;This is an illegal and traitorous decision by the I.E.C.,&rdquo; said one of them, Mohammad Rafiq Shaheer, a lawmaker from Herat. &ldquo;It is a pity that without any shame they publicly announced that they are under pressure and have therefore made this illegal decision. It will not only harm the elections in the future, but over all it undermines the whole notion of democracy in this country.&rdquo;        

He said the majority in Parliament would refuse to allow the new candidates to be seated. A parliamentary group called the Coalition for Support of the Law signed up 150 members, more than half of Parliament, who agreed to resist any attempt to change the election results.        

Mr. Manawi said that his commission&rsquo;s decision had not been easy. &ldquo;The disputes have made the whole country avoid doing very essential tasks,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Over all, this country has a right to expect us to ease it from crisis, no matter who created that crisis.&rdquo;        

Diplomats were cautious in their reactions to the commission&rsquo;s decision. &ldquo;What it comes down to is that it&rsquo;s a political compromise,&rdquo; one Western diplomat said. &ldquo;But is this the end? We don&rsquo;t know.&rdquo;        
