
KAMPALA, Uganda &mdash; Tribal clashes in a region of newly independent South Sudan have killed at least 58 people in the past week, the United Nations says, raising fears of ethnic instability in the deeply impoverished country.        

Hundreds more are feared to have died in fighting that broke out between members of the Nuer and Murle ethnic groups in the eastern state of Jonglei, where violence between ethnic groups has raged for years. On Thursday, members of the Murle attacked a number of villages in Uror County, burning grass-thatched huts, stealing cattle and killing or abducting local villagers known as the Lou Nuer, United Nations and local government officials said. The United Nations said it had counted 58 bodies at two sites in the area. Fighting had subsided, but the officials said they had not been able to visit all the areas where violence had been reported.        

&ldquo;The likelihood would be more casualties, but we are unable to verify them ourselves,&rdquo; said Aleem Siddique, a spokesman for the United Nations in South Sudan. &ldquo;Our efforts now will be focused on reconciliation between the two tribes so that we can prevent these sort of incidents from occurring in the future.&rdquo;        

South Sudan became independent from Sudan on July 9 after decades of civil war with the north, which is largely Arab and Muslim. While South Sudan&rsquo;s ethnic groups fought in sometimes loose alliances against the north, tribal tensions have routinely bubbled over into violence.        

From January to the end of June, 2,368 people have been killed in 330 episodes of violence across South Sudan, Reuters reported, citing figures released by the United Nations in July.        

In a speech celebrating the country&rsquo;s independence, President Salva Kiir promised amnesty to all militias and urged South Sudan&rsquo;s people to forge a national identity that transcended ethnic groups. But for a country this vast and poor, that could prove difficult.        

In June, just weeks before independence, members of the Nuer and Dinka ethnic groups, two of the country&rsquo;s largest, teamed up in Jonglei State to attack the Murle there, stealing cattle and killing hundreds of people in what was said to be retaliation for attacks carried out by the Murle.        

South Sudanese officials worry that the Murle attack on Thursday was in response to the events in June, and that the tit-for-tat violence could tear at the new nation&rsquo;s fragile political cohesion.        

The local authorities &ldquo;believe between 100 and 300 people might have lost their lives,&rdquo; said John Boloch Kumen, a South Sudanese official and a member of the Murle who is originally from Jonglei State. &ldquo;Unless the leadership of the state takes a serious concern, there will be the vicious cycle of revenge.&rdquo;        
