
OTTAWA &mdash; Canada&rsquo;s political opposition was significantly weakened after the death Monday of the country&rsquo;s New Democratic Party leader, Jack Layton.        

Mr. Layton, whose family issued a brief statement saying he died early Monday at his home in Toronto, was treated for prostate cancer earlier this year. The treatment had appeared to be successful, and he campaigned vigorously in advance of the May elections. But at a news conference in late July, Mr. Layton said he was temporarily stepping aside as party head to receive treatment for a different cancer. He looked unusually gaunt but vowed to return to Parliament this fall.        

Mr. Layton, who was 61, had unexpectedly devastated Quebec&rsquo;s separatist movement in Parliament during the election in May and emerged as the first head of the New Democrats, a center-left party supported by labor, to become the leader of the official opposition. His widow, Olivia Chow, is a New Democrat member of Parliament. His death now leaves all three of Canada&rsquo;s major opposition parties headed by interim leaders as Prime Minister Stephen Harper, a Conservative, is at the helm of his first government with a majority of votes in the House of Commons.        

&ldquo;The government is now going to have a very easy time in the House of Commons,&rdquo; said Heather MacIvor, a political scientist at the University of Windsor in Ontario. &ldquo;If they get too easy a ride, it may bring them down because there have already been concerns about this Conservative government&rsquo;s accountability over how it uses its powers.&rdquo;        

Mr. Layton&rsquo;s approach to politics, which avoided attacks on opponents, sought consensus on issues and promoted moderately left-wing causes, provided a sharp contrast to Mr. Harper&rsquo;s politics.        

Mr. Layton continued that theme in an open letter to Canadians he wrote on Saturday and was released after his death.        

&ldquo;My friends, love is better than anger,&rdquo; Mr. Layton wrote. &ldquo;Hope is better than fear. Optimism is better than despair.&rdquo;        

While Mr. Layton spent most of his adult life in Toronto, where he had a long career in municipal politics, he was born and raised in Hudson, Quebec, an affluent, mainly English-speaking community west of Montreal. His family has a long history of political activity, although generally not from the left. His great-grandfather Philip Layton was a blind piano dealer in Montreal who successfully campaigned for government benefits for the blind. A grandfather of Mr. Layton was a provincial cabinet minister in Quebec under a right-of-center party, and his father was a federal conservative cabinet minister.        

In his 2006 book &ldquo;Speaking Out Louder,&rdquo; Mr. Layton wrote that he chose a political life during the 1970 crisis that followed the kidnapping and murder of a Quebec politician by a Quebec separatist group whose members also held a British trade envoy captive.        

Many people were surprised when Mr. Layton became the New Democratic leader in 2003 despite having relatively little federal experience. He leaves behind a party that has been drastically transformed since it was created in 1961 through an alliance between the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, a socialist party formed during the Great Depression, and the Canadian Federation of Labour, the umbrella organization for organized labor.        

Much of the party&rsquo;s history was one of internal squabbling, often between its Western populist and labor wings. Many political analysts also argued that it favored the moral high ground and dogma over political success.        

Under Mr. Layton, the New Democrats shed the last of their overtly socialist positions and adopted a platform aimed more at attracting middle-class voters. While his more moderate approach angered some of the party&rsquo;s left-wing members, May&rsquo;s election result confirmed its political wisdom.        

Led by Mr. Layton&rsquo;s energetic campaign style, the New Democrats almost wiped out the Bloc Qu&eacute;b&eacute;cois, a party devoted to Quebec&rsquo;s separation, and stole seats elsewhere in Canada previously held by the Liberal Party, historically Canada&rsquo;s most successful political movement. One sign of Mr. Layton&rsquo;s popularity in Quebec, where he came to be known as &ldquo;Le Bon Jack,&rdquo; was the electoral success of many New Democrat candidates who had been virtually unknown, including students who had not even visited the communities they now represent.        

The party&rsquo;s success in Quebec has also brought challenges.        

When Mr. Layton took his medical leave, he nominated Nycole Turmel, a former labor leader and neophyte politician, as his interim replacement. Earlier this month, news reports disclosed that she was a member of the Bloc Qu&eacute;b&eacute;cois as recently as January and that she still belonged to a new provincial party devoted to separatism.        

Ms. Turmel said that she supported those parties for other reasons and did not share their views about separation from Canada.        
