
LONDON &mdash; The former News of the World editor Andy Coulson received hundreds of thousands of dollars in severance pay from his former employer after joining now-Prime Minister David Cameron&rsquo;s Conservative Party as director of communications in 2007, according to a British Broadcasting Corporation report on Monday evening.        

Mr. Coulson was arrested last month in connection with investigations into phone hacking and payments to police officials under his editorship. Although he has denied any wrongdoing, his role at Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s side from 2007 until he stepped down this year had become the topic of political intrigue and swirling rumors here since the scandal came to dominate headlines last month.        

In its report, the BBC said that the severance payments, part of an agreement that included company health care benefits and a car, were received in installments that continued after he joined the Conservative Party in July 2007.        

A person in the party, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the legal and political sensitivity of the topic, said on Monday that there was confusion in the party over the report. Although some had suspected such an arrangement, the details cited by the BBC were not known, the source said, citing conversations with senior officials.        

When Mr. Coulson was first hired, the person added, party officials had been uncomfortable over his high wages from the party itself &mdash; around $400,000 a year. Mr. Coulson was widely credited as being crucial to the strategy that saw Mr. Cameron elected prime minister last year, with the endorsement of The News of the World and other British newspapers owned by Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s News Corporation.        

A spokesman for 10 Downing Street directed inquiries on the BBC report to the Conservative Party, which said via a spokeswoman that &ldquo;senior party officials have no knowledge of Andy Coulson&rsquo;s severance arrangements.&rdquo; She declined to answer further questions.        

The revelations could well reignite controversies over whether Mr. Cameron ignored signs that one of his closest colleagues might have known about, or even endorsed, hacking, and Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s influence over Britain&rsquo;s politicians. Mr. Coulson resigned from the weekly tabloid in January 2007 after the arrest and imprisonment of two people who worked for the newspaper, the private detective Glenn Mulcaire and the reporter who covered the royal family, Clive Goodman, for phone hacking.        

Mr. Cameron has insisted that he gave Mr. Coulson &ldquo;a second chance&rdquo; by bringing him to the heart of the Conservative Party and then to the heart of government despite the scandal.        

The payments that Mr. Coulson received after he stepped down as editor also raise questions, according to people familiar with continuing investigations into phone hacking at Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s companies, about the unusual practice of giving severance to senior staff over time rather than with a one-time payment. It raises, they said, potential issues about buying continued loyalty.        

The company has admitted that, until recently, it paid Mr. Mulcaire&rsquo;s extensive legal fees long after he ceased to work for it, and in a letter submitted to Parliament last week it became known that Mr. Goodman had also been paid by the tabloid while in prison.        

Agreements with more junior News of the World staff, who lost their jobs when the tabloid was shuttered last month, will pay a lump sum, not installments, according to former employees. Although it is unclear who authorizes such arrangements, one former journalist said Mr. Murdoch had been involved.        

A spokeswoman for News International, a British unit of News Corporation, declined to answer questions.        

Tom Watson, a member of the opposition Labour Party and a leading figure in parliamentary investigations into the scandal, suggested Monday evening on Twitter that the severance payments to Mr. Coulson might be &ldquo;an undeclared donation&rdquo; from Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s company to the Conservative Party, and that he would refer the matter to Britain&rsquo;s electoral commission.        
Jo Becker contributed reporting from New York.
