
STUTTGART, Germany &mdash; The swastika is illegal here, as is the Hitler salute. Germans have learned after decades of fighting their expression that the ideas behind them cannot be outlawed.        

But the question facing German officials today is whether pushing those ideas underground makes them more radical in the short term, and maybe even more attractive in the long run, precisely because they are forbidden.        

In the debate over the rise of the far right in Europe, Germany has remained, for obvious reasons related to its history, very much the exception. The kind of mainstream far-right parties so common in the rest of Europe are nowhere to be found here.        

But the anti-Islam and anti-immigrant ideas that have taken root across the Continent burst into the mainstream debate here last year when a book by an executive with Germany&rsquo;s central bank, Thilo Sarrazin, blaming Muslims for &ldquo;dumbing down&rdquo; Germany sold more than a million copies. The national discussion culminated with Chancellor Angela Merkel&rsquo;s declaration at a party conference last October that multiculturalism had &ldquo;utterly failed.&rdquo;        

That same month a study by the Friedrich Ebert Foundation, an organization affiliated with the left-wing Social Democratic Party, found that nearly a third of Germans believed that foreigners were here to take advantage of the welfare state, and that close to 60 percent of those surveyed favored restrictions on the practice of Islam.        

&ldquo;There is great potential in the resentment and xenophobia that right-wing populist parties could seize,&rdquo; said Daniela Kolbe, a Social Democratic parliamentarian from the former East Germany, where the extreme right has been strongest since the fall of the Berlin Wall more than 20 years ago. &ldquo;My greatest fear is that someone charismatic will emerge who can harness that potential.&rdquo;        

So far no one has taken that step. The historical taboos have been simply too strong.        

&ldquo;Many don&rsquo;t feel comfortable going public with their opinions because they are immediately demonized,&rdquo; Alexander Neidlein, executive director of the far-right National Democratic Party here in the southwestern state of Baden-W&uuml;rttemberg, said in a recent interview. &ldquo;In other European countries it&rsquo;s different, because they don&rsquo;t have the same history that we do.&rdquo;        

The party has come under significant criticism in Berlin, where one of its posters for the coming city elections features a slogan that could be translated as &ldquo;step on the gas,&rdquo; but is literally &ldquo;give gas,&rdquo; which has been widely criticized as a reference to gas chambers. The party&rsquo;s leader, pictured in the ad on the back of a motorcycle, told the Web site Spiegel Online, &ldquo;After 66 years, people need to stop bringing up things from the past.&rdquo;        

Unlike populist right-wing parties like the True Finns, the Danish People&rsquo;s Party or the National Front in France, the National Democrats have no seats in the federal Parliament. They have been plagued in recent years by internal tensions and rocked by financial and legal difficulties.        

But while the upheaval of recent months &mdash; with turmoil over the euro, protests in Athens and Madrid and riots in London &mdash; has been a source of trepidation across Europe, Mr. Neidlein sees opportunity amid the turmoil.        

&ldquo;The worse it gets with the financial crisis and the failure of the multicultural society,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;the sooner people will wake up and be ready for more radical political ideas.&rdquo;        

Baden-W&uuml;rttemberg was thrust into the news in Germany when, the week after the recent deadly attacks in Norway, the police raided 21 homes as part of an investigation of a right-wing extremist group calling itself Standarte W&uuml;rttemberg. The police said the inquiry was not connected to the events in Norway, but a handgun and 100 rounds of ammunition were confiscated in the early morning raids.        

German authorities gather intelligence and statistics on extremists and the crimes they commit. &ldquo;You see tremendous losses in the number of people belonging to far-right parties, but nearly a doubling of the number of individuals capable of violence,&rdquo; said Frank Dittrich, vice president of the State Office for the Protection of the Constitution in Baden-W&uuml;rttemberg, the state branch of domestic intelligence.        

Nationwide the federal office considered 65,000 people as far right in 1993, a number that declined to 25,000 by last year. Over the same period, those the office counted as prone to violence climbed to 9,500 from 5,600.        

&ldquo;The research shows that when the parties are strong, the violence falls, and when the parties are weak, the violence rises,&rdquo; said Britta Schellenberg, an expert on the far-right at Ludwig-Maximilians University in Munich.        

Ms. Schellenberg said she was worried about attacks against left-wing politicians in addition to the more-often-reported violence against immigrants and their German-born children.        
Stefan Pauly contributed reporting from Berlin.
