
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; The euphoria that followed the rebels&rsquo; triumphant march in Tripoli gave way to confusion and wariness on Monday, as Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi remained at large, his son Seif al-Islam made a surprise appearance at a hotel with foreign journalists, and pockets of loyalist forces stubbornly resisted rebel efforts to take control of the capital.        

While rebel leaders professed to be making progress in securing Tripoli and planning for a post-Qaddafi government, and international leaders hailed the beginnings of a new era in Libya, the immediate aftermath of the lightning invasion was a vacuum of power, with no cohesive rebel government in place and remnants of the Qaddafi government still in evidence.        

Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi, whose capture the rebels had trumpeted since Sunday, walked as a free man to the Qaddafi-controlled luxury Rixos Hotel in the center of Tripoli early Tuesday, boasting to foreign journalists there that his father&rsquo;s government was still &ldquo;in control&rdquo; and had lured the rebels into a trap, the BBC and news services reported. His appearance raised significant questions about the credibility of rebel leaders.        

It was not clear whether he had been in rebel custody and escaped, or was never held at all. Another Qaddafi son, Muhammed, escaped from house arrest on Monday.        

Fighters hostile to the rebels still battled on the streets and rooftops of Tripoli, wounding or killing at least a dozen people. And Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s green flag still flew in parts of Tripoli and over at least two major cities considered strongholds of his tribe, Sabha to the south and Surt on the coast roughly midway between Tripoli and Benghazi. The Pentagon reported late Monday that its warplanes had shot down a Scud missile fired from Surt.        

In a brief address from his vacation home on the island of Martha&rsquo;s Vineyard, Mass., President Obama recognized both the historic nature of the rebels&rsquo; accomplishment and the troubles they face. Saying that the future of Libya &ldquo;is in the hands of its people,&rdquo; he cautioned that &ldquo;there will be huge challenges ahead.&rdquo; He pledged that the United States would seek to help Libya in its attempt to establish democracy.        

There was speculation that Colonel Qaddafi may have retreated to his fortified compound, Bab al-Aziziya, in Tripoli, which rebels said was heavily defended by snipers and tanks.        

Mahmud Nacua, a Libyan rebel representative in London, told reporters that the insurgents would &ldquo;look under every stone&rdquo; for Colonel Qaddafi so that he could be brought to trial. This was presumably a reference to charges by the International Criminal Court in The Hague, which in June issued arrest warrants for Colonel Qaddafi, Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi and Libya&rsquo;s intelligence chief, Abdullah Senussi, accusing them of crimes against humanity.        

The struggle to a impose a new order on the capital presents a crucial test of the rebel leadership&rsquo;s many pledges to replace Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s bizarre autocracy with the democratic rule of law, and it could have consequences across the country and throughout the Arab world.        

Unlike the swift and largely peaceful revolutions in Tunisia and Egypt, the Libyan insurrection was the first revolt of the Arab Spring to devolve into a protracted armed struggle, and at times threatened to descend into a civil war of factions and tribes.        

A rebel failure to deliver on their promises of justice and reconciliation here in the capital could spur Qaddafi loyalists around Libya to fight on. And an ugly outcome here might discourage strong foreign support for democracy movements elsewhere.        

For now, governments throughout the West and the Middle East welcomed the rebels&rsquo; victory and pledged to assist them in the transition. The European Union said Monday that it had begun planning for a post-Qaddafi era, and Turkey&rsquo;s foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, said he would fly to Benghazi on Tuesday to meet with the rebel leader, Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, the semiofficial Anatolian Agency reported.        

Egypt formally recognized the rebel Libyan government on Monday, calling the Transitional National Council the &ldquo;new regime.&rdquo; Mohammed Amr, Egypt&rsquo;s foreign minister, said that the council would take over the Libyan Embassy in Cairo, and would assume Libya&rsquo;s seat on the Arab League, which is based in Cairo.        
Reporting was contributed by Stephen Farrell from Cairo, Sebnem Arsu from Istanbul, Helene Cooper from Washington, and Neil MacFarquhar from the United Nations.
