
PARIS &mdash; President Nicolas Sarkozy has used the crisis over the euro and his relationship with the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, to set a potential political trap for the Socialist opposition less than nine months before the French presidential election.        

Hoping to show the French that he is a man of stature and responsibility, Mr. Sarkozy is pressing for a constitutional amendment to promote a balanced budget and making it a litmus test of fiscal responsibility for the Socialists, who oppose it.        

Mr. Sarkozy has previously floated an idea he calls &ldquo;the golden rule,&rdquo; a legal requirement for a balanced budget, and a weak version has passed both houses of Parliament, where his center-right party has a majority. The Socialists voted against it, calling it a political maneuver and a &ldquo;communications operation.&rdquo;        

Now he wants to enshrine the idea in the Constitution, and for that needs 60 percent of the legislators, which he does not have.        

But with the support of Mrs. Merkel, made explicit at their summit meeting last week, Mr. Sarkozy has made the idea of a constitutional golden rule a strong Franco-German recommendation for all 17 euro-zone countries. The stated intention is to promote the economic integration the two leaders think is a prerequisite for a durable solution to the euro crisis, which is founded on deep imbalances in fiscal rectitude and competitiveness among the different states.        

But Mr. Sarkozy also seems to have a domestic intent &mdash; to portray the Socialists as fiscally irresponsible and spendthrift. He has also, with much fanfare, ordered his government to come up with new spending cuts and alterations in the tax code to ensure, even in a period of flat growth, that he meets his stated target of reducing national debt to 5.7 percent of gross domestic product this year and 4.6 percent next year, election year.        

His ministers are supposed to report back to him on Aug. 24, which will produce more publicity and, without doubt, more Sarkozy praise of the golden rule as the answer for Europe. That will also help him deflect attention from the size of the cuts, which may be as much as $14 billion.        

In the meantime, Mr. Sarkozy has returned to the Mediterranean vacation home of his pregnant wife, leaving the Socialists, gearing up for their own primary fight in October, having to explain why a debt limit and balanced budgets are a bad idea. They have some sensible arguments, but as often in politics, a simple idea often trumps a complicated one.        

The Socialists recognize the need for fiscal discipline, but for now their own plans are either complicated or vague, and emphasize new programs more than cuts.        

Fran&ccedil;ois Hollande, currently the favorite in the polls for the Socialist presidential candidacy, said the golden rule &ldquo;has no substance.&rdquo; Martine Aubry, the Socialist Party president and another prominent candidate, has called it a public-relations exercise. &ldquo;The proposed &lsquo;golden rule,&rsquo; not very restrictive in truth, is first of all an exercise in communications,&rdquo; she wrote in Le Monde, feeding the myth that &ldquo;the left would push public finances into deficit while the right would bring them into balance.&rdquo;        

In fact, she said, it is the right that has increased the debt far more than the left. The Socialists have not held the presidency since 1995, and the Sarkozy government, like the United States and Germany, responded to the economic crisis of 2008 with stimulus spending and higher deficits, if not nearly so much as Washington did.        

That has prompted another Socialist candidate, S&eacute;gol&egrave;ne Royal, to compare Mr. Sarkozy to a speeder without a driver&rsquo;s license who wants to teach others how to drive.        

Another prominent Socialist, Arnaud Montebourg, said bluntly, &ldquo;The deficit is the bastard child of the right, a mixture of ideological choices and payoffs for its electoral clients&rdquo; &mdash; big business and the rich.        

Others, like Jean-Luc M&eacute;lenchon of the Left Party, have assailed the right&rsquo;s obsession with deficits and balanced budgets during an economic crisis as &ldquo;dangerous and criminal.&rdquo;        

Mr. Sarkozy has said French voters will be the judge of that in the next election.        

Germany has already enshrined a golden rule. Germany&rsquo;s Basic Law now requires the government to balance the budget by 2016, and future governments to keep the deficit to no more than 0.35 percent a year, far below the 3 percent limit in the Maastricht agreement that is supposed to govern the euro zone, but has rarely been applied. France, for example, has exceeded the 3 percent limit at least six times between 1999 and 2010, and will do so again this year and next.        

The French idea is much softer. It was originally drafted as a ban on fiscal deficits, but has become simply an obligation to pursue a plan to reach a balanced budget in the five-year term of any new government. While Mr. Sarkozy has yet to propose specific language, the amendment as it is being discussed, unlike the German amendment, would not be binding.        

The French version does include social security and pension spending in the budget figures, and would make it harder to pass special laws creating tax breaks outside the larger budget law.        

But failure to pass it, after all the fuss, could hurt France&rsquo;s reputation in the bond markets. France has the weakest economy of all the triple-A rated countries, and although the ratings companies have confirmed that their rating of France is stable, passage of the golden rule may comfort the markets, especially if the Socialists win the presidency.        
