
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Even as a United Nations human rights team was investigating the violence in Syria, activists said Tuesday that security forces killed at least five more civilians in an assault on the suburbs of Hama, one of the country&rsquo;s most restive cities.        

The team was sent by the United Nations Human Rights Council to investigate what it has called &ldquo;systematic human rights violations&rdquo; in the government&rsquo;s attempt to crush five months of protests challenging President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s grip on power. Activists said Tuesday that among those killed were three women caught in raids on al-Ghab plain, a stretch of farmland in the northwest.        

It was an eventful &mdash; if increasingly routine &mdash; day in Syria, where the government tried to project an image of control and calm by once again unleashing its security forces even as civilians continued to demonstrate that the use of lethal force could not quell their uprising.        

The United Nations says at least 2,200 people have been killed in Syria since the revolt began in mid-March.        

But the government continued to face other pressures as well, which have only mounted in recent weeks since President Obama and other Western leaders called on Mr. Assad to step down. The United States ambassador to Syria, Robert Ford, paid a surprise visit to the southern town of Jasem, marking the second time in two months he has visited an area that has been the scene of protests and violence. The visit is likely to enrage the Syrian government, just as his first visit, to Hama, did.        

&ldquo;He came to check the situation here,&rdquo; said Safi, an activist from Dara&rsquo;a who was reached by phone. &ldquo;At one point, people gathered around his car and chanted slogans in support of the international community. They were really excited to receive him.&rdquo;        

The authorities had banned Mr. Ford and other Western diplomats from leaving the capital, Damascus, and its outskirts after Mr. Ford and the French ambassador visited Hama seven weeks ago amid some of the biggest antigovernment demonstrations this summer. At the beginning of August, Mr. Assad ordered his troops to invade the city and crush dissent there. More than 250 people were killed during the assault, according to human rights activists.        

It was not clear if the government knew in advance of Mr. Ford&rsquo;s plan to visit Jasem, a town about 20 miles east of the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights. Activists said that 12 people were killed in the town in May after large demonstrations there.        

A State Department spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, confirmed that Mr. Ford traveled to Jasem and spent about four hours there.        

Mr. Ford is the first United States ambassador to Damascus since Washington withdrew its diplomat after the assassination of the former Lebanese prime minister, Rafik Hariri, a killing in which Syria is believed to have had a role.        

Mr. Assad has dismissed international condemnation of his crackdown as &ldquo;meaningless&rdquo; and said the situation in Syria has improved in the past two months. His government blames a foreign conspiracy for the unrest and says it is battling Muslim extremists.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.
