
WASHINGTON &mdash; The NATO air campaign that was instrumental in helping the rebels advance into Tripoli is hamstrung in many ways now that the fighting has turned into complex house-to-house urban warfare, American military and allied officials said Tuesday.        

For legal and practical reasons, as well as to avoid the perception of bombing indiscriminately inside Tripoli, the Libyan capital, allied warplanes will continue to prowl for targets, but mostly on the outskirts of the city where government troops might be trying to escape or reinforce Tripoli &mdash; and where the risk of civilian casualties is much lower, allied officials said.        

A NATO spokesman, Col. Roland Lavoie, said at a news conference in Naples, Italy, on Tuesday that &ldquo;there are still weapons out there and there are still targets that we could hit if we have any signs that they could represent a threat to the civilian population.&rdquo;        

But he and other NATO officials acknowledged that the urban environment in Tripoli, a city of about two million people, was &ldquo;far more complex&rdquo; for airstrikes than past targets have been.        

Until now, the vast majority of targets attacked in Tripoli have been sites suspected of being military command headquarters or weapons-storage buildings that NATO monitored closely for days or weeks with surveillance aircraft, including Predator drones, to ensure that no civilians were living or working there.        

Allied targeting experts and fighter pilots do not have that option with the rapidly shifting battle lines in block-by-block combat carried on by fighters on both sides dressed in civilian clothing.        

&ldquo;It could be difficult, because the use of air power, to a large degree, is negated when you get into this kind of urban warfare,&rdquo; Senator John McCain said Tuesday on &ldquo;The Early Show&rdquo; on CBS. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s hard to identify targets and hard to be effective. &nbsp;But I don&rsquo;t think there&rsquo;s any doubt of the eventual outcome.&rdquo;        

This is hardly the first time that the United States or NATO has dealt with the challenge of rooting out foes in urban environments. American troops, in particular, learned many lessons combating the insurgency in Baghdad. While the United States and NATO do not have major armies on the ground in Libya, the allies have passed on these lessons to the rebel fighters. Applying them, they think, will allow rebels who had been dependent on strong NATO air support for many of their past gains to drive Qaddafi loyalists out of Tripoli completely.        

A NATO military official said Tuesday, for instance, that British and French commandos were on the ground with the rebels in Tripoli offering &ldquo;fairly extensive&rdquo; help. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re doing a lot of coordination with some of the air assets that we have to bring specific targeting on the remnants of the pro-Qaddafi regime,&rdquo; the official said, describing a traditional role of commandos in calling in airstrikes on precise targets, or instructing the rebels on how to do it themselves.        

The military official said he did not know if Central Intelligence Agency operatives in Libya were also working with the rebels in Tripoli, but he said &ldquo;they certainly should be.&rdquo;        

Outside Tripoli, fighting continued on Tuesday in government strongholds like Surt and Sabha, and Colonel Lavoie said allied warplanes would continue to use precision weapons to enforce the United Nations mandate to protect civilians. &ldquo;It might not be on the front line,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It might be in the approaches of Tripoli if there are movements of vehicles.&rdquo;        

NATO dropped little ordnance in the last 24 hours &mdash; the French bombed some small mobile rocket launchers in Brega &mdash; and the United States dropped none.        

&ldquo;This is not a situation where there&rsquo;s a whole lot of kinetic targeting taking place from the air,&rdquo; an American defense official said. &ldquo;There is an abundance of caution being exercised when you&rsquo;re working in a confined urban environment. Operations are obviously moving in favor of the rebels every day, so you don&rsquo;t want to do things that would be counterproductive to that progress.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
Pentagon officials said that by Tuesday the rebels controlled large portions of Tripoli, but they said there remained pockets where Qaddafi forces continued to fight back. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s still a pretty unclear picture, but for the most part the rebels appear to have control of most areas,&rdquo; the senior defense official said.        

A senior NATO diplomat said that by late Tuesday there were four or five main pockets of resistance from fighters loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, and that the limitations on allied air power put more of an onus on rebel fighters to combat loyalist troops still fighting throughout the capital.        

Moreover, NATO officials acknowledged they did not have reliable estimates on the number of soldiers fighting a last-ditch campaign to back Colonel Qaddafi, which makes it hard to judge when the rebels might establish firm control over the capital.        

The official also said that Colonel Qaddafi appeared not to be in his compound, stormed by the rebels on Tuesday, but that he remained in Libya although &ldquo;probably&rdquo; not in Tripoli.        

The official said that a compound wall that was broken down so the rebels could enter the area appeared to have been blasted through on the ground and was not caused by an airstrike.        

Pentagon officials said that the United States continued to fly Predator drones over Tripoli and had sent more in recent weeks at the request of NATO. The United States also continued to provide refueling planes and additional surveillance aircraft.        

One Libya expert cautioned against the notion that NATO and rebel forces may face a protracted urban conflict, saying that many remaining Libyan troops had hastily retreated into the capital in recent days; had not prepared elaborate defenses; are short on fuel, water and ammunition; and have little experience fighting an urban guerrilla war.        

&ldquo;They don&rsquo;t have the practice of defending a city or carrying out an insurgency, and soldier for soldier they&rsquo;re being outfought by the rebels,&rdquo; said Frederic Wehrey, a senior policy analyst with the RAND Corporation who follows Libya closely.        
