
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Its impenetrable walls breached at last, the people stripped the colonel&rsquo;s home of its treasures. They sauntered on the grassy grounds as if it were a public park, and swung on his statue of a fist crushing a plane, a symbol of defiance, as if it were a jungle gym.        

They sat in Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s chairs, reclaiming them as their own.        

&ldquo;This was his castle,&rdquo; said Walid Shanta, a dentist who joined the rebels to take over the compound, Bab al-Aziziya, on Tuesday morning.        

Bab al-Aziziya had been Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s residence and a military barracks, at once a symbol of power and a monument to paranoia. It separated and also exalted him, serving as a backdrop to decades of absolute authority and to his many defiant and manic speeches.        

On Monday, the colonel&rsquo;s son Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi taunted the rebels from its sprawling grounds, far removed from the dusty city that fell into disrepair long before the war arrived at its doors.        

On Tuesday, the Libyan rebels, aided by NATO warplanes, sent in thousands of fighters to capture it, in a pitched six-hour battle that filled the capital with black smoke and the boom of heavy weapons.        

&ldquo;This is our prize,&rdquo; said Mr. Shanta, as he held several guns taken from the base, as did hundreds of other men. The apparent fall of Bab al-Aziziya marked the symbolic end to the colonel&rsquo;s four decades in power.        

Hundreds of people rushed in to savor the moment, trampling across forbidden ground, reclaiming two square miles of their city during an edgy stampede of joyful looting set against the sounds of machine-gun fire and explosions.        

&ldquo;Our people have arrived,&rdquo; said Col. Mohammed Ali Ethish, an army officer who defected several months ago to command a rebel fighting brigade. He left the compound with a brand-new 9-millimeter pistol in a smart black case that he held like a gift. &ldquo;I am very, very happy.&rdquo;        

The visitors were fighters who had risked their lives to take Bab al-Aziziya or neighbors who wanted to venture down notorious halls. Some people took out their anger on the famous totems of the colonel&rsquo;s bizarre dictatorship, or its vulgar trappings. Several men spent 10 minutes smashing a gold-plated tea trolley. A group around them cheered.        

The penetration of the compound &mdash; and the symbolism of the victory &mdash; shocked the rebels.        

They said it was ringed by crack Qaddafi troops protecting their Brother Leader, who was rumored to be hiding inside. As rebel attempts to exert control over the city faltered Tuesday, the rebels worried that Bab al-Aziziya, with its network of tunnels throughout the city, would become a base for the loyalists to wage a last stand against the rebels.        

In the morning, rebel fighters from brigades throughout the country were sent on an urgent mission to capture the base. A mile away, their reinforcements were pinned down by snipers hiding in a water tower. NATO warplanes bombed the compound. Fighters from the coastal city of Misurata, armed with heavy weapons and deep experience in urban combat, turned the battle, several people said.        

By midafternoon, Qaddafi forces abandoned large parts of the base.        

The looters filed in even as sporadic fighting persisted. In a measure of the current mood in Tripoli, most people were looking for weapons. The golden pistols a man showed to reporters seemed like novelty items. Many walked out of the compound with cattle prods.        

There seemed to be boxes marked Beretta &mdash; the handgun &mdash; available to anyone who wanted one. Young men threw shotguns in their backpacks or carried them out in both hands, posing for pictures as they went.        

For some people, the hunt for weapons reflected fear for what the future holds.        

Wael Sabri, from Tripoli, said he took the handguns &ldquo;maybe to protect my family.&rdquo; Then referring to Colonel Qaddafi, he said, &ldquo;Maybe he will come back.&rdquo;        

Others went for luxury items. Flat-screen televisions were hauled away from private residences on the compound.        

People cheered and laughed as they toyed with another of the eccentric symbols of the leader, an electric golf cart that Colonel Qaddafi used to drive around the compound.        

Hisham al-Windi took what he said was the colonel&rsquo;s military cap. &ldquo;Everyone knows this cap,&rdquo; he said.        

Sidiq Rujbani ran off with a more intriguing souvenir, a sheaf of papers that he said were the medical records of members of the Qaddafi family.        

The biggest attraction at the compound was the statue of the fist crushing an American warplane, a monument to defiance, installed by the colonel after attacks by President Ronald Reagan on the compound in 1986. Behind the statue, a building Colonel Qaddafi had called the House of Resistance, the bombed-out remains of the Reagan attack, took on new meaning as rebels rummaged through the debris and tried to sort out the meaning of this victory.        

&ldquo;The big head has fallen,&rdquo; said Al Wakidi Mohamed, a former journalist and rebel fighter, who sat on a jeep in front of the statue as the sun set.        

&ldquo;The world didn&rsquo;t know Libyans,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They knew Qaddafi.&rdquo;        
