
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Backed by NATO airstrikes and seasoned reinforcements, rebel fighters crashed through the gates of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s fortresslike compound Tuesday, running madly across its sprawling lawns, ransacking its barracks for weapons and carting off mementos of his 42-year dictatorship.        

The victory was by no means complete, however. Colonel Qaddafi and his family were nowhere to be found. And as crowds cheered into the night in the city&rsquo;s Green Square, now Martyrs&rsquo; Square, some Qaddafi militiamen were still fighting around the city, and the rebels acknowledged that even the compound, Bab al-Aziziya, was not yet under their full control.        

The storming of the compound represented the fruition of an oft-repeated rebel vow: &ldquo;We will celebrate in Bab al-Aziziya,&rdquo; the ultimate seat of power in the Qaddafi government. The conquest was spearheaded by hundreds of experienced fighters from the port city of Misurata, who developed into some of the rebels&rsquo; best organized and most effective units after months of bitter fighting with elite loyalist forces.        

Jubilant rebel fighters made off with advanced machine guns, a gold-plated rifle and Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s golf cart. One took the distinctive fur that Colonel Qaddafi wore in his first public appearance after the uprising began six months ago.        

While the pillaging of Bab al-Aziziya was the most conclusive evidence yet that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s rule was at an end, it was not yet clear how much his fall would do to pacify Qaddafi partisans who may feel they have much to lose from the rebels&rsquo; ascendance, especially while their leader remains at large.        

As a reminder that he remained on the loose, Colonel Qaddafi, in an address broadcast early Wednesday over a local Tripoli radio station, called his retreat from Bab al-Aziziya &ldquo;tactical,&rdquo; Reuters reported. He blamed months of NATO airstrikes for bringing down his compound and vowed &ldquo;martyrdom&rdquo; or victory in his battle against the alliance. It was the second such address by Colonel Qaddafi, 69, since his forces lost control of Tripoli.        

Rebel leaders acknowledged Tuesday that their forces in Tripoli are not under any unified command. Some are simply Tripoli residents who have taken up guns, and have little or no military experience. And rebels from the western mountains fight in independent brigades from each town or tribe, spraying its name &mdash; &ldquo;Zintan&rdquo; or &ldquo;Nalut&rdquo; &mdash; as they go.        

Rebel military commanders said that aside from the area around Bab al-Aziziya, they believed that only two other neighborhoods of Tripoli remained under the control of Qaddafi loyalists. One is Al Hadba. The other is Abu Salim, which includes the Rixos Hotel. A group of journalists have been trapped there for days, first by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s guards and now by gunfire outside. On Tuesday the BBC reported that the hotel had come under attack as well, forcing the journalists to take shelter.        

But gunmen and snipers hostile to the rebels continue to operate in many other neighborhoods, and doctors at clinics and hospitals around Tripoli reported hundreds of gunshot wounds over the last 72 hours, even in neighborhoods rebels consider well controlled.        

The death toll was impossible to assess. Doctors at a small clinic in the relatively safe neighborhood of Jansur reported receiving 30 patients injured in the fighting, 6 of whom died overnight.        

It is also unclear how many rebel fighters are in Tripoli, in part because so many young men from the city are now brandishing automatic rifles. The rebels from the western mountains number a few thousand in tribal bands of 600 or more, and the Misurata fighters were said in unconfirmed reports to number around 500.        

Rebel leaders struggled to explain how their leaders in the eastern city of Benghazi misled the world two days ago when they falsely reported the capture of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s son Seif al-Islam, one of the most powerful figures in his father&rsquo;s government. He embarrassed the rebels early Tuesday by walking freely into the Rixos Hotel and boasting that his father was still in control and inside the city.        

In a news conference in the Qatari capital, Doha, Mahmoud Jabril, a top rebel leader, said it was essentially a misunderstanding, suggesting that Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, had mistaken an early notification of an unconfirmed rumor for an official report of Seif al-Islam&rsquo;s capture. There was no explanation why the misunderstanding went uncorrected for two days.        
Kareem Fahim contributed reporting from Tripoli, Libya, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
