
MOSCOW &mdash; A day after an airport suicide bombing that investigators suspect was organized by Islamic militants, Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin on Tuesday vowed retribution. President Dmitri A. Medvedev lashed out at low-ranking subordinates at the airport for failing to stop the attack. A number of initiatives were announced to prevent future terrorist acts.        

Even so, the government seemed to be facing a bleak calculus.        

None of its strategies for stamping out the long-running insurgency in southern Russia &mdash; neither the harsh measures favored by some in the security services nor the social programs and infrastructure projects supported by many policy experts &mdash; have yielded much success.        

The bombing, which killed at least 35 people at the country&rsquo;s premier international airport southeast of Moscow, came less than a year after two suicide attacks on the subway system here. In the meantime, the unrest in the North Caucasus itself &mdash; Chechnya and other Muslim regions &mdash; endures.        

There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the airport attack on Monday, but the authorities made clear that they thought  it was connected to the North Caucasus. There were conflicting reports about whether the bomber was a man or a woman, and whether accomplices were involved.        

The government&rsquo;s frustration at its inability to quell the insurgency seemed especially apparent on Tuesday in remarks by Mr. Medvedev, who unexpectedly turned his ire on the private management of the airport, Domodedovo. He went on national television to declare that security precautions at the arrivals area where the attack occurred were so poor that the situation was &ldquo;anarchy.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Such a quantity of explosive material that was carried in or brought in &mdash; that&rsquo;s not so easy to do,&rdquo; Mr. Medvedev said. &ldquo;We must hold responsible those who have ties to the company that makes decisions, the management of the airport.&rdquo;        

He did not say whether he would hold top federal security officials responsible for not detecting those shortcomings beforehand.        

The bomb was detonated in the area where people greet arriving passengers after they have exited passport control and picked up luggage, a zone that  is often unsecured in major airports around the world. Security experts consider arrivals areas to be so-called soft targets because they are less heavily policed.        

In the past, people entering such zones in Russian airports have occasionally had to pass through metal detectors, but those  checks have generally been sporadic. After the attack on Monday, the authorities immediately set up new inspections.        

On Tuesday, airport executives were so startled by Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s criticism that they took the unusual step of publicly defending themselves, saying it was the government&rsquo;s duty, not theirs, to ensure that such safeguards were put in place.        

For his part, Mr. Putin turned to the tough talk that he has relied upon to rally the public after terrorist attacks in recent years. &ldquo;I have no doubt that this crime will be solved and that retribution is inevitable,&rdquo; he  said.        

In recent years, the government has alternated between crackdowns in the North Caucasus and policies intended to address widespread poverty, corruption and other problems that officials concede sometimes contribute to the insurgency.        

When Mr. Putin was president in the early part of the last decade, he was a champion of the more muscular approach. Violence in the North Caucasus and terrorist acts  elsewhere in the country were  answered with raw force and a consolidation of control by the Kremlin.        

Mr. Medvedev has tended to swing in the other direction, speaking about focusing on what is often termed by experts in Russia as the root causes of terrorism in the region.        

Mr. Medvedev appointed a businessman, rather than  a general or security official, as his special envoy to the North Caucasus, and the government&rsquo;s tactics seemed to shift. The subway bombings last March came early enough in the experiment that the Kremlin did not feel pressured to change  course.        

The subway attack &ldquo;was at the very start of the new strategy, and the feeling was that you needed to give it more time,&rdquo; said Pavel K. Baev, a senior researcher at the Peace Research Institute Oslo. &ldquo;Now, I&rsquo;m not sure they have any Plan B in Moscow, because a lot of their options are exhausted.&rdquo;        

Mr. Baev said a military clampdown in the North Caucasus was not possible, in part because the police and military are already stretched thin in the rest of the country. And the soft-power approach introduced under Mr. Medvedev &mdash; which emphasizes investment and job creation &mdash; has hit a wall because of pervasive corruption, he said. With all these solutions foundering, he said, the government seems to have given up seeking new strategies.        

&ldquo;Maybe because it looks so hopeless that no one wants to think about it,&rdquo; Mr. Baev said.        

Grigory S. Shvedov, editor in chief of Caucasian Knot, a respected Internet news service, said the government had failed in part because it would not loosen the security services&rsquo; grip on the region even as it tried to nurture development and social programs.        

&ldquo;They are trying to implement two different approaches that absolutely contradict each other,&rdquo; Mr. Shvedov said. &ldquo;The bombing of Domodedovo shows the results of this contradiction.&rdquo;        

Mr. Medvedev has voiced impatience with the pace of change, particularly after last spring and summer brought a rise in attacks on both civilian and security targets in the Caucasus. In August, Mr. Medvedev upbraided his envoy, Aleksandr G. Khloponin, for failing to attract investment to the region of Dagestan, near Chechnya. Mr. Khloponin acknowledged that the situation was &ldquo;miserable.&rdquo;        

Aleksei V. Malashenko, an expert on the region, wrote that Mr. Khloponin could hardly be faulted.        

&ldquo;For all his businessman&rsquo;s qualities, he remains a Soviet man, a Marxist who seriously believes in economic determinism and who decided &mdash; he was persuaded of this by higher-ups &mdash; that the region could be brought out of crisis and saved, so to speak, without political changes,&rdquo; Mr. Malashenko wrote in Nezavisimaya Gazeta, a leading Russian newspaper.        

In an interview, Mr. Malashenko said Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s ideas had collided with those of his mentor and close ally, Mr. Putin.        

&ldquo;Putin and Medvedev can&rsquo;t approach the Caucasus independently,&rdquo; said Mr. Malashenko, of the Carnegie Moscow Center. &ldquo;The one who is stronger is in charge, and right now, Putin is stronger. And this is why everything continues.&rdquo;        

Meanwhile, he said, even the president himself and his top aides waver, unsure of what to do. In the end, there is no clear policy.        

&ldquo;Last spring, Medvedev said terrorists should be targeted with pinpoint blows,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;That was great. Three days later, he said the people who cook food for them and wash their clothes are terrorists as well. How can that be? It is one or the other.&rdquo;        
