
BAGHDAD &mdash; A suicide bomber driving a car packed with explosives attacked a police checkpoint west of Ramadi on Wednesday night, killing seven people, including five police officers, and wounding four other officers and a civilian, according to local officials.        

The attack, coming four days after Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia released a statement saying it was in the midst of a 100-attack campaign in Iraq to avenge the death of Osama bin Laden, underscored the country&rsquo;s tenuous security situation as the United States prepares to withdraw its roughly 48,000 remaining troops by the end of the year.        

The head of the police in Anbar Province, Maj. Gen. Hadi Rizaich, said that security officials had some warning that there was going to be a car bomb attack in Ramadi on Wednesday night, but had been unable to find the car.        

&ldquo;There are sleeper cells of Al Qaeda in Anbar who exploit the weaknesses in our security to carry out attacks,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We have information that Al Qaeda is getting more support now from neighboring countries to destabilize the situation in our province.&rdquo;        

Anbar borders Syria, and Iraqi officials are extremely concerned that the unrest in Syria will lead to more suicide bombers&rsquo; taking advantage of the situation there to stage attacks across the border. In Wednesday&rsquo;s attack, a sedan exploded as it passed through the checkpoint in the village of Albu Bali, west of Ramadi, around 9:15 p.m.        

Ahmed Abdul Karim, 35, a police officer, said he was standing about 30 feet from the checkpoint when the car exploded. &ldquo;I was protected by blast walls,&rdquo; he said, adding, &ldquo;We rushed to the checkpoint to help our friends, but when we got there they were burned so badly.&rdquo; The bomber&rsquo;s body was hurled 300 feet from the car by the blast, he said.        

In other violence in Iraq on Wednesday, a bomb in the city of Hit, in Anbar Province, killed a local official and his son. In Diyala Province, gunmen attacked a checkpoint north of Baquba, killing one person. Several minutes later, a bomb at the same checkpoint wounded four people.        
Employees of The New York Times contributed reporting from Anbar and Diyala Provinces.
