
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Buoyed by their seizure of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s fortresslike compound in Tripoli, rebels sought to strengthen their control on Wednesday, pursuing pockets of loyalist resistance and placing a nearly $2 million bounty on the Libyan leader&rsquo;s head as their fighters closed in on one of his last bastions of support, his birthplace in Surt.        

The rebels claimed breakthroughs on other fronts, saying their fighters had started battling for Sabha, another of the colonel&rsquo;s stronghold in the south, and in Zuwarah in the west, where they said they had captured a military base.        

Sporadic firefights continued in Tripoli, a sign that control of the city could not be claimed by either side. In a show of strength, the rebels flooded the city&rsquo;s thoroughfares with the mud-splattered trucks of their fighting brigades. In another sign of the power shifts under way, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s loyalists abruptly released more than 30 foreign journalists they had held captive in the Rixos Hotel here. Over the weekend, they were taken captive at gunpoint as the rebels advanced on the capital and left in the Rixos.        

&ldquo;Rixos crisis ends. All journalists are out!&rdquo; Matthew Chance, a CNN correspondent, posted on Twitter as he and the others were allowed to leave the hotel with the aid of Red Cross workers who took them away.        

Later in the day, the elation was tempered with word that four Italian journalists were abducted and their driver killed outside of Tripoli, in territory nominally under rebel control. Italian consular officials said the journalists, abducted by unknown gunmen, were being held by Qaddafi loyalists in an apartment near Bab al-Aziziya, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s captured compound and residence.        

Colonel Qaddafi was not at home when rebels stormed the fortress. He said in an address broadcast early Wednesday on a local Tripoli radio station that his retreat from the compound was a tactical maneuver. He blamed months of NATO airstrikes for bringing down his government and vowed &ldquo;martyrdom&rdquo; or victory in his battle against the alliance. Urging Libyan tribes across the land to march on the capital, he said, &ldquo;I call on all Tripoli residents, with all its young, old and armed brigades, to defend the city, to cleanse it, to put an end to the traitors and kick them out of our city.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;These gangs seek to destroy Tripoli,&rdquo; he said, referring to the rebels. &ldquo;They are evil incarnate. We should fight them.&rdquo;        

In the eastern city of Benghazi, the base of the rebel uprising, the head of the rebel Transitional National Council told a news conference on Wednesday that Libyan businessmen had contributed two million dinars, about $1.7 million, for the capture of Colonel Qaddafi dead or alive.        

&ldquo;We fear a catastrophe because of his behavior,&rdquo; the rebel leader, Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, told reporters there. The rebel leaders in Benghazi also called on loyalists in Surt, more than 200 miles east of Tripoli, to join them, and said they had directed rebel fighting units to close in on Surt from Misurata in the west and the port city of Ras Lanuf in the east.        

The rebel military units from Misurata, which have emerged as the opposition&rsquo;s most able fighters, have encountered little resistance. But there were reports on Wednesday that rebel brigades approaching from the east were stalled in Bin Jawwad, a hamlet that has tripped up the rebels during previous attempts to advance on Surt.        

Elsewhere, though, there were signs of loyalist disarray. Al Arabiya television reported that the rebels had taken control of an army base in Zuwarah, a coastal city about halfway between Tripoli and the Tunisian border. There was no immediate confirmation of the report about the base, Mazraq al-Shams, which had been heavily contested for days. But there were news reports on Tuesday night that the Tunisian authorities had closed the main border crossing with Libya because of fighting in the Zuwarah area.        

NATO warplanes were heard over the skies in Tripoli in the morning and later in the evening, striking unspecified targets in a bid to strike a fatal blow to Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s lingering loyalists. Many citizens stayed at home as rebels blasted the skies with volleys of celebratory gunfire, though more shops could be seen opening and more cars seemed to be on the road. In a sign of the changed atmosphere, hundreds of journalists on Wednesday moved into high-rise hotels that a day or two before would have been easy targets for snipers. Farther south, though, the two sides continued to fight over several neighborhoods, including Abu Salim and Bab al-Aziziya, the former Qaddafi compound that was still not completely under rebel control.        
Kareem Fahim reported from Tripoli, and Rick Gladstone from New York. Reporting was contributed by David D. Kirkpatrick from Tripoli, Alan Cowell and Steven Erlanger from Paris, Seth Mydans from Moscow, Elisabetta Povoledo from Rome, and Dan Bilefsky from the United Nations.
