
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; When rebels broke through the gates of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s compound this week, Abdul Rahman Sharif was so moved that despite the gunfire he took his daughters, ages 11, 15 and 18, with him to see it for themselves. Then after dark he returned with his wife. And the next day, as more bullets flew, he visited the compound with his 90-year-old mother.        

Looking back at the dizzying collapse of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s terrifying power as he and his mother drove home, he said, Libyans now face a more subtle challenge. &ldquo;We need to get rid of the little Muammar el-Qaddafi inside each of us,&rdquo; he said, describing a combination of anxiety, lawlessness and cynicism he attributed to four decades under Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s arbitrary authoritarianism. &ldquo;Some people hated him, some people would die for him, but even if you did not like him he affected you,&rdquo; Mr. Sharif, 56, said.        

Residents of Tripoli keep venturing out in the still-contested streets to gawk as jubilant rebels overrun the iconic backdrops of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s theatrical rule &mdash; his barracks and mansion at the Bab al-Aziziya compound, the old city square he named after his &ldquo;green&rdquo; revolution. And they reflected on the unexpected brittleness of his hold on the city. Many said that his power, like that of so many tyrants, was rooted mainly in the fear he had instilled in Libyans, until a few rebel victories kicked it away.        

&ldquo;When the rebellion started six months ago, we knew it would be bloody,&rdquo; Mr. Sharif said. &ldquo;We thought you were going to see more bloodshed here than you did, because he was a bloodthirsty man.&rdquo; And even as Bab al-Aziziya fell, many in Tripoli still felt pangs of fear. False rumors swept the city that the colonel had poisoned the water in a final act of spite. &ldquo;See what he has done?&rdquo; Mr. Sharif asked.        

Look at Libyan drivers, he said, pointing toward cars swerving by: no one followed the rules, because no expected them to be fairly enforced. &ldquo;We did not feel like it was our country,&rdquo; he said.        

In the past few days, residents said, they watched in astonishment as the police and military forces they had dreaded for so long melted away in a matter of minutes. Ali el-Ayan, an aircraft maintenance engineer who was visiting the city&rsquo;s Green Square in his neighborhood with his daughters, said that he had watched Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s troops fill the area with soldiers and weapons on Saturday night in anticipation of a rebel uprising.        

He was inside watching Al Jazeera when it reported that the rebels had reached the square. He ran out to watch as they arrived from four directions in a seemingly coordinated attack.        

&ldquo;It was a good plan,&rdquo; Mr. Ayan said. &ldquo;Within half an hour the square was clear of any Qaddafi army at all. They left their weapons and equipment and some of their uniforms and ran off, and it was a great night for Libyans.&rdquo;        

Like several other residents, Mr. Ayan said he had always felt a visceral shudder whenever he passed Bab al-Aziziya. When the walls of the compound finally broke open, he said, he thought of an iconic image from the end of the cold war, when Russians shook off their fear of the Kremlin. Just as Boris N. Yeltsin mounted a tank at the Russian Parliament, Libyans had taken their former tyrant&rsquo;s house, he said. Then he recalled President Ronald Reagan&rsquo;s words after he ordered a 1986 airstrike on the Libyan compound to punish Colonel Qaddafi for his support of terrorism abroad: &ldquo;&nbsp;&lsquo;We have done what we had to do.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The Libyan people did what needed to be done,&rdquo; Mr. Ayan said.        

A smaller re-enactment of the Qaddafi government&rsquo;s collapse played out Wednesday at the Rixos Hotel, where a handful of guards had detained about 30 foreign journalists long after the senior officials working there had fled. It was at the hotel that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s son Seif al-Islam had made a surprise appearance on Monday, vowing that the Qaddafis&rsquo; forces were poised to retake the city. Several journalists said Wednesday that the guards holding them were so cut off from other sources of information that they did not know just how wrong Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s son was.        

But on Wednesday, several journalists said, two Arabic-speaking journalists sat down with the chief guard to lay out the situation. &ldquo;Look, they all left you, all the big guys are gone,&rdquo; an Iraqi cameraman told them, journalists present said.        

The chief guard broke down in tears. Terrified of rebel reprisals, the guards surrendered their weapons to the journalists and insisted on having the Red Cross escort them out of the hotel.        

In the same way, others said that the recent defection of top officials from the Qaddafi government had pushed the uprising to a tipping point. Mr. Sharif, an employee of Libya&rsquo;s National Investment Company, said he had watched for years as others were promoted over him because he refused to join the Qaddafi political machine and its various &ldquo;revolutionary committees.&rdquo; The company&rsquo;s chief may have earned mediocre returns but he was a paragon of political fidelity.        

&ldquo;He was high up in the revolutionary committee and everything was all right, and then the next day I saw on television that he had fled,&rdquo; Mr. Sharif said.        

When his boss defected, he said, he knew the end was near. Then, after evening prayer on Saturday night, he heard young men all over his neighborhood and the city pouring out of mosques, calling out: &ldquo;God is great! God is great!&rdquo;        

He ran to his door to add his voice to the shouts. &ldquo;I am 56,&rdquo; Mr. Sharif said, &ldquo;but this revolution makes me feel like it is the &rsquo;70s, like I am young again.&rdquo;        

On Wednesday, his mother carried with her a bottle of homemade Libyan perfume to Bab al-Aziziya to sprinkle as a tribute on the revolutionaries. She said her father had died at 90 in 1972, just three years after Colonel Qaddafi had come to power. She recalled that her father had told the family: &ldquo;You will see a dark day under him. Thank God I am not going to be here to see it.&rdquo;        
