
MOSCOW &mdash; The North Korean leader, Kim Jong-il, has agreed to consider a moratorium on nuclear weapons tests and production, and said he would return to stalled six-party talks on the nation&rsquo;s nuclear program, the Russian presidential press secretary told the Russian news media on Wednesday.        

Mr. Kim made the agreement at a meeting with President Dmitri A. Medvedev in the southern Siberian city of Ulan Ude, where he is stopping on a weeklong trip in his armored train.        

&ldquo;They confirmed their willingness to go back to the negotiations without preconditions,&rdquo; the press secretary, Natalya Timakova, said after the meeting.        

&ldquo;In the course of the talks, North Korea will be ready to resolve the question of imposing a moratorium on tests and production of nuclear missile weapons,&rdquo; she was quoted as saying.        

Washington and Seoul have demanded that North Korea announce such a moratorium before, not after, six-party talks begin. Still, Mr. Kim&rsquo;s reported comment offered another sign that his government wanted to return to the nuclear disbarment talks.        

The North&rsquo;s official Korean Central News Agency reported early Thursday that Mr. Kim and Mr. Medvedev had agreed that the talks should be reconvened &ldquo;without preconditions&rdquo; and strive to achieve the &ldquo;denuclearization of the whole Korean Peninsula,&rdquo; based on the principle of &ldquo;simultaneous actions,&rdquo; according to the South Korean news agency Yonhap. There was no mention of a moratorium.        

North Korea has often said that talks should proceed without preconditions, while the United States and South Korea have demanded that the North first show its sincerity by meeting past nuclear commitments that have gone unfulfilled.        

In Washington, the State Department reacted cautiously and skeptically. &ldquo;If in fact they are now willing to refrain from nuclear test and missile launches, this would be welcome, but it would be insufficient,&rdquo; a spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, said, citing previous violations of agreements and statements. &ldquo;Their disclosure last November of uranium enrichment facilities remains a matter of serious concern to us, and these activities are a clear violation of their obligations&rdquo; under United Nations resolutions.        

Talks on the nuclear issue, involving a promise of aid in return for an end to North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear weapons program, have been stalled for more than two years. The talks include South Korea, China, Japan and the United States as well as Russia and North Korea.        

&ldquo;Russia has consistently advocated a peaceful, political and diplomatic solution to this problem, for the restoration of dialogue and cooperation between North and South Korea,&rdquo; the Kremlin said in a statement.        

Mr. Medvedev said on television that progress had also been made on a Russian proposal to build a natural gas pipeline to South Korea that would pass though North Korean territory.        

&ldquo;As regards the gas cooperation, there are results,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We have directed our ministries to set up an ad hoc commission to determine the specific parameters of bilateral cooperation on gas transit via North Korea and, therefore, to get the Republic of Korea to join this project,&rdquo; Mr. Medvedev said.        

After raising tensions with armed provocations against South Korea, Mr. Kim has recently begun reaching out again, visiting China in May and sending his diplomats to meet with South Korean and American diplomats in July to discuss a resumption of six-nation talks.        

But hostilities continue, with an exchange of artillery fire between the North and South this month, and a threat from the North to auction off South Korean-owned hotels, restaurants and other remnants of a mountain resort that used to be a symbol of inter-Korean cooperation.        

The six-party talks began in 2003 with an aim of persuading North Korea to give up its nuclear weapons program for economic and diplomatic benefits. They ended abruptly in 2008. Since then, North Korea has detonated a nuclear device, tested a long-range rocket that may one day be able to carry nuclear warheads and revealed an industrial-scale uranium enrichment plant.        

For Washington and Seoul, the revelation of the North&rsquo;s uranium enrichment program added urgency to resume the talks. It showed North Korea was pursuing a second route to build and perhaps proliferate nuclear weapons in addition to its existing plutonium-based weapons. In recent meetings with the North Korean diplomats, American and South Korean officials tried to gauge whether North Korea was serious about living up to past commitments to nuclear disarmament agreements.        

&ldquo;Pre-steps&rdquo; that Washington and Seoul want North Korea to take before the resumption of talks have included freezing all its nuclear activities and allowing United Nations nuclear inspectors to verify it. The stance reflects a deep suspicion that North Korea has sought talks simply to extract badly needed economic aid and to buy time to build a nuclear arsenal. North Korea resisted the demands, most recently in separate meetings in July with South Korea&rsquo;s chief nuclear negotiator and with the special American envoy on North Korean affairs.        
Seth Mydans reported from Moscow, and Choe Sang-hun from Seoul, South Korea.
