
SUKHUMI, Georgia &mdash; Three years after Russia defied international consensus and unilaterally declared a breakaway enclave of Georgia called Abkhazia to be a sovereign nation, the area&rsquo;s leaders continue to struggle with the price of that recognition.        

With no other major countries willing to acknowledge its legitimacy, Abkhazia relies almost completely on Moscow for its survival. Russian troops and border guards provide security, Russian companies sell food and fuel to the Abkhaz people and the Russian government pays pensions to the elderly. The Russian ruble is the only currency.        

With Russians eyeing Abkhazia&rsquo;s verdant beachfront real estate and even the Russian Orthodox Church looking to expand its influence, some Abkhaz have begun to wonder how much longer their autonomy will last.        

&ldquo;We are trying to hang on to our sovereignty, to that freedom and independence that we fought for, that we gave our lives for,&rdquo; said Sergei M. Shamba, Abkhazia&rsquo;s de facto prime minister. &ldquo;Everything now depends on how successfully we walk the sharp edge of the dagger that we have been walking our whole history. Any wrong step could lead to tragedy, and we&rsquo;ve had not a few of those in our history.&rdquo;        

Mr. Shamba is one of three candidates running in a snap presidential election on Friday, set for the anniversary of the day in August 2008 that Russia recognized the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, another rebel Georgian enclave, after Russian troops won a brief war with Georgia.        

The campaign, for the most part, has run smoothly, and the outcome will hardly matter, according to experts here in Sukhumi, Abkhazia&rsquo;s capital. The winner is most likely to face the same predicament as President Sergei V. Bagapsh, who died suddenly in May: maintaining good relations with Russia, which is crucial to Abkhazia&rsquo;s survival, while also warding off annexation.        

For some, the question is not whether any leader of this tiny territory can prevail, but whether Abkhazia has already lost.        

&ldquo;Everyone understands that the current setup is a dead end,&rdquo; said Inal Khashig, the editor in chief of a local independent newspaper. &ldquo;It is too similar to the Soviet patronage system. A little Soviet with some elements of democracy will not allow us to become more sovereign.&rdquo;        

Abkhazia, a finger of subtropical land wedged between Russia and Georgia along the Black Sea, has been caught between larger powers for most of its history. It was absorbed into the Russian Empire under the czars and became a premier vacation destination during the Soviet era, when it was an autonomous region within the Soviet Republic of Georgia.        

After the Soviet Union&rsquo;s collapse in 1991, Georgian officials declared that Abkhazia &mdash; which had an ethnically and linguistically distinct Abkhaz population as well as many Georgians and others &mdash; should remain part of the newly independent Republic of Georgia, setting off a war whose scars are still visible in the bullet-strafed buildings of Sukhumi and the vacant stares of camouflage-clad old men.        

The war ended with a Georgian retreat and the exodus of about 200,000 ethnic Georgians, whose homes and property were confiscated. It also led to a tenuous independence for Abkhazia. Moscow has nominally supported Abkhazia for years, but the Russian presence has expanded since formal recognition three years ago.        

There are now about 3,500 Russian soldiers and 1,500 border guards deployed in Abkhazia. Government-connected Russian companies have begun restoring strategic assets like roads and railroads that could become important in preparations for the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, a Russian resort town just a few miles north of the Abkhaz border.        

Many Russians would like to begin restoring the territory&rsquo;s tourist infrastructure. But Abkhazia&rsquo;s leaders have been unwilling to change a law that prevents foreigners, including Russians, from buying real estate. Many believe the measure provides a necessary bulwark against Russian incursion, even if it means hotels and restaurants remain bombed-out wrecks more than a decade and a half after the war with Georgia ended.        

The latest flashpoint in the real estate dispute concerns three vacation homes once used by the Soviet leaders Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Nikita S. Khrushchev and Stalin. Abkhazia nationalized the properties after the war with Georgia in the 1990s, but the Russian government now wants to assume ownership. Talks on the issue are at an impasse, officials said.        

Some leaders said they would prefer that Russian money be directed to more practical, though perhaps less financially lucrative areas than tourism.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;There are many spheres that need funding, above all agriculture,&rdquo; said Aleksandr Z. Ankvab, Abkhazia&rsquo;s vice president, who is now running for the top job. &ldquo;No resorts can exist without agriculture, or else we&rsquo;ll have to feed our guests with the goods of strangers. We need to invest in local manufacturing, education, infrastructure, medicine, sport, culture, science. This must be done today.&rdquo;        

Russia has allocated about $362 million toward developing Abkhaz infrastructure, though there is little visible sign of improvement. Soviet-era apartments remain speckled with bullet holes from the war in the 1990s. Electricity and water supplies in some regions are shoddy, residents said. A few construction projects are under way, though locals say many are destined to become housing for Russian soldiers and their families.        

&ldquo;For all these years, unfortunately, we have been unable to complete one large-scale project,&rdquo; Mr. Shamba said. &ldquo;We have not been able to come up with a plan for developing the economy.&rdquo;        

Russian officials accuse Abkhaz leaders of misappropriating money from Russia. In January, Russia&rsquo;s Audit Chamber announced that about $12 million allocated to infrastructure development had been misused.        

More damaging to progress, according to Russian officials, has been the obstinacy of Abkhaz leaders.        

&ldquo;Abkhazia is going from a common law marriage to a legal one,&rdquo; said Sergei A. Markov, a Russian parliamentarian and Kremlin-connected analyst. &ldquo;For 15 years they got used to a certain kind of lifestyle and thought that as soon as Russia came in all that they possessed would remain theirs and get better.&rdquo;        

For the relationship to work, he said, Abkhaz leaders must permit Russia more control, at least over the spheres in which Russians are already involved, like security and infrastructure development.        

Abkhazia&rsquo;s leaders acknowledge that they will probably always need a larger power to provide protection. And few see much hope of improved relations with Georgia, which considers Russia&rsquo;s presence in Abkhazia as an occupation of its sovereign territory and has demanded that Georgian refugees be allowed to return.        

Whatever the tensions with Russia, many Abkhaz say they are grateful for its support, which has allowed them for the first time in years to think about something other than security.        

&ldquo;With the Russian Army we definitely feel much safer,&rdquo; said Irma Logua, 40, an economist. &ldquo;The problems we had three years ago have not been solved. But before, all attention was on the border, and now we can concentrate on internal reconstruction.&rdquo;        

At a campaign event here this week for Mr. Ankvab, not one person in a two-hour question-and-answer session asked about security. Most of the concerns were about jobs and pensions &mdash; and the widespread problem, apparently, of stray cows.        
