
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Word raced through Tripoli Central Hospital as fast as the bloody gurneys rushing through the entrance on Thursday carrying wounded fighters from the front: perhaps this was Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s last stand.        

The hospital&rsquo;s doctors &mdash; soldiers of another sort in their own underground resistance to Colonel Qaddafi during the six-month revolt &mdash; knew the battle would not be easy, whether or not the colonel had been located. By virtue of their work receiving the dead and the wounded, they have developed a special perspective on the rebels&rsquo; blitz of Tripoli this week and the continuing toll of the fighting.        

Their morgue was already overflowing, with more than 115 bodies of fighters and civilians still unclaimed. Two doctors said the hospital had treated as many as 500 patients a day this week for gunshot wounds as the rebels struggled to overcome the Qaddafi loyalists who stubbornly continued to fight.        

&ldquo;I haven&rsquo;t left in six days,&rdquo; said Dr. Nabil Bay. &ldquo;Qaddafi controlled the hospital on Saturday and Sunday, and the rebels took over Monday, and every day we are overwhelmed with patients.&rdquo;        

Of the six days since the revolt reached Tripoli, the capital, Thursday may have been the bloodiest. Doctors and journalists reported evidence of fresh massacres by both sides around the city, while the battle to establish full control of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s breached compound, Bab al-Aziziya, raged on.        

In their drive to take command of Tripoli, the rebels concentrated their forces on a block-by-block battle for the streets of the Abu Salim neighborhood, a center of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s support. By late afternoon, the fighting had once again swamped Tripoli Central Hospital with wounded civilians and combatants.        

From his hiding place, Colonel Qaddafi taunted the rebels with a speech carried over loyalist radio channels urging Libyans to cleanse Tripoli of the &ldquo;rats, crusaders and unbelievers&rdquo; &mdash; his favorite terms for the rebels and their Western allies. Deprived of state television, Colonel Qaddafi has turned to the radio at least twice this week to remind the world that he has not given up.        

His government spokesman, Moussa Ibrahim, apparently also in hiding, told The Associated Press in a telephone interview that Colonel Qaddafi was still in command of his forces and was capable of withstanding any rebel onslaught for &ldquo;weeks, months and years.&rdquo;        

Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s loyalists delivered the same message by waging an intense gunfight outside the Corinthia Hotel here, where many journalists have taken up residence &mdash; and where the rebels&rsquo; governing body, the Transitional National Council, is expected to settle as well.        

Intensifying their quest to find Colonel Qaddafi and his sons, rebel leaders said their forces had attacked Sabha, a town in the south that is a stronghold of the Qaddafis&rsquo; tribe. And Britain&rsquo;s defense secretary, Liam Fox, said Thursday that NATO was trying to help, apparently deviating from NATO&rsquo;s nominal mission to protect civilians. &ldquo;I can confirm that NATO is providing intelligence and reconnaissance assets&rdquo; to the insurgents &ldquo;to help them track down Colonel Qaddafi and other remnants of the regime,&rdquo; Mr. Fox told Sky News.        

In a sign of the rebels&rsquo; growing confidence, cabinet members of the Transitional National Council appeared at a news conference in Tripoli on Thursday to announce that they were formally moving their operations from the eastern city of Benghazi to Tripoli.        

During an emotional address, the oil and finance minister, Ali Tarhouni, praised the rebel fighters, asked police officers to get back to work and called on Qaddafi loyalists to put down their arms and go home.        

&ldquo;There will not be any revenge,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The law will be between us.&rdquo;        

But that pledge may already have been violated. Reuters reported the discovery of the bullet-ridden bodies of more than 30 pro-Qaddafi fighters in a military encampment in Tripoli. At least two had been bound with plastic handcuffs, five were in a field hospital at the camp and one was still strapped to a gurney with an intravenous drip in his arm.        

Among the hundreds of bodies in the Tripoli Central Hospital morgue &mdash; some in wall drawers, but many lying on the floor barely covered &mdash; at least one was bound at the hands, although it was unclear which side he fought for or whether he had been wounded before he was bound.        
Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York.
