
DAKAR, Senegal &mdash; Armed robbers killed at least 12 people and possibly more in attacks on a bank and police station in northeastern Nigeria on Thursday, according to a government official, a local clergyman and news reports.        

The robbers took cash from the bank and rifles and ammunition from the police station before speeding off, the official said, in a bold assault on Gombi, with a population between 50,000 and 60,000, near Nigeria&rsquo;s border with Cameroon.        

Ahmad Isa Hassan, the Gombi local government chairman, said by telephone Thursday night that 19 people were killed in the attacks, though news reports quoting police sources spoke of 12 fatalities.        

&ldquo;There was terrible shootings in the town,&rdquo; Mr. Hassan said. &ldquo;You can&rsquo;t imagine. I was hearing the shootings. Everybody was hearing them.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hassan said the police station and bank were both destroyed by the attackers, who were armed with machine guns. He said at least seven were killed at the bank, including customers.        

News reports cited state police officials as saying that the attackers were members of Boko Haram, a radical Islamist group that has caused mayhem in the region. Mr. Hassan disagreed, suggesting that the attackers were robbers.        

If the attackers are confirmed to be members of Boko Haram, the robbery would represent one of the most brazen assaults yet in an almost daily campaign of attacks by the group, which seeks to establish strict Islamic law across Muslim northern Nigeria.        

Boko Haram, which means, roughly, &ldquo;Western Education is Sin&rdquo; in the local Hausa language, has resisted Nigerian army efforts to suppress it for more than two years. In the nearby regional capital of Maiduguri, it has carried out a series of bombings and political assassinations that have led to a wave of repression by the military, and left the population in fear.        

&ldquo;Between 6 and 6:30 there were gunshots, and the gunshots were just too much,&rdquo; said Amos Irmiya Temteerdiu, bishop in the Lutheran Church of Christ, who lives in Gombi. &ldquo;It was so hectic. The gunshots were right at my gate. It was so loud indeed.&rdquo;        

Mr. Temteerdiu said the army had been deployed in the town, and he could hear military vehicles driving by.        

&ldquo;Now the town is calm,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;People have been frightened, so much.&rdquo;        
