
BAGHDAD  &mdash;  Iraq&rsquo;s new government has been in office for just over one month, but already it has seen the toppling of  governments in Tunisia and Lebanon, antigovernment protests in Egypt, and a rise in violence and unrest at home. On Tuesday, as Iraqis watched televised street demonstrations from Lebanon, some here wondered how far they were from destabilizing conditions of their own.        

&ldquo;We need electricity, security and job opportunities,&rdquo; said Ghazwal Abdul Karim, who runs a laundry in the mostly Sunni Yarmouk neighborhood. &ldquo;If not, we will be like Tunisia or Lebanon.&rdquo;        

Iraqis watched Lebanon&rsquo;s fires amid a week of sectarian bloodshed here that killed more than 150 people, as well as street demonstrations over the lack of electricity. Critics of the government decried a court decision last week that placed formerly independent agencies like the central bank and the election commission under the government&rsquo;s executive branch, which they said concentrated too much power in the hands of the prime minister and his cabinet.        

The demonstrations in Lebanon came as hundreds of thousands of Iraqi and Iranian Shiites observed the Arbain holiday in Karbala, 60 miles south of Baghdad, leaving the capital empty.        

Word of the broad protests in Egypt were slow to circulate here, given that Egyptian television was not reporting them. Far more noticed was  the tumult in Lebanon, and reaction here was divided along sectarian and party lines.        

Rafia Abduljabar Noshi, a Parliament member allied to the fiery Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr, saw the ascendance of Lebanon&rsquo;s Shiite Hezbollah party as a warning shot to the region. The Sadrists, whose influence rose during last year&rsquo;s elections, have modeled themselves consciously after Hezbollah, as a populist movement that grew out of a militia.        

&ldquo;Change in the Middle East has been started with the revolution in Tunisia,&rdquo; Mr. Noshi said, &ldquo;and it won&rsquo;t end without changes of dictatorship in other Arab countries.&rdquo;        

Among Sunnis, who tend to view Iraq&rsquo;s new Shiite-led government as a puppet of Iran, many saw the Lebanese upheaval as driven by Tehran.        

&ldquo;What is happening in Lebanon will be very big,&rdquo; said Saad Abdul Razaq, who runs industrial training programs around the region. &ldquo;They are using religion to drug people, which is a disaster.&rdquo; But he said that Hezbollah&rsquo;s success would embolden Iraq&rsquo;s Sunni-backed opposition party, which he supported.        

&ldquo;In Lebanon, the prime minister is Sunni,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The Shiites withdrew, and the government collapsed. Here something similar could happen, only the other way around. Maybe we will withdraw and Maliki will collapse.&rdquo;  He was referring to Iraq&rsquo;s prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki.        

Many Shiites, though, saw Hezbollah&rsquo;s triumph as their destiny and that of the region.        

&ldquo;Hezbollah is loyal to Islam and it&rsquo;s the complement to the great Islamic republic of Iran,&rdquo; said Jafar al-Abayatchi, 36, a shop owner in the mixed Karada neighborhood of Baghdad. Referring to Hezbollah&rsquo;s leader, he said, &ldquo;We need to support Sayeed Hassan Nasrallah, to let Iraqis follow their steps to achieve a Shia empire to fight Israel, the first enemy after America.&rdquo;        

A neighbor, Husam al-Dayni, 41, was even more emphatic, saying that Lebanon&rsquo;s example would  spread to Egypt and Kuwait, and then around the region. &ldquo;We are looking for clerics to govern our countries,&rdquo; he said.        
Zaid Thaker and an Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting.
