
BREGA, Libya &mdash; The last 50 miles of the coastal highway leading to this much-contested town in eastern Libya is littered with hundreds of burned-out tanks, trucks, military cars and assorted armored vehicles, sometimes as many as 25 in a single cluster, mangled by NATO bombings and lying at improbable angles, many already rusting despite the dry desert air, others black with char.        

Rebel ground forces were not as successful, and over the past several months Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s troops repulsed them repeatedly from Brega, stubbornly guarding its strategic refinery.        

In the end, though, Brega fell without much of a fight.        

Offering a clue as to why the capital, Tripoli, may have fallen as quickly as it did, rebel fighters here said that as soon as word came that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s son Seif al-Islam had been captured in Tripoli (even though he apparently had not), the loyalist forces defending the town and its refinery simply gave up and fled.        

&ldquo;They don&rsquo;t want to fight us anymore,&rdquo; said Mohammed Abdul Aziz Saeed, a rebel from the elite Ali Hassan al-Jaber Brigade, in the forefront of the fighting. On Friday, Mr. Saeed was assigned with a half-dozen other rebels to guard the entrance to the refinery, where a liquefied petroleum gas tank has been ablaze for a week, sending thick plumes of smoke miles across the desert. It had been hit in the cross-fire as rebels advanced.        

Now many of these rebels, most of them citizen soldiers with civilian jobs awaiting their return, expressed hope that it was all but over, and that they would not have to fight their way into Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s hometown, Surt, an additional 210 miles west. &ldquo;Both of us feel the same way, now,&rdquo; said another rebel, Ali Sayeed, a university student. There was no sense of the stubborn fighting still going on in Tripoli.        

&ldquo;As soon as they get Qaddafi, it will be over,&rdquo; said Maj. Hisham Mustafa, in charge of a checkpoint on the highway outside Brega. &ldquo;Qaddafi and his sons,&rdquo; he added.        

His unit has traded in its &ldquo;Mad Max&rdquo; pickup trucks for a captured loyalist tank and a pair of brand-new, armored personnel carriers that they said were donated by Qatar, an early ally of the rebels. Many of the men had new uniforms, and ammunition of many sorts appeared plentiful. The new armored vehicles were seen throughout eastern Libya recently.        

&ldquo;After Seif was captured, it wasn&rsquo;t hard anymore,&rdquo; said Saber Mohammed, 24, a petroleum engineer on duty guarding the residential part of the town. &ldquo;There was a little shooting and they just ran away.&rdquo;        

They fled farther west toward Surt, with the new front line outside the town of Ras Lanuf, and for several days fired rockets from multiple launchers toward the rebels; four rebels were killed this week, according to doctors at a clinic here. However, the shooting has stopped, and many of the rebels talked hopefully of negotiations going on with officials in Surt to bring the fighting to an end.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s &lsquo;game over,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said Hamid Mikial, a fifth-year medical student who has been working in a frontline clinic since the fighting began in the east on March 15.        

So far the residents of Brega do not seem to share that optimism, and although they are allowed to return, virtually no one has done so. Brega remains a ghost town for the moment. Rebels at the gate search any cars leaving to control looting, but traffic is scant. They have pasted portraits of Colonel Qaddafi on the tarmac, so people have to walk or drive over them.        

On a hillside farther down the highway, another rebel unit had requisitioned a pair of Russian-made Libyan tanks, and figured out how to operate them. For the moment, however, the tanks were rigged with awnings and bedding and were being used as a campsite. The rebels had found a stray horse, which they tethered to one of the tanks.        

&ldquo;I think it will all be finished quietly,&rdquo; said Mustafa Shaad, one of the self-taught rebel tank operators.        

The tanks, still painted in loyalist colors, were a clear sign that the rebels no longer worried about NATO airstrikes, which on at least two occasions had mistakenly killed rebels. Though they remembered that, the men had nothing but praise for NATO. Many said they had seen NATO liaison officers come through, which they credited with preventing more mistakes. They either did not know or would not say what nationality they were.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re not afraid anymore,&rdquo; said Muhammad Ramadan, 30. &ldquo;There are not that many really with Qaddafi, and they don&rsquo;t have very good morale now. They don&rsquo;t have any strategy.&rdquo;        

For the moment, the rebels said their strategy was just to wait and to talk &mdash; negotiators were reportedly in touch with defenders in Surt, Major Mustafa said. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want to shed any more blood,&rdquo; he said.        
