
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Like many Libyans, Sheik Abdul Ghani Aboughreis had reason to feel bitterness toward supporters of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi as he led the first Friday Prayer service since rebels flooded into the city here.        

When the uprising broke out in Tripoli six months ago, Sheik Aboughreis helped kick it off with a fiery Friday sermon at the Mourad Agha mosque. His words sent thousands of demonstrators pouring into the streets. From the earliest days of the uprising, his mosque and neighborhood became a center of revolt and resistance, and for six months it felt the lash of a brutal crackdown that residents say left dozens dead and hundreds, including Sheik Aboughreis, in prison.        

But on Friday, five days after rebels broke through the prison gates to free him, Sheik Aboughreis watched the bands of thousands of young men racing through the streets waving Kalashnikovs from their pickup trucks, and he decided to deliver an unexpected message.        

&ldquo;The message was to forgive,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;to forgive each other, to make sure to leave it to the law and not take revenge on each other.&rdquo;        

As bodies pile up around the city, and fighting continues, it appears that not everyone is willing to heed his advice. At a graveyard near Tajura where Colonel Qaddafi had not long ago staged burials of empty coffins in order to accuse NATO of killing civilians, gravediggers cursed at the unidentified, five-day-old bodies of four men they said were Qaddafi soldiers. They were mercenaries, the gravediggers said, offering no evidence and saying they were found near the colonel&rsquo;s compound. They were given an incomplete Islamic rite, and then dumped in a single grave.        

News reports have said there is evidence of at least one group execution of Qaddafi supporters.        

&ldquo;Revenge is the big problem,&rdquo; said Said Nashi, 18, who had come to the cemetery to bury a cousin killed by a rocket-propelled grenade. &ldquo;If anyone had a problem with you before, now he may kill you.&rdquo; He compared the capital with the smaller cities the rebels had taken: &ldquo;Tripoli is not like Benghazi or Misurata, where everyone knows each other. It is a city of three million people.&rdquo;        

Neighbors leaving the Tajura mosque, though, insisted they had accepted the sheik&rsquo;s advice, even as they detailed the brutal oppression that only a brave few even dared speak of just six months before.        

Sheik Aboughreis had resented Colonel Qaddafi for years, in part because of his stranglehold on religious expression. He sent the secret police &mdash; or even armed guards &mdash; into mosques every Friday to monitor the imam&rsquo;s sermon for signs of dissent. Sometimes the government handed out sermons that imams were expected to deliver.        

By Feb. 24, Benghazi had begun flying the rebels&rsquo; tricolored flag, and nighttime rioters tore down Qaddafi billboards across the north side of Tripoli. In those early days of the uprising, when Colonel Qaddafi was still strong, Sheik Aboughreis, 56, a frail man with wire rim glasses and an unruly gray beard, saw government security men in his mosque. Still, he urged his listeners to join the revolt, to march on central Tripoli in peaceful protest.        

&ldquo;Big courage,&rdquo; the sheik&rsquo;s brother, Abdul Karim, 48, said.        

Thousands then streamed out of the mosque, and they flowed into a river of others in the adjacent neighborhood of Souk el-Juma. The enthusiasm was quickly breached. They had run into an ambush. Government forces fired live ammunition into the crowd, killing at least 20, witnesses said.        

Some in the mosque, speaking openly for the first time about the events of that week, said they saw far more fall. A few days later, a doctor who was present furtively showed to a visiting journalist six pictures taken in a Tajura emergency room. All were of patients who had died from single bullet wounds to the head, neck or chest, suggesting the work of trained snipers.        

After the marchers scattered that day, Sheik Aboughreis expected the secret police to come for him. But they did not. Instead, residents of the neighborhood said, the police rounded up any young men in the neighborhood suspected of activism, pulling them from their beds and into the streets in the middle of the night. More than 600 were taken, many residents said. And family members were told that if they protested again the captives would never return, neighbors said.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;He is a leader, and they were afraid of a revolt,&rdquo; the sheik&rsquo;s brother said. &ldquo;So only after they picked up all the active people &mdash; the young people &mdash; they came for him.&rdquo;        

That finally happened on March 30. By then the streets of Tajura were thick with the white four-door Toyota pickups of the government militiamen.        

Criminal law in Qaddafi&rsquo;s Libya was capricious, but the sheik&rsquo;s family nonetheless hired a lawyer. To their delight, a judge signed a letter ordering Sheik Aboughreis&rsquo;s release in July, and he walked out the first gate of his prison.        

But by the time he reached a second gate, he was detained again, he said, by a new group of soldiers. They blindfolded him for a ride to a new prison.        

&ldquo;They told me they were taking me away for two hours,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And instead it was 45 days.&rdquo; The Libyan authorities told his family that they did not know where he was.        

In both prisons, Sheik Aboughreis said, he could hear the screams of torture victims at all hours through the walls of his cell. &ldquo;Without any relation to anything,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Arbitrary. Whenever they felt like it they would start torturing someone.&rdquo;        

In the early hours of Sunday morning, inmates escaping an adjacent prison rescued Sheik Aboughreis and those around him as well. He shuffled through gunfire in the streets until he ran into a distant cousin who took him in. It was two days before the streets were clear enough for a son to retrieve him.        

Now, he said, he worries that other victims of the Qaddafi security forces will look to exact revenge on their tormentors. An overflowing crowd of thousands came to pray with Sheik Aboughreis again after his liberation and their own.        

&ldquo;We are smelling freedom today, and I hope all the Arab countries get the same soon,&rdquo; said Abdul Ghani Sharif, 45, said as he left.        

But he acknowledged forgiveness might not be easy. &ldquo;We have paid a high price,&rdquo; he said.        
