
BEIJING &mdash; Chinese leaders have appointed a new Communist Party leader to govern the vast and sometimes restive region of Tibet, where economic development has been rapid but tensions between indigenous people and immigrants from China&rsquo;s Han majority have been high, and where human rights have been an abiding concern.        

Like almost all party secretaries for&nbsp;the Tibet Autonomous Region, traditionally central Tibet, since the Communists invaded in 1951, the new leader, Chen Quanguo, is an ethnic Han. The one exception was an ethnic Yi leader, Wu Jinghua, in the 1980s. Mr. Chen immediately promised to continue the central government&rsquo;s policies and maintain stability, but he steered clear of any mention of the Dalai Lama, the exiled spiritual leader frequently vilified by the Chinese government.        

&ldquo;I will resolutely carry on the Central Party Committee&rsquo;s instructions and policies regarding Tibet,&rdquo; Mr. Chen said in his acceptance speech on Thursday, according to Tibet Daily, the official newspaper of the regional branch of the Communist Party. &ldquo;I will be loyal to the leadership of Communist Party of China, to the communist system, to regional ethnic autonomy policies and to the development path with Chinese and Tibetan characteristics.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;The central task is economic development; the foundation is ethnic unity; the two priorities are development and stability; the focus is to improve livelihood.&rdquo;        

Mr. Chen&rsquo;s appointment to the top Tibetan post appeared to be part of a standard shuffling of senior provincial leaders by the government&rsquo;s Central Committee ahead of the country&rsquo;s expected change in leadership in late 2012.        

Mr. Chen replaced Zhang Qingli, who had served the normal term of about five years and was reported to have moved to a new, unspecified job. In 2008, at the behest of the central government, Mr. Zhang oversaw a harsh crackdown when Tibetans began rioting after a peaceful protest in their capital, Lhasa, was suppressed. Monasteries were shut down, monks and other Tibetans were put into &ldquo;patriotic re-education&rdquo; classes and camps, and paramilitary police officers were posted throughout Lhasa. Chinese officials blamed the Dalai Lama; Mr. Zhang famously said he was &ldquo;a jackal clad in Buddhist monk&rsquo;s robes.&rdquo;        

Scholars of modern Tibet point to central government policy directives that accelerated under Mr. Zhang as having led to the rioting. One directive encourages the heavy migration of Han Chinese to the Tibetan plateau; they often take coveted jobs in shops, restaurants and other businesses during the warmer months, then go back to their lowland homes during the harsh Tibetan winters. Another policy aims to demonize the Dalai Lama and keep tight controls on Buddhist religious practice. The suppressed 2008 protest that led to the wider rioting was held by monks upset over the religious controls.        

Before his appointment, Mr. Chen had held no positions in Tibet. A native of Henan Province, in eastern China, he graduated from Zhengzhou University in the provincial capital and served most of his career in various posts around the province. Mr. Chen was vice governor of Henan during years when Li Keqiang was acting governor and governor there; Mr. Li is expected to succeed Wen Jiabao as China&rsquo;s prime minister next year. From 2009 until his appointment this week in Tibet, Mr. Chen served as acting governor and governor of Hebei Province, which surrounds Beijing. He also served as the deputy secretary of the party committees in both Henan and Hebei.        

Tensions have been especially high in some Tibetan areas of Sichuan Province. Those areas are east of the Tibet Autonomous Region and called Kham by Tibetans. Two monks in different monasteries there killed themselves through self-immolation earlier this year to protest Chinese policies. The Xinhua news agency reported Friday that the authorities planned to charge three monks with murder in the death of Phuntsog, the monk who set fire to himself on March 16 at Kirti Monastery. The report said two monks were suspected of plotting and assisting in the self-immolation, and a third monk is suspected of hiding Phuntsog after the act and preventing him from receiving medical treatment. The two-day trial of the monks is scheduled to start on Monday.        
Mia Li and Jonathan Ansfield contributed research.
