
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Infused with new energy after watching the violent televised downfall of Libya&rsquo;s longtime autocrat, thousands of Syrians poured into the streets of their own country after noon prayers on Friday and demanded the same fate for President Bashar al-Assad, residents and activists reported.        

It was yet another show of defiance in Syria against the government of Mr. Assad, who has never hesitated to use deadly force to suppress the five-month-old uprising that has threatened his grip on power. The rebellion in Libya that sent Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi fleeing from his fortified enclave in Tripoli seemed to give the Syrian protesters fresh enthusiasm.        

&ldquo;Qaddafi is gone; it is your turn, Bashar!&rdquo; demonstrators screamed, according to accounts relayed from Syria, which has banned most foreign news organizations from reporting inside the country. Others shouted, &ldquo;Bye-bye, Qaddafi. Bashar is next!&rdquo; and &ldquo;Bashar, we don&rsquo;t love you, even if you turn night into day!&rdquo;        

The Friday demonstrations, the last in the holy month of Ramadan, came as Russia and China, Syria&rsquo;s allies, tried to foil a proposal by the United States and European nations to impose Security Council sanctions on Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government for its crackdown. Russia introduced a rival resolution calling on Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government to accelerate reforms, but making no mention of the tougher sanctions sought by the United States and its European Union allies.        

Western diplomats criticized the Russian resolution as a tactical maneuver that was meaningless as a deterrent. Mark Kornblau, a spokesman for the United States Mission to the United Nations, said, &ldquo;The regime&rsquo;s violence has continued unabated, the international condemnation has grown louder and the Security Council&rsquo;s response should reflect those realities.&rdquo;        

In a sign of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s growing isolation, Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of the militant group Hezbollah, called on Syria to introduce reforms and said that the unrest there would have major implications on the region if not solved peacefully. The Iranian-backed Shiite group in Lebanon has been one of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s strongest allies.        

In previous remarks Mr. Nasrallah has always offered support for the Syrian leadership, and his group adopted the government version of events there: that it is battling foreign armed groups.        

The protests on Friday were held under the slogan &ldquo;Patience and Determination,&rdquo; and while the number of casualties paled in comparison with previous Fridays, security forces killed at least five demonstrators in eastern and central towns, where large protests were reported.        

&ldquo;The regime can kill thousands, wound thousands and arrest thousands, but they cannot kill our determination to change,&rdquo; said Abdo, a protester from Damascus who wanted to give only his first name. &ldquo;They can&rsquo;t understand that the Syrians want freedom and democracy, not promises to introduce reforms.&rdquo;        

The Local Coordination Committees, a group of activists who plan and document the uprising, said that protesters demonstrated in small numbers across towns and cities at the same time, in attempts to confuse security forces and avoid casualties.        

The United Nations has said that at least 2,200 people have been killed since the protests started five months ago.        

In Deir al-Zour, a tribal region in eastern Syria and one of the most restive locales, two people died when security forces shot at their protest, according to Maamoun Saleh, an activist there.        

Mr. Saleh said at least 5,000 armed men were deployed in the city, mainly around mosques and in major squares and intersections where protests are usually held. He said there were fewer protesters than in previous Fridays, which he attributed to tight security measures and random arrests in the previous week.        

&ldquo;But the fact that people still have the courage to go out and that the regime needs to send thousands of security men shows that the government is not in control of the city,&rdquo; Mr. Saleh said.        

Three people were also reported killed in Douma, a suburb of Damascus, when gunmen loyal to Mr. Assad shot at protesters coming out of a mosque. In al-Qadam, another suburb of Damascus, activists said men drove around shooting randomly at houses to scare people into staying indoors.        

In Mr. Nasrallah&rsquo;s speech on Friday to mark Al Quds Day, an annual Iranian-inspired event to show solidarity with Palestinians, he called on the Syrians and their friends to step up efforts to help them end the unrest peacefully to avoid regional fallout.        

&ldquo;We all support the need for big and important reforms, so Syria can be stronger,&rdquo; Mr. Nasrallah said. &ldquo;This means that all efforts should be combined to calm the situation in Syria and push it toward dialogue and peaceful solution. Anything else is dangerous for Syria, Palestine and the region.&rdquo;        

His remarks came days after the Iranian president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, a major ally of Syria and Hezbollah, urged the Syrian government and people to reach a peaceful resolution.        

Also on Friday, the United Nations said its humanitarian mission to Syria had found an &ldquo;urgent need&rdquo; to protect civilians against excessive use of force and reported widespread intimidation by the government.        

The mission was the first to visit Syria since the uprising against Mr. Assad began in March. It was allowed to visit a number of cities where protests were being held but government officials were always with the mission members, limiting their ability to assess the situation fully, said a United Nations deputy spokesman, Farhan Haq.        

&ldquo;The mission concluded that although there is no countrywide humanitarian crisis, there is an urgent need to protect civilians from the excessive use of force,&rdquo; Mr. Haq said.        
Dan Bilefsky contributed reporting from the United Nations.
