
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; As the fighting died down in Tripoli on Friday, the scope and savagery of the violence during the nearly weeklong battle for control of the capital began to come into sharper focus.        

Amnesty International said Friday that it had evidence that forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi had killed rebels who had been held in custody in two camps. In one camp, it said, guards killed five detainees held in solitary confinement, and in another they opened the gates, telling the rebels they were free to go, then tossed grenades and fired on the men as they tried to run for freedom.        

The report, based on accounts from escaped prisoners, cited no death toll, but said that of the 160 detainees attacked, only 23 were known to have escaped.        

On Thursday, there were reports that the bullet-riddled bodies of more than 30 pro-Qaddafi fighters had been found at a military encampment in central Tripoli. At least two were bound with plastic handcuffs, suggesting that they had been executed, and five of the dead were found at a field hospital.        

More bodies turned up in the streets on Friday, where occasional volleys of gunfire were heard. Near Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s abandoned citadel, Bab al-Aziziya, rebels began hauling away nine bloated bodies. The face of one was so badly decayed it appeared charred.        

Maggots crawled over the torso of another.        

&ldquo;Only a butcher could commit a massacre like this,&rdquo; said Sami Omar, a rebel.        

Six were dumped near a trash receptacle, two left under a stairwell and one thrown in a large ditch, his hands apparently cuffed.        

Rebels said Qaddafi loyalists had killed them as they celebrated his fall. But one resident said they were his fighters, slain by rebels.        

As he spoke, a rebel approached him, saying he was not authorized to speak.        

In a sign of the intensity of the fighting this week in the capital, 40 bodies, many in advanced states of decomposition, were piled up in an abandoned hospital in the Abu Salim neighborhood, until Friday the preserve of the Qaddafi forces. Most of the fighters were darker skinned than most Libyans, a sign, rebels there said, that they may have been recruited from sub-Saharan Africa. The rebels have frequently accused the Qaddafi government of using mercenaries but have not offered convincing proof.        

The halls of the hospital were a chaos of beds and unplugged machines, and its floors were painted with blood. A medical technician said that three doctors had been on duty during the fighting in recent days, and that they had been unable to cope.        

It was difficult to ascertain the fates of the dead men, who were lying on gurneys nested by maggots in a hospital room and the morgue. The relatives of one victim, Abdul Raouf Al Rashdi, a 33-year-old police officer, said he had been killed by a sniper several days earlier in the Hay Andalus neighborhood.        

Across the jittery capital, residents running short of electricity and supplies but seeming quieter than in past days began pulling back the cloak of secrecy imposed by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s mercurial rule. Scores of pickups and cars carrying rebel fighters and the curious careened into Bab al-Aziziya.        

Bombed in 1986 by the United States military, the house had become a shrine of sorts to Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s leadership. Walls were covered with graffiti, scrawled over the years by visitors and delegations from Ghana, Kenya, Russia and elsewhere.        

Days after rebels from Misurata and other Libyan towns stormed the compounds, new slogans had gone up.        

&ldquo;Libya is free,&rdquo; one read. &ldquo;Misurata is steadfast,&rdquo; said another.        

&ldquo;This is our history, &rdquo; said Rida Said, 28, a resident of Tripoli, as he walked through the house. &ldquo;Every tyrant has his end.&rdquo;        

Another find at the compound offered what might be a strange twist on history. A reporter for The Irish Times found documents there that seemed to show that the Libyan leader&rsquo;s adopted daughter Hana, who was supposedly killed at age 4 in the 1986 attack, was alive and had been working as a doctor. The paper said it found a medical school exam of hers along with a certificate from an English language course in which she received an A.        

Others have reported seeing a spacious and well-appointed office at Tripoli Central Hospital that workers there claimed was Hana Qaddafi&rsquo;s.        

On the diplomatic front, rebels said that they had begun to transfer their administration from Benghazi, the birthplace of the uprising, to the capital, Tripoli.        

The rebel leadership has said it is badly in need of money as it tries to reconstitute a police and military force, collect weapons and stave off a more bloody reckoning with the defenders of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s legacy. In Turkey, Mahmoud Jibril, the de facto rebel prime minister of a leadership still moving to Tripoli, renewed an appeal for the release of frozen assets.        

&ldquo;This needs a lot of money,&rdquo; he said Friday in Istanbul. The leadership, he added, &ldquo;needs to prove its power by delivering the needs of the Libyan people.&rdquo;        

He added, &ldquo;Otherwise, there will be a legitimacy crisis.&rdquo;        

His remarks followed a decision by the United Nations Security Council on Thursday to approve an immediate infusion of $1.5 billion in Qaddafi-government assets that the United States seized last spring.        

The fight to subdue the recalcitrant loyalist forces was expanded beyond Tripoli on Friday. NATO warplanes struck targets in Surt, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s hometown and his lone remaining outpost of support, as rebel troops moved into position for an assault, news agencies reported.        

The alliance said its planes struck a command bunker and a convoy of 29 military vehicles in Surt, where Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s tribe, the Qaddafa, remain fiercely loyal to the ousted dictator. The rebel leadership had hoped the city would surrender peacefully, but tribal leaders have rejected all entreaties, The Associated Press reported.        

In a setback for the rebel leadership, the African Union, meeting in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, refused to recognize the Transitional National Council as the legitimate government of Libya and called instead for a government that includes Qaddafi-era officials, Reuters reported.        

Over the years, Colonel Qaddafi has spread Libya&rsquo;s oil wealth liberally among numerous African nations, winning the loyalty of their leaders, who fear they will not receive the same largess under a new, more democratic government.        
David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from Tripoli, and Alan Cowell from Paris.
