
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Gunmen abducted the son of a slain former governor from the eastern city of Lahore on Friday, relatives and police officials said.        

Relatives confirmed the kidnapping of Shahbaz Ali Taseer, the son of Salman Taseer, the former governor of Punjab Province, who was assassinated in January in Islamabad by one of his security guards. The assassin, Malik Mumtaz Qadri, later said he had killed Mr. Taseer because of the governor&rsquo;s opposition to Pakistan&rsquo;s blasphemy laws.        

There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the abduction, and it was not clear whether it was related to the Taseer family&rsquo;s stand on the blasphemy laws or some other issue. The Taseers have expressed apprehension about their safety in the past and have said that they continue to receive threats from the Taliban and Islamic militants.        

&ldquo;We cannot talk to the press right now, but whatever you have heard is true,&rdquo; said Shehrbano Taseer, a sister of Shahbaz Ali Taseer, before abruptly hanging up the phone.        

Governor Taseer had been one of Pakistan&rsquo;s most vociferous opponents of the blasphemy laws. Critics claim that the laws, which call for a mandatory death sentence for anyone convicted of insulting Islam, have been misused to persecute minority groups.        

Angered by Governor Taseer&rsquo;s position, hard-line Islamists in the country had issued death threats against him.        

The abduction of Mr. Taseer was the second high-profile kidnapping in Lahore this month. On Aug. 13, an American development expert, Warren Weinstein, was abducted from his residence. Mr. Weinstein is still missing, and there has been no demand for a ransom or a claim of responsibility, police officials say.        

Shahbaz Ali Taseer was serving as a director of the First Capital Securities Corporation, an investment advisory company. On Friday, he was traveling without a security escort when a group of armed gunmen commandeered his vehicle at a busy traffic intersection, the police said.        

News of the abduction prompted immediate condemnation from government officials, friends and supporters of the Taseer family.        

&ldquo;Every effort has to be made to trace down the culprits,&rdquo; said Sherry Rehman, a lawmaker with the governing Pakistan Peoples Party.        

Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani said he had asked police officials to ensure Shahbaz Ali Taseer&rsquo;s safe return.        

Rana Sanaullah Khan, the Punjab law minister, said Mr. Taseer had been provided a security detail but had chosen to leave it behind at his residence on Friday.        
