
NEW DELHI &mdash; The impasse between the anticorruption campaigner Anna Hazare and India&rsquo;s government continued Friday as Mr. Hazare vowed to maintain his hunger strike until leaders in Parliament agreed to key elements of his proposal for an independent anticorruption agency.        

Expectations were high that Mr. Hazare, 74, might finally end his fast on Friday, the 11th day of his hunger strike. A day earlier, India&rsquo;s Parliament, prodded by Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, accepted one of Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s key demands by agreeing that his legislation should be introduced and debated.        

Instead, Friday was a day of political maneuvering and brinksmanship. In a letter to the prime minister, Mr. Hazare demanded that lawmakers quickly approve a resolution agreeing to use the current session to pass legislation creating the anticorruption agency, known as a Lokpal, and that the agency closely hew to elements of his proposed legislation.        

&ldquo;My inner conscience tells me if there is a consensus on these proposals, I will break my fast,&rdquo; he said. Even so, he said, he would continue staging a sit-in protest in New Delhi until the legislation became law.        

Mr. Hazare has lost more than 15 pounds and has rejected advice from doctors that he accept a glucose drip to prevent kidney problems. As yet, Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s health is not considered threatened, but analysts are increasingly concerned that the situation could spin out of control unless a deal is quickly reached.        

Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s demands are focused on a few main elements: he wants a Lokpal with investigative powers over the federal government and similar independent organizations to monitor corruption in each state; he wants all public officials up to and including the prime minister to come under their ambit, excepting only the judiciary; and he wants lawmakers to require that all government departments create Citizens Charters, the equivalent of publicly accessible contracts explaining what services each office provides and how long it takes to deliver them.        

It remained unclear how Indian officials would react. Lawmakers in competing parties will begin discussing Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s proposed legislation on Saturday.        

Meanwhile, Rahul Gandhi, the son of Sonia Gandhi, who leads the governing Indian National Congress Party, broke his conspicuous silence on the issue by delivering a parliamentary address in which he recommended that any new anticorruption agency become a constitutional body answerable to Parliament. Mr. Gandhi, a general secretary of his mother&rsquo;s party, also called for government financing of elections, transparency in government contracting, tax reform and tougher regulation over land acquisitions and mining.        

&ldquo;Witnessing the events of the last few days it would appear that the enactment of a single bill will usher in a corruption-free society,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I have serious doubts about this belief.&rdquo;        

Hundreds of thousands of people across India have joined peaceful marches or protest rallies to support Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s anticorruption movement. His hunger strike has brought the nation&rsquo;s political process to a standstill.        

The unusual spectacle of a private citizen trying to dictate terms on the passage of a law has prompted growing criticism that his effort, even if well intentioned, threatens to undermine democratic institutions. In his speech, Mr. Gandhi warned that any attempt to undo the checks and balances of the parliamentary system &ldquo;sets a dangerous precedent for a democracy.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Individual dictates, no matter how well intentioned, must not weaken the democratic process,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;This process is often lengthy and lumbering. But it is so in order to be inclusive and fair.&rdquo;        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
