
WASHINGTON &mdash; Pentagon officials said Tuesday that they were unsure if some of the technology in China&rsquo;s prototype stealth fighter jet had come from the wreckage of a first-generation American stealth fighter shot down over Serbia in 1999, but they expressed doubt that much could have been gleaned from the debris of a plane developed in the 1970s.        

Pentagon officials did say they believe that the Chinese picked up pieces of the plane, an F-117 Nighthawk, which had been strewn over a wide area of farmland some 30 miles west of Belgrade, in the NATO bombing campaign during the Kosovo war. &ldquo;But at this point, it&rsquo;s hard to imagine that a great deal of applicable and useful information could have been culled from the site,&rdquo; said an Air Force official, who asked for anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly about military intelligence.        

At the same time, Chinese defense officials and military analysts told the Chinese state-run newspaper, Global Times, that China had developed the new stealth fighter, called the J-20, which was unveiled and flight-tested this month, by adopting &ldquo;technological innovations.&rdquo; They said the jet was not copied from American fighter planes. The Chinese government made no official statement on the origins or capabilities of the J-20.        

The Pentagon was reacting to comments from Balkan military officials, who were quoted by The Associated Press on Sunday as saying that the Chinese had in all probability gleaned some of their technology for the J-20 from the downed F-117. &ldquo;We believe the Chinese used those materials to gain an insight into secret stealth technologies,&rdquo; Adm. Davor Domazet-Loso, Croatia&rsquo;s military chief of staff during the Kosovo war, told The A.P.        

Nighthawks, first put into service in 1983, were the world&rsquo;s first radar-evading stealth fighters, and their radar-absorbent coating theoretically should have made them difficult for the Serbians to detect. But Air Force investigators believed that Yugoslavia jury-rigged its system of radars and communications and used a Soviet-built SA-3 surface-to-air missile to shoot down the plane. It was the first one of the Nighthawks to be hit; its pilot ejected and was rescued.        

Admiral Domazet-Loso also told The A.P. that Serbian intelligence had reported that Chinese agents had crisscrossed the crash site and had bought up pieces of the Nighthawk collected as souvenirs by local farmers.        

In a development that further fueled suspicions about China, on Monday a federal judge in Hawaii sentenced a former American stealth bomber engineer, Noshir Gowadia, to 32 years in prison for selling stealth missile technology to China.        

China&rsquo;s military buildup has increasingly worried the Pentagon, although officials in both the United States and China say the Chinese are a generation or two behind the American military.        

The J-20 caused an uproar two weeks ago when the Chinese sent it on its first test flight, 15 minutes long, a few hours before Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates met in Beijing with President Hu Jintao of China. On a visit meant to smooth over rocky relations between the American and Chinese armed forces, the flight was seen as an unusually bold show of force.        

Pentagon officials would not address speculation that the J-20 looked similar to the American F-22 Raptor, the world&rsquo;s most advanced stealth fighter. Col. Dave Lapan, a Pentagon spokesman, also questioned what China&rsquo;s 15-minute flight proved. &ldquo;The fact that it flew doesn&rsquo;t have anything to do with stealth,&rdquo; he said.        
David Barboza contributed reporting from Shanghai.
