
ABUJA, Nigeria &mdash; A suicide bomber detonated a vehicle packed with explosives outside the United Nations headquarters in the Nigerian capital of Abuja on Friday, destroying several floors in a thunderous blast that left at least 18 people dead, witnesses and officials said.        

Boko Haram, a shadowy Nigerian Islamist insurgency group with possible links to Al Qaeda&rsquo;s affiliates in the region, claimed responsibility for the attack in a telephone call to the BBC&rsquo;s Hausa language broadcast service in northern Nigeria. If confirmed, it would signal a significant leap in the scope of Boko Haram&rsquo;s focus, which until now had taken aim exclusively at domestic targets as part of an ill-defined aim to establish strict Islamic law in the country&rsquo;s north.        

The Nigerian government has come under repeated attack by Boko Haram in the north and by militants in the south. Foreign oil companies and their workers have also been a common target of southern insurgents, who demand a greater share in the nation&rsquo;s oil profits. But the deadly strike on the United Nations, the first on its offices in Nigeria, was a surprising turn. Fifteen of the dead were United Nations personnel, an agency spokesman said Friday night from New York.        

&ldquo;This act provides a new dimension to threats on the domestic front,&rdquo; said Joy Ogwu, Nigeria&rsquo;s ambassador to the United Nations, who called the attack a &ldquo;transnational crime&rdquo; and urged renewed efforts to fight terrorism in her country.        

If indeed the work of Boko Haram, the attack lends substance to new concerns of officials and analysts that an inward-looking organization is increasingly adopting the methods and aims of global terrorists. The bombing, capping months of small-scale explosions and assassinations, mostly in the country&rsquo;s north, is by far the most brazen attack yet.        

&ldquo;The logic of Boko Haram has been essentially inward looking,&rdquo; said Chidi Anselm Odinkalu of the Open Society Justice Initiative, in Abuja. &ldquo;To now seek to attack the U.N. entirely departs from the narrative they have so far constructed. That&rsquo;s the most worrying thing about this. It makes Boko Haram an international threat.&rdquo;        

In recent years, United Nations offices have been the targets of lethal attacks in Iraq, Algeria and Afghanistan, and though the bombing was unprecedented for Nigeria, it did not come as a total surprise. United Nations officials said that the organization had stepped up security at all its buildings in Nigeria in the past month after receiving information that it could be a target of Boko Haram. The officials said they were now evaluating new threats and would be further strengthening security at United Nations facilities in Nigeria.        

Twenty-six United Nations agencies, including the United Nations Development Program, Unicef and the United Nations Population Fund, maintained offices in the building, which is close to the United States Embassy and the Nigerian national defense headquarters. As many as 400 people may have been inside at the time of the attack, and the death toll was likely to rise, officials said.        

Farhan Haq, a United Nations deputy spokesman, said the suicide bomber&rsquo;s car rammed through two gates surrounding the building around 11 a.m. local time. Witnesses said a huge explosion sent billows of smoke over the area and spread panic.        

Adebayo Jelil, a security guard at the building, said that he saw a big jeeplike vehicle drive through the exit gate of the building, head for the reception area and explode. He said at least three floors of the seven-story structure were heavily damaged, with walls blasted away and cables and rods protruding.        

&ldquo;The U.N. headquarters in Nigeria has been shattered,&rdquo; said a Nigerian Red Cross official who was at the scene, Adeyemo Andronicus Adebayo. &ldquo;You see littered bodies, blood,&rdquo; he said, adding, &ldquo;It was the worst devastation.&rdquo;        

By midday, casualties were being ferried to the national hospital nearby, and the area had been cordoned off by security. The hospital put out an appeal for blood on local radio, while rescue workers clambered up ladders into an enormous hole in the mangled building.        
Senan Murray reported from Abuja, and Adam Nossiter from Dakar, Senegal. Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York, Dan Bilefsky from the United Nations, and Nick Cumming-Bruce from Geneva.
