
PESHAWAR, Pakistan (AP) &mdash; Hundreds of Taliban fighters crossed Saturday from an area of eastern Afghanistan largely abandoned by American troops and killed more than two dozen soldiers and police officers in northwest Pakistan, officials in Pakistan said.        

It was the latest in a series of attacks that have raised tensions among Pakistani, Afghan and United States officials. Afghan officials said that the raids did not come from their side of the border.        

At least 200 militants crossed into Chitral District &mdash; where militant violence has been rare &mdash; on Saturday morning and attacked seven checkpoints run by Pakistan&rsquo;s Frontier Corps, the paramilitary troops in the northwest tribal areas. Two of the checkpoints were overrun, the Pakistani military said.        

There were conflicting reports about the numbers of Pakistani security forces and militants killed.        

The Pakistani military said 25 paramilitary soldiers and police officers and 20 militants were killed in the fighting. But a local police official, Nizam Khan, gave the toll as 38 soldiers and police officers and nine militants.        

Fighting continued Saturday afternoon as Pakistan sent in reinforcements to drive the militants back across the border, the military said.        

The militants chanted, &ldquo;God is great!&rdquo; and &ldquo;Long live jihad!&rdquo; as they fought, said Capt. Abdul Ghani, a member of the paramilitary forces.        

The military pinned responsibility for the attack on Pakistani Taliban fighters and their Afghan allies who have taken sanctuary in the eastern Afghan districts of Nuristan and Kunar, which are across the border from Chitral. The United States largely pulled out of Kunar about a year ago but recently had added additional troops.        

Maj. Mohammad Ayub Hassainkhail, a deputy border police commander in eastern Afghanistan, said the attack did not come from his side of the border.        

&ldquo;We have officers all along the border area, and we haven&rsquo;t seen any movement of the insurgents across the border,&rdquo; Major Hassainkhail said.        

Gen. Shams ul-Rahman Zahid, the provincial police chief in Nuristan, said Pakistani Taliban fighters had operated in the province. But he said pressure from Afghan and NATO forces forced them to go back to Pakistan.        

NATO did not immediately respond to requests for comment.        

The Pakistani military said it had given Afghan and NATO forces intelligence about large pockets of militants in Kunar and Nuristan over the last year, but that they had not taken sufficient action.        

In the absence of NATO and Afghan Army forces along the border, &ldquo;The terrorists are using these areas as safe havens and have mounted repeated attacks,&rdquo; the military said in a written statement.        

Also Saturday, gunmen killed a retired army colonel in northwestern Pakistan, and a police officer died trying to rescue him, said Umer Hayat, a police official.        

The gunmen seized Col. Shakeel Ahmad as he was on his way home from morning prayers in the garrison city of Kohat, Mr. Hayat said. The police intercepted the gunmen&rsquo;s car at a checkpoint and engaged them in a firefight in which one police officer was killed and two others were wounded. The gunmen escaped and later shot Colonel Ahmad and left his body alongside a road.        

No group has claimed responsibility, but the Pakistani Taliban have often taken aim at soldiers and police officers in the country.        
