
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; More evidence of massacres by forces loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi during his final hours in power came to light on Saturday, pointing to the killing of scores of prisoners in at least five mass executions.        

Meanwhile, the provisional government formed by rebels was struggling to restore running water, electrical power and adequate medical supplies to the two million residents of the Libyan capital, as shortages became critical. The leaders of the rebellion that ousted him have acknowledged that the legitimacy of their new government will depend on its ability to provide basic services and security while holding in check the appetite for revenge among the victims of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s repression.        

Taken together, the killings, dysfunction and shortages suggested how intensely Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s chaotic and bloody legacy continues to challenge the fledgling transitional government even though he himself is out of sight and on the run. The latest sign of the ugly end of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s rule was a group of about 50 badly charred bodies heaped and strewn around a corrugated metal warehouse his soldiers had used as a prison. Five other bodies lay outside: one draped in military fatigues, one with his feet bound in green rope, and another in a small box marked &ldquo;fragile.&rdquo; Two survivors said that soldiers in the Khamis brigade &mdash; a private militia controlled by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s son Khamis &mdash; had carried out the executions Tuesday evening, the night rebels breached the walls of the colonel&rsquo;s compound.        

Abdul Hadi Abu Shahayna, a Tripoli judge who said he was held at the facility, said the other prisoners included lawyers, other judges and engineers &mdash; opposition figures, but also regular people caught up in a post-uprising sweep. Judge Abu Shahayna said he was arrested on May 25 and held until July 10 with a group that fluctuated in size between 70 and 100 people.        

Two blocks away, the badly decomposed bodies of at least 15 other men were found rotting in a wooded gully. One of the men had his hands tied behind his back with plastic flex cuffs, and a rebel commando said seven other bodies had already been carted away.        

The advocacy group Human Rights Watch said it had documented three other mass executions as well. In the first case, at least 17 detainees&rsquo; bodies were found in a Libyan internal security building in the neighborhood of Gargur on Monday as the rebels prepared their assault on his compound nearby.        

In the second case, another 18 bodies were found decaying in a dry riverbed between the internal security building and Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s compound; witnesses and relatives told Human Rights Watch that the victims had died three to five days ago, before rebels took the area on Friday morning. Among the 18, two were found with hands bound behind them, and two others wore green medical scrubs.        

The third case was more ambiguous. Another 29 bodies were found in and around a makeshift field clinic outside Bab al-Aziziya, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s main residence compound. Researchers for Human Rights Watch said they found four on hospital beds, several others on cushions in military tents, one with an apparent execution-style gunshot to the head, and another with wrists tied behind his back. A volunteer removing the bodies said at least three others were bound as well. But others were in uniform and wore Qaddafi belt buckles, or green ribbons on their wrists.        

The rebels who unseated Colonel Qaddafi were still fighting his loyalists Saturday in areas around the airport road south of the city, and rebel leaders gave unconfirmed reports of still other massacres.        

The leadership of the transitional government, meanwhile, was increasingly focused on meeting the most basic needs of Tripoli&rsquo;s residents. Government officials acknowledged that most of the city lacked running water or electrical power for a second day as temperatures hovered around 90 degrees. Hospitals, overcrowded with patients wounded in the fighting, were running short on crucial medicine. Gas shortages have driven the price of filling a tank as high as $150. And many residents said they were increasingly worried about how the provisional government might regain control of the weapons stockpile that was looted from Qaddafi armories.        
Robert F. Worth contributed reporting.
