
Nigeria&rsquo;s president visited the site of the United Nations building hit by a deadly suicide bombing in the capital, Abuja, pledging Saturday to bring to justice an Islamist group called Boko Haram that has claimed responsibility for the attack, which killed at least 18 people.        

&ldquo;Boko Haram is a local group linked up with terrorist activities,&rdquo; President Goodluck Jonathan told journalists gathered at the charred shell of the building, The Associated Press reported. &ldquo;As a government, we are working on this, and we will bring it under control.&rdquo;        

Dozens of people wounded in Friday&rsquo;s attack remained hospitalized, some with serious injuries, which led some local officials to say that the death toll was almost certain to rise.        

Martin Dawes, an official at Unicef, said a large number of the victims worked for the World Health Organization, which was holding a staff meeting above the area where a suicide bomber detonated a vehicle packed with explosives. Mr. Dawes said janitors and other cleaning people were among the victims.        

&ldquo;This is an attack on a working community,&rdquo; he said.        

Armed police officers patrolled the streets of Abuja, setting up roadblocks and checking cars, according to witnesses, as the government sharply stepped up security in the capital. Abuja sits midway between the largely Christian and animist south and the predominantly Muslim north.        

The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, sent his deputy, Asha-Rose Migiro, to Abuja. The United Nations building in Abuja, which is near the American Embassy, housed more than two dozen United Nations agencies.        

The investigation into the attack immediately centered on Boko Haram, a shadowy Islamic extremist group with possible links to Al Qaeda&rsquo;s affiliates in the region. The group claimed responsibility for the attack in a call to the BBC&rsquo;s Hausa radio service, but its involvement has not been confirmed.        

The group, which emerged in the far northeastern corner of Nigeria several years ago, had been all but extinct after a bloody assault by the Nigerian military in 2009 decimated its leadership. But it has re-emerged in recent months, attacking the Nigerian government with improvised explosive devices similar to those used by Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, a diffuse North African militant movement inspired by Al Qaeda.        

Nigeria also faces an armed insurgency in the oil-rich Niger Delta region and is riven with ethnic and religious tension. Mr. Jonathan was elected this year to a full term as president after taking over the helm from Umaru Yar&rsquo;Adua, who was elected in 2007 but died in office.        
Adam Nossiter contributed reporting from Lagos, Nigeria.
