
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; It was perhaps only fitting that Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi would be as unpredictable on the lam as he was in power for 42 eccentric years.        

In Green Square, now renamed Martyrs&rsquo; Square, youths cleaning the asphalt predicted he was under their feet. In Bab al-Aziziya, once Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s bastion of power here, residents carting away his possessions suggested neighboring Algeria, his hometown of Surt or some faraway locale in the desert, an environment in which Colonel Qaddafi long claimed to feel most at home. Fighters firing volley after celebratory volley just shrugged.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s the biggest question &mdash; where is Qaddafi &mdash; and nobody knows,&rdquo; said Suleiman Abu Milyana, a fighter from the Nafusah Mountains in the west. &ldquo;He has a particular mind and many personalities. If he had one, you could guess, but he has three or four, so no one can know.&rdquo;        

As his capital fell last week, Colonel Qaddafi and his family evaporated (though two of his sons may, or may not, have been briefly held). Even the adopted daughter he claimed was killed in an American air strike in 1986 &mdash; wrongly, it now seems &mdash; disappeared from the city of two million, leaving behind her empty office at a Tripoli hospital. Since then, he has released a few brief audio messages, with vintage insults four decades in the making. In one, he called on countrymen to cleanse his capital of rats, traitors and infidels. &ldquo;Let the masses crawl from every place toward Tripoli,&rdquo; he declared in the other.        

&ldquo;Forward! Forward! Forward!&rdquo; he cried.        

On Sunday, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s loyalists even offered to negotiate, a proposal that Mahmoud Shammam, the information minister in the transitional government, dismissed as &ldquo;a daydream.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We are going to arrest them very soon,&rdquo; he said, though that has become the refrain of bad predictions the past week as the rebels consolidate their control here.        

&ldquo;We really don&rsquo;t know where he is right now,&rdquo; acknowledged one senior American counterterrorism official, speaking on the condition of anonymity in Washington.        

British and French special operations troops, aided by American reconnaissance imagery and intercepts, as well as operatives from the Central Intelligence Agency, have helped rebels search for Colonel Qaddafi throughout the capital, American officials say.        

&ldquo;We have no reason to believe Qaddafi has left Tripoli,&rdquo; one American military officer said, noting that the Libyan leader likely had a series of tunnels and safe houses, supported by a network of trusted aides, that he could use to evade his pursuers. But other American officials said he could have slipped out of the capital to towns in the east, and the speculation &mdash; in Tripoli and elsewhere &mdash; is that he somehow made his way to Algeria, the only neighboring country that has yet to recognize or support the rebel leadership.        

In reality, the rebel leadership seems more overwhelmed with the task at hand, bringing back running water, electricity and medical supplies to the capital, as well as doing something about the hundreds of fighters roaming streets with the prestige that a brand-new assault rifle brings. While they acknowledge his capture might end resistance in places like Surt, on the coast, and Sabha, to the south, they say they have already accomplished the greatest challenge: ending the reign of the Arab world&rsquo;s longest-ruling leader. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t care about him, he&rsquo;s gone,&rdquo; said Mazigh Buzakhar, a 29-year-old activist. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s been gone since the 17th of February,&rdquo; he said, citing the date the revolt began. &ldquo;He lost his legitimacy and he has nothing left. He means nothing to Libya or Libyans.&rdquo;        

But in less guarded moments, some acknowledge the shadow Colonel Qaddafi can still cast in a country where two-thirds of Libyans have known no other leader.        
Rod Nordland contributed reporting from Benghazi, Libya, and Mark Mazzetti from Washington.
