
ABUJA, Nigeria &mdash; Investigators searched the rubble of the shattered United Nations headquarters building here in the Nigerian capital on Sunday as the number of deaths climbed to at least 21 and questions lingered about who bore responsibility for Friday&rsquo;s suicide car bombing, even as men who said they were representatives of a radical Islamist sect claimed it.        

Twisted metal rods hung down amid the debris in the darkened ground floor, piles of glass shards lay about the grounds and parking lot, and virtually every window in the front of the sprawling four-story building had been blasted out. Evidence of the suicide vehicle&rsquo;s deadly full-speed surge &mdash; a twisted metal exit gate &mdash; lay on its side on the grass in front of the building. An unarmed United Nations guard was run over and killed while trying to stop it.        

The building lies at the end of a long driveway, so the bomb-carrying vehicle was able to accelerate fully before it crashed through two barriers.        

The bomb was perhaps no bigger than 100 pounds, according to the United Nations&rsquo; security chief, but it was still big enough to have wounded and killed scores, most of them Nigerian employees of the agency. F.B.I. agents arrived Saturday to help with the investigation at the building, which some United Nations officials said had been damaged beyond repair.        

&ldquo;I heard the bang, and I woke up in debris and a pool of blood,&rdquo; Aniekan Etim Usanga murmured from his hospital bed here, his head swathed in bandages. Mr. Usanga, a World Health Organization employee, had been in a meeting on the second floor of the building, just above where the explosives-laden vehicle crashed into the reception area.        

&ldquo;Suddenly, there was a noise,&rdquo; Ludovic Mabiala, another W.H.O. staff member, recalled from his hospital bed, his eyes half shut. &ldquo;I saw some colleagues collapsing,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I walked toward them to assist them. That&rsquo;s the last thing I remember.&rdquo;        

Many of the wounded &mdash; about 26 &mdash; were still being treated Sunday in the intensive care unit of the National Hospital here, where they were visited by Asha-Rose Migiro, the United Nations deputy secretary general. About 73 people were wounded in all.        

&ldquo;The men and women who work in this U.N. house are here only to help,&rdquo; Ms. Migiro said in a statement. &ldquo;Targeting such people is outrageous, and morally reprehensible.&rdquo; She said she had spoken to a cleaning woman wounded in the blast, now hospitalized, who was anxious to return to work to support her family.        

Victims spoke Sunday of routine tasks on a calm Friday morning that were interrupted suddenly in a shower of blood and debris. &ldquo;I was bringing a proposal,&rdquo; Alex Isahrohien said at the hospital. &ldquo;I saw the vehicle run into the reception. I heard the blast. I was covered in blood.&rdquo;        

Around Abuja, a made-to-order, modernistic new capital at the fault-line center of Nigeria dividing the Christian south from the Muslim north, security appeared to have been sharply tightened, with immense traffic jams in front of checkpoints on the roads leading into the city.        

Nigerian news media and officials cautiously acknowledged this weekend that the bombing had opened a new and far more dangerous dimension in the country&rsquo;s fitful struggle with terrorists, but much about it remained a mystery, just like the Islamic sect that the country is fighting in the north. Motive, means &mdash; what type of explosive &mdash; and even the perpetrators remained unclear on Sunday.        

Men who said they represented Boko Haram, an Islamic sect with possible links to Al Qaeda&rsquo;s affiliates in the region that has carried out months of bombings and assassinations, have been telling Nigerian reporters by telephone since Friday that the sect was responsible for the blast. They have made similar claims in the past.        

&ldquo;Through the wisdom of Allah, we have launched the attack with absolute precision,&rdquo; a man who identified himself as Abu Darda told a reporter in Kano on Friday. &ldquo;We have said it several times that the U.N. is one of our prime targets.&rdquo; Another man claiming to be a spokesman for Boko Haram, Mallam Abu Kaka, in a telephone conference call on Saturday with reporters in Maiduguri, blamed the United States. &ldquo;The U.S. government has been collaborating with the Nigerian government to clamp down on our members nationwide,&rdquo; he said. Both men warned that more attacks were imminent.        

Still, a Web site that the group has used in the past had made no claims about the blast as of Sunday. But Boko Haram&rsquo;s terror campaign in the north has seen a steady increase in sophistication &mdash; the use of remotely detonated bombs, in particular, has led analysts to suspect a Qaeda connection &mdash; and the suicide blast on Friday could be seen as one more step in the progression.        
Aminu Abubakar contributed reporting from Kano, Nigeria, and Yahaya Ibrahim from Maiduguri, Nigeria.
