
NEW DELHI &mdash; For the nearly two weeks that Anna Hazare staged his hunger strike, the question hanging over India had been, &ldquo;When would it end?&rdquo; After Mr. Hazare triumphantly broke his fast on Sunday, a different question arose: &ldquo;What now?&rdquo;        

It applies not just to the fate of the remarkable popular anticorruption protest movement that coalesced around Mr. Hazare but also to the political status quo in India. The Hazare movement exposed a populist rage toward India&rsquo;s political class and a lack of public confidence in the efficacy of India&rsquo;s democratic institutions, if not a lack of confidence in Indian democracy.        

Mr. Hazare, 74, a longtime social activist who lost more than 15 pounds during a 13-day fast, is now an exalted figure in much of India. When he lifted a cup of coconut water and honey to his lips on Sunday morning, aided by two young girls, the moment was broadcast live across the nation. Thousands of supporters cheered at Ramlila Maidan, the public ground in New Delhi that has served as his fasting site.        

He gulped the juice for a moment, and no doubt it tasted sweet. He and his advisers, known as Team Anna, had triumphed in a standoff against India&rsquo;s political establishment after Parliament on Saturday had capitulated to his key demand for creating an independent agency to fight official corruption, known as the Lokpal.        

&ldquo;This is a moment of glory for our country,&rdquo; Mr. Hazare told supporters on Sunday morning, praising them for remaining peaceful throughout nearly two weeks of rallies, marches and demonstrations. &ldquo;This movement has created a faith that the country can be rid of corruption and we can go ahead with implementing laws and the Constitution.&rdquo;        

India&rsquo;s political leaders emerged from the past two weeks far less exalted, especially the governing Indian National Congress, which seemed outmaneuvered and uncertain throughout the crisis. For months, leaders of the Congress Party had failed to effectively tackle different corruption scandals, creating an impression that the party lacked the will or the interest to address the issue.        

When Mr. Hazare staged his hunger strike, the public outpouring of support seemed to throw Congress Party leaders off balance, and they never quite recovered. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh made a dramatic appeal in Parliament for Mr. Hazare to end his strike &mdash; yet was rebuffed. Rahul Gandhi, the Congress Party&rsquo;s presumed prime minister-in-waiting, made a rare parliamentary speech in which he rejected the notion that a Lokpal was a cure-all for corruption. Two days later, his party folded to Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s demands.        

For Mr. Gandhi, the Hazare crisis interrupted what was widely assumed to be his own coming-out moment as the new leader of the Congress Party. His mother, Sonia Gandhi, the party&rsquo;s president, has been recuperating in the United States from surgery. Mr. Gandhi left her bedside in the United States to return to celebrate India&rsquo;s Aug. 15 Independence Day, and presumably to begin taking a more public posture in Congress Party affairs.        

Instead, Mr. Hazare upended the political landscape, and Mr. Gandhi disappeared for days before his speech in Parliament.        

&ldquo;This could have been an opportunity for him to assert his leadership,&rdquo; said Pratap Bhanu Mehta, president of the Center for Policy Research, a group in New Delhi. &ldquo;Instead, it does raise questions about how much leadership he has shown.&rdquo;        

Yet the Congress Party can probably be grateful that the public seems disgusted with the political establishment as a whole. Leaders of the main opposition party, the Bharatiya Janata Party, or the B.J.P., provided some notable oratory during parliamentary debates but hesitated until the end on whether and how to embrace Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s movement.        

In a media-saturated political culture, Mr. Hazare presented an irresistible figure: a simple man in a Gandhian cap whose hunger strike unexpectedly tapped into widespread public disenchantment over corruption, large and small. He drew support from common people but also from middle-class professionals and college students, the demographic groups often dismissed as politically apathetic in India. College students marched through New Delhi or visited Ramlila Maidan, posing for photographs while waving Indian flags.        

&ldquo;This movement has convinced the youth of this country that they are active agents of change,&rdquo; said Varun Gandhi, a B.J.P. lawmaker in Parliament, during a speech on Saturday. He added: &ldquo;A churning is taking place. We could say it is a silent revolution, except it is not so silent anymore.&rdquo;        

But the Hazare movement also disquieted others. Muslims and lower-caste Hindus felt excluded and raised concerns about possible ties between the Hazare movement and right-wing Hindu groups.        

Many intellectuals accused Mr. Hazare and his advisers of trying to hijack India&rsquo;s parliamentary processes by insisting that his hunger strike would end only if lawmakers agreed to approve his bill. Indeed, the split-screen coverage on Indian news channels neatly framed the competing seats of power: Live shots from the debate in Parliament, the nation&rsquo;s elected seat of power, were contrasted with images from Ramlila Maidan, where Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s advisers claimed title to the popular will.        

By Sunday, with victory in hand, Mr. Hazare and his advisers had toned down their attacks, offering praise to the prime minister and Parliament.        

Mr. Hazare was taken to a local hospital for two or three days of observation. But he has pledged to remain vigilant until Parliament gives final passage to the Lokpal legislation during the current session.        

Political analysts say it is unclear whether the crowds who rallied for Mr. Hazare can be marshaled into a sustained political movement or would prove evanescent.        

On Sunday, though, Mr. Hazare had a message for them: More is needed.        

&ldquo;We have to continue to carry the torch of this struggle for change,&rdquo; he said.        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
