
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; After trying for months to engage with Syria in an effort to ease the violence there, Turkey&rsquo;s president declared Sunday that he had &ldquo;lost confidence&rdquo; in the government in Damascus, and he stopped just short of calling on President Bashar al-Assad to step down.        

&ldquo;Clearly we have reached a point where anything would be too little too late,&rdquo; the Turkish president, Abdullah Gul, told his country&rsquo;s Anatolia news agency, expressing frustration that Mr. Assad&rsquo;s violent crackdown on protesters has continued past the 15-day window in which Turkey had said it expected a change.        

&ldquo;Today in the world there is no place for authoritarian administrations, one-party rule, closed regimes,&rdquo; Mr. Gul said, adding that such governments could be &ldquo;replaced by force&rdquo; if their leaders did not make changes.        

&ldquo;Everyone should know that we are with the Syrian people,&rdquo; he said.        

The statements were particularly harsh coming from Turkey, which has invested enormous diplomatic efforts in Syria in recent years and has struggled to mediate the current crisis. Mr. Gul&rsquo;s remarks also sharply increased pressure on Mr. Assad on a day when his Interior Ministry urged the residents of Damascus to stay home &ldquo;for their own safety&rdquo; and not to respond to online calls for protests in the capital.        

Hours earlier, the Arab League said it would send its secretary general, Nabil el-Araby, to Damascus to seek a resolution to the widespread protests and violent crackdown, which the United Nations has said has killed 2,200 people.        

The Arab League called on Syria to &ldquo;end the spilling of blood and follow the way of reason before it is too late.&rdquo; The statement was issued after the Arab foreign ministers met through Sunday night into Monday morning in Cairo.        

The league did not detail its proposals, but Al Jazeera reported that they would include holding presidential elections, pulling back the army from the cities, releasing political prisoners and those arrested during the protests, and forming a national unity government in which opposition leaders would play a role.        

The mounting tone of alarm from Turkey and the Arab world reflects their view that Syria&rsquo;s stability is essential to the region, and it underlines their desire for a peaceful transfer of power there.        

Regional and international interests are tangled in Syria, and the government&rsquo;s sudden downfall could lead to unpredictable results, especially with the many Arab governments in flux after eight months of uprisings. Syria shares a long desert border with Iraq, where an insurgency is in its ninth year, and it remains officially at war with Israel. Damascus is also a crucial Iranian ally and a divisive force in neighboring Lebanon.        

Syria&rsquo;s neighbors also worry that sectarian and ethnic power struggles could have a ripple effect if Mr. Assad falls. Syria&rsquo;s Sunni majority is ruled by the minority Alawites, an offshoot of Shiite Islam. And like Turkey, Syria has a discontented Kurdish minority.        

Even Iran, Syria&rsquo;s staunchest ally, has softened its support in recent days, calling on the government to be more &ldquo;patient&rdquo; with its people and to respect their &ldquo;legitimate&rdquo; demands, although it did not back down from its remarks that blamed foreign interference for the unrest.        

Protesters in the southern city of Dara&rsquo;a tried Sunday to capitalize on the growing international pressure on Damascus, challenging Turkey to stand up for them by raising banners that referred to the Turkish prime minister&rsquo;s call on Aug. 10 for Syria to enact reforms within 15 days.        

The banners, according to a witness, Anwar Farres, proclaimed, &ldquo;The 15 days are over.&rdquo;        

Some Syrian activists expressed disappointment that the Arab League did not criticize Mr. Assad more harshly, like Turkey did, or call for his ouster, as the United States and some European countries have done.        

&ldquo;This league is speaking a different language from the street,&rdquo; Ayad Sharbaji, the editor of Shabalak magazine, which is often banned by the authorities, said in an interview. In Dara&rsquo;a, a funeral for a 14-year-old boy, who died from injuries in clashes on Friday, turned into a large protest on Sunday, and two people were killed as tanks stormed the city of Idlib, according to the Local Coordinating Committees, a protest group. Another person was killed by a sniper in the suburbs of Damascus, and a large protest was reported there, the London-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said Sunday.        

Mr. Farres in Dara&rsquo;a said that an unusually large number of military personnel stormed fields and houses looking for protesters. The troops also barricaded the city to prevent people from traveling to Damascus, which has remained relatively quiet and where large protests would pose a serious challenge to the Assad government.        

&ldquo;The more the pressure increases on Bashar, the more it increases on people,&rdquo; Mr. Farres said.        

The emotional tenor of the statement from Mr. Gul, the Turkish president, appeared to indicate his government&rsquo;s frustration. The Turkish foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, has visited Syria 60 times in the past eight years and has urged Mr. Assad to listen to the protesters. In May, Mr. Davutoglu called for drastic changes, on the order of &ldquo;shock therapy,&rdquo; in Syria.        

Mr. Assad has lifted emergency laws and endorsed new measures that would allow political parties to operate alongside his Baath Party. On Sunday, he approved a new law that would allow citizens to open news media outlets, ending the government monopoly, though not its censorship.        

Mr. Sharbaji, the magazine editor, said the new media law was &ldquo;not worth the paper it&rsquo;s written on.&rdquo; He said no law protecting the news media would be enforced while security forces dominated life in Syria.        

Turkey, too, apparently considered those steps as inadequate.        

&ldquo;We are really very sad,&rdquo; Mr. Gul said. &ldquo;Incidents are said to be &lsquo;finished,&rsquo; and then another 17 people are dead. How many will it be today? We have lost our confidence.&rdquo;        

Syrian officials reacted with defiance to the Arab League statement and declined to say if they would receive the Arab envoy, two Lebanese news channels reported. The Arab League did not say when the visit was planned.        

Khaled Aboud, a member of Syria&rsquo;s Parliament, said in an interview that the Turks were simply serving the United States&rsquo; interests and that Turkey&rsquo;s prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, was afraid to stand up to his country&rsquo;s American-backed military.        

Mr. Aboud also played down the significance of Syria&rsquo;s relationship with Turkish relationship. &ldquo;Our relationship with Turkey is new,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;not strategic like with Iran.&rdquo;        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.
