
BAGHDAD &mdash; The men sat around a small plastic table at an outdoor cafe here on Friday evening, playing chess, smoking cigarettes and reminiscing about when Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s regime fell and they felt free for the first time in their lives.        

But the conversation quickly turned to darker memories of how freedom spilled into chaos, bloodletting and, ultimately, anarchy. The memories were stirred up last week by images on television of another people, the Libyans, heading down the same road and, perhaps, heading toward the same darkness Iraqis have lived under for nearly a decade.        

&ldquo;They have to learn from us,&rdquo; said Abdul Khaliq, 42, a mechanic from Baghdad, after winning several games of chess.        

The men said they had learned the hard way what they never understood living under decades of repression: that democracy is not just the absence of oppression, but that it also involves challenging concepts of tolerance, compromise and civic responsibility yet to take root in Iraq, or in Libya.        

What emerged in Iraq after the fall of Mr. Hussein&rsquo;s government was a society of everyone for themselves, individually and in small groups, grabbing for what they could get &mdash; literally, through looting, and eventually through the political process. This has made many Iraqis weary of the chaos of Iraqi-style democracy. Increasingly, they want a strong hand &mdash; elected by the people &mdash; to wield power.        

From the cafe here, where other men were playing dominoes and backgammon, smoking hookahs and drinking tea, these veterans of national turmoil provided armchair advice for the Libyans. Their insights, not exactly brimming with appreciation for democracy, were illustrative of the problems that still plague Iraq and, they suspect, will await Libya if its people do not act quickly.        

Among their advice: Do not trust expatriates who rush back to stake a claim in the new government. Avoid a parliamentary system. And do not ostracize members of the former regime, as happened in Iraq under the so-called de-Baathification policy.        

&ldquo;People came from the outside to run Iraq, and they didn&rsquo;t understand the suffering we had lived through,&rdquo; said Firas Abdul Hadi, 28, an engineer in the office of the mayor of Baghdad, referring to how Iraqis who fled the country under Mr. Hussein&rsquo;s rule tried to claim power when they returned.        

&ldquo;They came back and claimed to be patriotic,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The Libyans should vote for people who suffered like them. People who were abroad didn&rsquo;t feel what they did.&rdquo;        

The new Libyan government, the men said, should be run by a president, not a prime minister, and lawmakers should be far removed from the day-to-day running of the government.        

&ldquo;The parliamentary system in Iraq has failed,&rdquo; said Thaar Abdul Kadhum, 34, a contractor. &ldquo;They should have a president who can make all the decisions, and not have all these blocs like we have now.&rdquo;        

The character of the politicians matters, too, they said. If the leaders do not have strong enough personalities, the men said, corruption will be rife, as it is in Iraq, where bribes are commonplace.        

&ldquo;People with weak personalities are seduced by the power, and they use the power to steal money from the people,&rdquo; Ahmed Ali, 46, a shop owner, said shortly after losing a game of chess.        

Perhaps most important, the men said, the Libyans must not repeat the mistake the Americans and Iraqis made of excluding from public life people who had ties to the previous system.        

In Iraq, many members of Mr. Hussein&rsquo;s Baath Party were thrown out of the government, and the entire Iraqi military was disbanded. Ostracizing so many Iraqis helped to fuel the insurgency that pushed the country into a sectarian conflict, in which tens of thousands of Iraqis died. It also robbed the country of the service of a whole class of middle managers, including educators and engineers.        

&ldquo;You have to keep them in the government in order to avoid the struggle we had,&rdquo; said Mr. Hadi, the engineer. &ldquo;Because of this, sometimes the Sunnis didn&rsquo;t participate.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ali, the shop owner, had a simple answer for creating a stable society: real estate. &ldquo;All the people of a country want a piece of land,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They will only accept the government if you give them land. How could I love my government if they don&rsquo;t give me a piece of its land?&rdquo;        

The men said that Libyans should be wary of freedom of speech. In Iraq, they said, they are now free to express themselves, which they could not do under Saddam Hussein. But this right is almost useless, they said, because the government is not responsive to the public.        

&ldquo;Nobody listens to the people,&rdquo; Mr. Hadi said.        

Eight years after the United States-led invasion, there are still bombings and assassinations in Iraq almost every day, and unemployment is high. It is far from the country that the Bush administration had hoped for after Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s government fell.        

&ldquo;We believed Basra would just turn into Dubai,&rdquo; said Mr. Kadhum, the contractor, referring to the port city in the south where Iraq&rsquo;s oil exports are loaded onto tankers.        

Basra is indeed one of the safer and more prosperous parts of the country, but it is far from becoming another Dubai, the modern emirate. On Thursday night, two explosions, including one detonated by a suicide bomber, killed four people and wounded 35 just outside the Iraqi city.        
Omar al-Jawoshy contributed reporting.
