
LONDON &mdash; Television footage of the only man convicted in the Lockerbie bombing lying in bed, purportedly comatose with advanced prostate cancer at his Tripoli home, has provided a focal point for a question asked with new urgency in places far from Libya: With Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s government in ruins, what reckoning is likely for the terrorist bombings that were once a signature of the former Libyan leader&rsquo;s war with the Western world?        

The issues range far beyond the bombing in 1988 that killed 259 people aboard Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, as well as 11 people on the ground, though many questions remain about who, including Colonel Qaddafi himself, may have ordered it.        

Two-thirds of the Lockerbie victims were Americans, and their families have petitioned for years for an accounting, including prosecutions, for those in the Libyan chain of command who knew of the plans for the Pan Am attack, of which Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi was convicted in a Scottish court.        

There are also Americans and Germans, victims or relatives of victims in a 1986 Berlin nightclub bombing, who have pressed for answers about that attack, and for compensation from Libya. Irish victims and their families have petitioned for an accounting for Libya&rsquo;s shipment of arms and explosives to the Irish Republican Army used in some of its bombings &mdash; atrocities,&nbsp;like the Lockerbie bombing, for which the Qaddafi government paid billions in compensation, without&nbsp;accepting responsibility.        

In Britain, the government wants help in identifying, and extraditing, the Libyan diplomat who used an AK-47 rifle in 1984 to shoot from the Libyan Embassy and kill a 25-year-old police officer, Yvonne Fletcher, as she monitored anti-Qaddafi protests outside. In Lebanon, powerful members of the Shiite community want Libya to account for the disappearance in Tripoli in 1978 of a prominent Shiite religious leader, Moussa al-Sadr, who visited Libya at Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s invitation.        

Two years after Mr. Megrahi was released amid acrimony from a Scottish prison and flown to Tripoli aboard Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s personal aircraft, the prospects of any further punishment for him appear slim &mdash; and not only because of his medical condition. Although questions remained about the Megrahi family&rsquo;s claims that he was &ldquo;close to death,&rdquo; other factors seemed stacked against any further accounting, at least outside Libya.        

After he took office last year, Britain&rsquo;s Conservative prime minister, David Cameron, apologized at the White House for the previous government&rsquo;s role in the release of Mr. Megrahi, which he described as &ldquo;completely wrong.&rdquo; But on Monday, a junior minister in the Foreign Office, Andrew Mitchell, said that with Mr. Megrahi&rsquo;s death apparently near, the issue was &ldquo;academic.&rdquo; In a separate news conference, William Hague, the foreign secretary, focused his attention on the case of Ms. Fletcher, the police officer killed in London.        

A weekend report in The Daily Telegraph, citing a leaked Scotland Yard document, said the police had witnesses identifying the killer as Abdulmagid Salah Ameri, one of 30 Libyans deported from Britain after Ms. Fletcher&rsquo;s killing. The report said Mr. Ameri had vanished after returning to Libya. Mr. Hague said the Transitional National Council, the rebel authority now recognized by Britain as Libya&rsquo;s new government, had given assurances that it would cooperate in investigating the Fletcher killing.        

Any chance of Mr. Megrahi&rsquo;s facing a return to Britain was dismissed by the Scottish government on Monday. Scottish officials were condemned in Britain and the United States for the 2009 decision to release Mr. Megrahi on compassionate grounds only eight years into a 27-year minimum sentence, a step they justified with medical reports saying that he was unlikely to live more than three months. Although Mr. Megrahi has defied that prognosis, Scotland&rsquo;s prime minister, Alex Salmond, told reporters that his government would resist calls for Mr. Megrahi&rsquo;s extradition.        

&ldquo;Mr. al-Megrahi remains under Scottish jurisdiction, and the only people with any legal entitlement to call for his return to Scotland are the Scottish government,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Whatever the U.K. prime minister or deputy foreign minister or American senators or lawyers have to say about the matter is neither here nor there.&rdquo;        

That position has been met with a steely response in Washington. The State Department reiterated Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton&rsquo;s often-stated view that Mr. Megrahi should never have been released, and a spokeswoman said the United States had received a commitment from the transitional authorities in Libya that they would review his case. &ldquo;This is a new day in Libya,&rdquo; the spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, said on Monday. &ldquo;This is a guy with blood on his hands, the lives of innocents. Libya itself under Qaddafi made a hero of this guy. Presumably, a new, free, democratic Libya would have a different attitude towards a convicted terrorist.&rdquo;        
David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from Tripoli, Libya, and Matthew L. Wald and Steven Lee Myers from Washington.
