
JERUSALEM &mdash; A Palestinian man from the occupied West Bank wounded eight Israelis early Monday when he hijacked a taxi in Tel Aviv, drove it to a packed nightclub and ran over police officers at a security checkpoint before emerging to stab several bystanders.        

A police spokeswoman said the man, who is 21 and from Nablus, shouted &ldquo;God is great!&rdquo; in Arabic before being subdued by police officers. One officer was seriously hurt and three others were wounded, as was the taxi driver.        

The police said they believed the attack was an act of political terror. The Palestinian Authority condemned it.        

The attack came at a time when Israel was stepping up security against terror attacks. The military said Monday that it had increased its presence along Israel&rsquo;s southern border with Egypt because of an intelligence warning of a possible attack by Islamic Jihad, a militant Palestinian group based in Gaza and supported by Iran. The military said members of the group had slipped into the Sinai region of Egypt in preparation for an attack on Israel.        

On Aug. 18, eight Israelis were killed in an attack mounted from Sinai. Israeli forces responded by killing leaders of a separate radical group in Gaza that it said was responsible for the attack. Three Egyptian policemen in Sinai were also killed by Israeli forces, who were pursuing the attackers. Tensions rose sharply with Egypt, leading Israel to apologize and to increase its cooperation with the Egyptian military.        

The revolution in Egypt that resulted in the overthrow of President Hosni Mubarak in February has led to an increase in lawlessness in Sinai, allowing more movement of Palestinian militants to and from Gaza through tunnels under the border.        

&ldquo;Even this morning, we are on high alert in the south in the face of a possible attack, which is similar in setup to the one that happened 10 days ago,&rdquo; the Israeli defense minister, Ehud Barak, said Monday.        

Mr. Barak spoke at an Israeli military industrial plant in the southern city of Ashdod, telling his hosts that an additional battery of a new antirocket defense system would be set up soon to intercept rockets fired from Gaza.        

&ldquo;By the end of the year we intend to have four sites, as part of a national emergency program that will bring us nine sites in less than two years, with many thousands of interceptions,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;This will change the foundations of the defense of Israeli citizens.&rdquo;        

The Tel Aviv attack occurred just before 2 a.m. at one of the city&rsquo;s most popular nightclubs, which was holding a well-publicized end-of-summer celebration. The police checkpoint and additional security there had been set up for crowd control in anticipation of scuffling unrelated to politics.        

The man accused of the attack was slightly hurt and, along with the victims, was taken to a hospital for treatment. He was under interrogation.        

Terrorist attacks, which became relatively common in Israel during the Palestinian uprising in 2002 and 2003, have been rare in Tel Aviv in the last few years, for a combination of reasons, including the renunciation of violence by the West Bank leadership, the construction of a security barrier by Israel and intensive Israeli military activity against militant cells.        

But the attack on southern Israel this month raised concerns about the renewal of such tactics, especially as peace talks have ground to a halt and mutual recrimination has increased.        

The Palestinian leadership is planning to appeal in a few weeks for the United Nations to accept the state of Palestine as a member. Israeli officials &mdash; as well as some Palestinians &mdash; say they are worried that the move, by raising expectations but changing little on the ground, could increase the frequency of violence.        

In a statement about the Tel Aviv attack issued through its news agency, the Palestinian Authority said it &ldquo;condemned this attack as well as the ongoing Israeli aggression against Palestinians in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem, and reaffirmed its intention to seek membership and recognition of a Palestinian state within 1967 borders and with Jerusalem as its capital in the United Nations.&rdquo; It added that &ldquo;no attempts to divert attention will stop us from achieving our goal.&rdquo;        

Israel and the United States have urged the Palestinian Authority not to seek the United Nations vote, and to engage instead in direct negotiations with Israel. The Palestinians say negotiations are pointless because they believe Israel has no desire to see a Palestinian state come into being.        

Palestinian newspapers on Monday included quotations from an interview that the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, gave to Arab newspapers, in which he said that international recognition of a Palestinian state would change the legal status of Palestinians by turning their territory into a &ldquo;country under occupation&rdquo; in accordance with international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention.        
