
MOSCOW &mdash; President Dmitri A. Medvedev on Monday set a Dec. 4 date for a parliamentary election that will almost certainly be dominated by the governing United Russia party and will set the stage for a presidential election early next year.        

But Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s announcement was overshadowed by the continuing political intrigue between him and his mentor, Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin, over which of them will run for president.        

The three minority parties in Parliament &mdash; the Communists, the Liberal Democrats and A Just Russia &mdash; have had little impact in the 450-seat Duma, the lower house of Parliament, where United Russia holds a two-thirds majority.        

In past contests the party has taken nothing for granted, and it is expected to use all the levers of power to ensure that it maintains the margin that has allowed it to pass legislation at will.        

&ldquo;I would very much like our next Duma to reflect the political preferences of the largest possible number of citizens,&rdquo; Mr. Medvedev told the leaders of registered parties gathered at the Black Sea resort of Sochi.        

Mr. Medvedev was Mr. Putin&rsquo;s choice to replace him as president when Mr. Putin reached the limit of two consecutive terms four years ago. The choice enabled Mr. Putin to effectively remain the country&rsquo;s most powerful figure &mdash; as the prime minister chosen by President Medvedev.        

The two men, who have made elaborate gestures of comradeship, have appeared to enjoy offering tantalizing hints as the nation waits to hear from them who is likely to be its president for the next four years.        

Still, a new element has emerged in the contest: Mikhail D. Prokhorov, one of Russia&rsquo;s richest men and the owner of the New Jersey Nets basketball team, who has taken over leadership of a small Western-oriented party known as the Right Cause. This month, Mr. Prokhorov, who has never held political office, said he would consider accepting the post of prime minister &mdash; but only if he liked the agenda of the incoming president.        
