
BEIJING (AP) &mdash; Video of a Chinese officer discussing sensitive spying cases has been leaked onto YouTube, in what appears to be an embarrassing failure of secrecy for the usually tight-lipped Chinese military.        

It was unclear when or where the officer, Maj. Gen. Jin Yinan, made the comments, and the Defense Ministry did not immediately respond Monday to questions about the video. Calls to the National Defense University, where General Jin is a lecturer, were not answered.        

While some of the spy cases had been disclosed before, few details had been released, while others involving the military had been kept secret.        

Among the cases General Jin discussed in the video was that of a former ambassador to South Korea, Li Bin, sentenced to seven years in prison for corruption. He said that Mr. Li had been discovered passing secrets to South Korea that compromised China&rsquo;s position in nuclear disarmament talks with North Korea, but that the accusation was too embarrassing to make public, and so corruption charges had been brought instead.        

Similar circumstances apparently led to corruption charges against the former head of China&rsquo;s nuclear power program, Kang Rixin, who was sentenced to life in prison in November. General Jin said that Mr. Kang had actually peddled secrets about China&rsquo;s civilian nuclear program to a foreign nation that he did not identify, but that the spying was considered too sensitive to bring up in court.        

Mr. Kang, a member of the Communist Party&rsquo;s Central Committee, was one of the highest-ranking officials ever involved in spying, General Jin said. His arrest was a shock to the party leadership, the general said.        

&ldquo;The party center was extremely nervous,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They ordered top-to-bottom inspections and spared no individual.&rdquo;        

General Jin also talked on the video about Tong Daning, an official from China&rsquo;s social security fund, who was executed in 2006 after being convicted of spying for Taiwan. He said that Mr. Tong had passed information to Taiwan&rsquo;s leaders about China&rsquo;s currency regimen, allowing them to avoid huge losses because of changes in exchange rates.        

Among other cases involving military personnel, General Jin spoke about Col. Xu Junping, who defected to the United States in 2000. He said that Colonel Xu had not disclosed technical secrets, but had relayed to the Americans his knowledge of the military leaders&rsquo; personalities, attitudes and habits gleaned from many years of accompanying senior military leaders on trips abroad.        

The video was also posted on Chinese Web sites; it was removed from most locations, but screen shots, audio files and transcripts of General Jin&rsquo;s comments could still be found on sites like Sina Weibo&rsquo;s popular microblogging service.        
