
TAMPA, Fla. &mdash; The new commander of American Special Operations forces has defended the use of commandos in a Navy Seals unit to back up a raid in Afghanistan earlier this month that ended in tragedy when a Chinook helicopter was shot down, rejecting criticism that planning for the operation was different from other missions that had been carried out successfully, as many as a dozen on a typical night.        

The commander, Adm. William H. McRaven, said &ldquo;there was nothing unusual about this mission&rdquo; to warrant the sustained criticism heard from some retired commandos and military analysts, who have questioned how the operation was planned and carried out and whether it was an appropriate use of the vaunted Navy Seals.        

The military is studying the Aug. 6 crash to determine the exact cause. Early indications are that an insurgent&rsquo;s rocket-propelled grenade brought down the Chinook helicopter, killing all 38 people on board: 17 members of the elite Navy Seals, 5 members of a Naval Special Warfare unit that supports the Seals team, 3 members of an Air Force Special Operations unit, 5 members of an Army helicopter crew, 7 Afghan commandos and a civilian Afghan interpreter.        

Admiral McRaven said he was awaiting the specific findings of the inquiry, but noted broadly that &ldquo;this was one of 11 missions that night.&rdquo; In an interview, his first since being sworn in as the top officer of the Special Operations Command two weeks ago, Admiral McRaven said, &ldquo;We will do whatever it takes to help the nation win this war &mdash; and this mission was not unique.&rdquo;        

Since the crash, which resulted in the greatest loss of American life on a single day in the Afghan war, some analysts have questioned why an elite Navy Seals strike team was assigned as mere backup for an Army Ranger raid on an insurgent cell, and why so many Special Operations personnel were aboard a single helicopter.        

Admiral McRaven dismissed assertions that the most highly trained Navy and Army commando teams should be reserved solely for the most high-profile missions; he said they were regularly assigned to support commanders of units in a local area of combat if that contributed to the overall mission.        

&ldquo;We have to be fungible as a force,&rdquo; Admiral McRaven said. &ldquo;And if we are not fungible as a force, then we are not of value. It is not unusual at all for Seals or Rangers or Army Special Operations forces to be part of a quick-reaction force, as in this case.&rdquo;        

Admiral McRaven also said that Chinook helicopters were used instead of the smaller, more agile, Black Hawks when a larger team was transported.        

&ldquo;They are more than capable of doing this particular job,&rdquo; he said of the Chinooks. &ldquo;This was an appropriate use of that particular helicopter.&rdquo;        

Before his promotion, Admiral McRaven was in charge of the Joint Special Operations Command, a part of the overall command that oversees the missions of the military&rsquo;s most highly trained strike units. He held that post during the May 2 raid into Pakistan that killed Osama bin Laden, a success that was discussed publicly by senior administration officials even though it involved a Seals unit that in the past the Pentagon would not even confirm existed.        

In what Admiral McRaven obliquely described as &ldquo;a changing landscape&rdquo; for Special Operations forces, he said he planned to take advantage of the recent attention paid to the strike units to engage the public more openly about the military&rsquo;s counterterrorism work.        

American Special Operations forces are assigned to more than 70 countries today. And while they account for only 3 percent of the military as a whole, they make up more than 7 percent of the forces assigned to Iraq and Afghanistan. The annual budget for the Special Operations Command is $9.8 billion, or 1.4 percent of Pentagon spending in 2011.        

Their experience at hunting high-value insurgent and terrorist leaders, and their role in training the security forces of allied countries, make it likely that they will still be wanted in Iraq and Afghanistan after American conventional forces have withdrawn.        

&ldquo;Special Operations forces will be in more demand, rather than in less demand,&rdquo; Admiral McRaven said. But he stressed that no decisions had been reached about American deployments in Iraq after the end of this year, or in Afghanistan after 2014.        

The troop reductions from both countries may make it possible for the Special Operations Command to devote more personnel to other areas of the world, which Admiral McRaven acknowledged had been neglected over the past decade because of the wars&rsquo; demands. He said he was looking for opportunities to add Special Operations personnel to training missions in the Pacific region, Africa and South America.        

As the 10th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks approaches, Admiral McRaven said that terrorism posed an enduring threat to the nation &mdash; but one that could be mitigated by vigilance.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m not sure I know how it ends,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;This may be the &lsquo;new normal,&rsquo; in terms of this threat that we will have to live with for a long time. But we are better postured now to deal with that threat than we&rsquo;ve ever been before.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think we will ever be complacent again.&rdquo;        
