
KAMPALA, Uganda &mdash; The Sudanese government has filed a complaint with the Security Council that South Sudan, its newly independent neighbor and former territory, is inciting violence and instability in the Nuba Mountains region of Sudan, a volatile border area where United Nations officials warn that war crimes may have been committed in recent months.        



A spokesman for the Sudanese government in Khartoum said Tuesday that South Sudan was supporting Nuban rebels with weapons and logistical support.        

&ldquo;We have documented proof&rdquo; that the rebels receive aid and instructions from the south, said the spokesman, Rabie A. Atti. &ldquo;All of them are one group, and they are moving as one group,&rdquo; Mr. Atti added. &ldquo;Soldiers, weapons, tanks, everything.&rdquo;        

Many people in the Nuba Mountains fought alongside the southern Sudanese through decades of civil war in Sudan, but while the south gained independence last month, the Nuba Mountains remained Sudanese territory, and an insurrection has been building there in recent months.        

With the south&rsquo;s independence, the conflict has taken on an international dimension.        

&ldquo;This threatening is coming from a foreign country, and this should be handled by the Security Council,&rdquo; Mr. Atti said.        

A United Nations official in New York confirmed that it had received a letter on Monday evening from the Sudanese government, written in Arabic, accusing both the South Sudanese government and the Sudanese wing of its governing party, the Sudan People&rsquo;s Liberation Movement, or S.P.L.M., of violating the peace agreement.        

Neither South Sudan&rsquo;s minister of information nor its army spokesman could be reached for comment.        

The northern government has long accused South Sudan of propping up the Nuban rebels, who, like the southerners, are non-Arabs and have suffered discrimination under the Arab-dominated government in Khartoum.        

The liberation movement maintains a wing in the north, and Abdel Aziz al-Hilu, a senior Nuban politician, has been known to refer to President Salva Kiir of South Sudan as &ldquo;Chairman Salva.&rdquo;        

Human-rights groups and some United Nations officials have accused the northern government of indiscriminate bombings and widespread human-rights abuses in the Nuba Mountains this summer. Some fear that the mountains could become the next Darfur, another conflict-racked region of Sudan, where brutal repression has led to the indictment of President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan by the International Criminal Court.        
