
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Saying that they had a &ldquo;good idea&rdquo; where Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi was hiding, the Libyan rebels on Tuesday gave the colonel&rsquo;s recalcitrant loyalists four days to surrender or face military action against holdout towns.        

The rebels also demanded that Algeria repatriate a clutch of Qaddafi family members &mdash; including his daughter and her newborn daughter &mdash; who fled into exile there on Monday.        

The ultimatums signaled a rebel movement emboldened by the NATO-backed military advances that swept it into Tripoli, the capital, and its growing acceptance abroad. The demands came as anxiety eased in Tripoli, more than a week after rebel forces seized Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s compound here in heavy fighting that marked his political demise after nearly 42 years of harsh and eccentric rule.        

The whereabouts of Colonel Qaddafi and his most influential sons remained unknown.        

With the sounds of gunfire trailing off in Tripoli, banks reopened and residents who days ago were terrified of venturing outside calmly lined up to withdraw money. More shops opened for business, just in time for Id al-Fitr, the holiday that comes at the end of the Muslim holy month of Ramadan.        

In growing numbers, Libyans continued their pilgrimages to the bombed remains of the state. A traffic jam clogged the entrance to Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s compound, Bab al-Aziziya. At a farm belonging to his son Seif al-Islam, rebel fighters walked through the vineyards and picked grapes.        

Speaking at a news conference in Benghazi, Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, chairman of the rebels&rsquo; Transitional National Council, said Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s loyalist fighters had until Saturday to negotiate a surrender. The offer related primarily to the coastal town of Surt, the fugitive leader&rsquo;s hometown and a focus of support for him, but also covered loyalist strongholds in Bani Walid and in the southern oasis town of Sabha.        

Mr. Abdel-Jalil said if the deadline passed with &ldquo;no peaceful indications for implementing this, we will decide this matter militarily.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We do not wish to do so, but we cannot wait longer,&rdquo; he said.        

Later, at a news conference in Tripoli, his deputy, Ali Tarhouni, reiterated that message, in a sign that the rebels, with growing assertiveness, are intent on quickly consolidating their control of the country.        

&ldquo;Sometimes to avoid bloodshed you must shed blood, and the faster we do this the less blood we will shed,&rdquo; Mr. Tarhouni said, according to The Associated Press, adding that the rebels had a &ldquo;good idea&rdquo; where Colonel Qaddafi was hiding.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t have any doubt we will catch him,&rdquo; he said.        

His comments may have reflected a desire to resolve the awkward halfway status of the rebel leadership, which at the moment bears much of the responsibility of a new government but without the full legitimacy. There have been hints of friction in Tripoli as some brigades of fighters balk at decisions of the transitional rebel leadership, and militia members who came from east and west to invade the capital mark their jurisdictions, block by block, with spray paint.        

The top leaders of the rebel council, like Mr. Abdel-Jalil, had yet to arrive in Tripoli from Benghazi, the eastern city where the movement to overthrow Colonel Qaddafi began in February.        

NATO, which since March has been conducting an air campaign against Qaddafi loyalists under a United Nations mandate to protect civilians, said it was aware of reports that there had been discussions between loyalists and rebel supporters in Surt. A NATO spokesman described the talks as encouraging.        

&ldquo;We will see how they evolve in coming days,&rdquo; said the spokesman, Col. Roland Lavoie, at a briefing in Naples, Italy, the headquarters of NATO&rsquo;s Libya operations.        

But he also said NATO still regarded Colonel Qaddafi as a threat and that its warplanes were still attacking his forces, focusing on &ldquo;a corridor to the eastern edge of Surt.&rdquo;        

Rebel brigades have advanced on Surt from the east and west, but have stopped short of an all-out assault.        
Reporting was contributed by David D. Kirkpatrick from Tripoli, Alan Cowell from London, Neil MacFarquhar from the United Nations, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
