
SANA, Yemen &mdash; The dusty streets of this ancient capital were jammed with cars as Yemenis ran last-minute errands before the start of Id al-Fitr, the joyous holiday that began Tuesday with the end of the holy month of Ramadan. Men stood in lines outside tiny barber shops, waiting patiently for their holiday trim, and, for a moment at least, the city tried to focus on something other than a lingering political and economic crisis.        

&ldquo;As much as we are suffering, Ramadan comes to alleviate what we are feeling,&rdquo; said Aladin al-Mahdi, an English teacher who was relaxing outside his brother&rsquo;s electronics shop in the popular Bab al-Sabah market. &ldquo;We are feeling that Allah will make it easier for us.&rdquo;        

Yet despite the Yemenis&rsquo; enduring commitment to faith and tradition, a looming uncertainty, even fear, hung over the city. There was no way to completely escape the dueling narratives of the days ahead, a nation celebrating, and also bracing for the worst.        

&ldquo;I expect there to be war,&rdquo; said Abdullah Mohamedy, who works at a small grocery store in Sana&rsquo;s walled old city. &ldquo;This year, Id is very, very different.&rdquo;        

Yemen has been trapped for months in a protracted stalemate between President Ali Abdullah Saleh and an opposition movement that wants him to leave office. After months of protests to force Mr. Saleh out, and after security forces killed dozens of demonstrators in the streets, Yemen has become unnerved, without any clear sense of who is running the country.        

The political crisis has led to an economic crisis, further undermining a nation that was already the poorest among Arab states. Public services have nearly ground to a halt. Government control is all but gone in outlying provinces.        

Mr. Saleh, who is in Saudi Arabia recovering from wounds he suffered in a bomb attack, appeared on state television Monday to wish the nation a happy Id, and to criticize the opposition. Not to be outdone, Maj. Gen. Ali Mohsin al-Ahmar, the second most powerful person in the country, who has sided with the opposition, gave his own broadcast suggesting that Mr. Saleh would soon face the same fate as Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

The tit-for-tat holiday greetings did not lift holiday spirits.        

&ldquo;This guy shows up, talks and says, &lsquo;Blah blah blah,&rsquo; and then this guy says, &lsquo;Blah blah blah,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said Ameen, a waiter at a Western-style cafe here who said he did not want to be identified for fear both sides would seek revenge. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s all just talking. No one is actually going to fix our problems. People are suffering so much. There are huge lines for water in my neighborhood.&rdquo;        

And so it was like that in the final hours before the start of Id, street markets were crowded with shoppers buying last-minute gifts for their children, as Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s family appeared to be gearing up for conflict against their powerful tribal rivals, the Ahmar clan.        

Essam Mohammed, a car salesman who now drives a taxi because no one is buying cars these days, said: &ldquo;If Ali Abdullah Saleh doesn&rsquo;t come back, we will have war. If he does come back, we will have war.&rdquo; Mr. Mohammed said that he, his wife and six children will not take their yearly vacation to the western port city Hodeidah for Id because gasoline is too expensive now that prices have risen.        

&ldquo;If the situation stays where it is, we&rsquo;ll have problems,&rdquo; Mr. Mohammed said.        

Even Ramadan, which is supposed to be a time for fasting, prayer, family and reflection, could not tamp down the rising tensions here in Sana between the president&rsquo;s family and the rival Ahmar clan. Governing party officials, allies of the president, issued statements accusing Hamid al-Ahmar, the most outspoken member of the Ahmar clan, and the opposition military commander, General Ahmar, who is no relation, of being the masterminds behind the attack on the presidential palace in June that left Mr. Saleh severely burned on much of his body.        

&ldquo;Accusing Hamid and Ali Mohsin of this attack essentially was a declaration of war,&rdquo; said Abdul-Ghani al-Iryani, a Yemeni political analyst.        

On Monday armed tribesmen loyal to the Ahmars were seen strolling the streets of the northern district of Hasaba, the area where war broke out in late May. Pickup trucks with machine guns propped up in the back sat unattended on the street. In a television interview last week, Hamid al-Ahmar demanded that the president &ldquo;be handed over to the legitimate authorities of the revolution&rdquo; to be tried.        

Not too far away, the president&rsquo;s son, Ahmed Ali Saleh, who leads the elite Republican Guards military unit, has been stocking up on heavy weaponry, like tanks, which can be seen in the capital.        

In those same streets, neighbors met outside their ancient stone houses to wish one another happiness in the year to come, the standard Id greeting, which seemed a bit of wishful thinking given the circumstances.        

&ldquo;Id is Id, Ramadan is Ramadan, the revolution is the revolution,&rdquo; Abdul Kader al-Guneid said as he celebrated the holiday in the city of Taiz. &ldquo;One minute you are in war, one minute you are not in war. It&rsquo;s funny, it just works like that.&rdquo;        
