
SYDNEY, Australia &mdash; Australia&rsquo;s highest court ruled out the government&rsquo;s plans to ship asylum seekers to Malaysia, including unaccompanied children, as part of a refugee swap deal, saying the program would violate both Australia&rsquo;s laws and its international commitments.        

The government said it had hoped to set a very public example by relocating as many as 800 migrants arriving by boat over the next four years, saying that adding obstacles to their quest for legal status and protections as refugees would discourage human trafficking. But advocates denounced the plan as too punishing to the relocated refugees.        

The court, ruling 6-1, focused on the fact that Malaysia could not offer guarantees for the safety and well-being of asylum seekers as required by Australian law.        

The immigration minister, Chris Bowen, called the ruling &ldquo;profoundly disappointing,&rdquo; but he said the government had not ruled out the possibility of similar deals with other neighbors in the Pacific region that might be found acceptable to the court.        

The ruling follows an injunction issued last month that halted the agreement, which had been signed in July. Under the deal, migrants arriving by boat &mdash; who are mostly from Afghanistan, Iran and Iraq &mdash; would have their refugee claims processed by the United Nations in Malaysia. In return, Australia agreed to accept 4,000 United Nations-certified refugees from Malaysia over the same four-year period.        

The plan, devised by Prime Minister Julia Gillard&rsquo;s government, was just the latest attempt by Australia to deter the flow of asylum seekers, particularly those arriving in dangerous and rickety boats. Under Prime Minister John Howard, asylum seekers were sent to nearby island nations for lengthy processing, but the so-called Pacific Solution was abandoned when Kevin Rudd succeeded him in 2007.        

Ms. Gillard, who took office last year, revived some of its elements in what rights groups criticized as the Malaysia Solution. It appeared to have early public support after more than two dozen refugees died late last year when their boat crashed into the rocky coastline of Australia&rsquo;s remote Christmas Island.        

But the tide turned when it became clear that the government intended to include even unaccompanied minors in the transfers. Malaysia is not a party to the United Nations Refugee Convention and has a spotty record in its treatment of refugees, points made loudly by human rights groups and cited by the court in its ruling.        

To be able to send refugees to another country, the ruling said, the country &ldquo;must be legally bound by international law or its own domestic law to: provide access for asylum seekers to effective procedures for assessing their need for protection; provide protection for asylum seekers pending determination of their refugee status; and provide protection for persons given refugee status pending their voluntary return to their country of origin or their resettlement in another country.&rdquo;        

Amnesty International, which has lobbied hard against the swap plan, praised Wednesday&rsquo;s ruling and urged an end to all such policies.        

&ldquo;Now that the High Court has put an end to this sorry saga, it&rsquo;s time for common sense to prevail,&rdquo; said the group&rsquo;s refugee spokesman, Graham Thom.        
