
LONDON &mdash; To compensate for the lack of natural light around his new basement swimming pool, one London homeowner installed an outdoor camera that projects real-time images of the changing sky onto the pool ceiling. To assuage the concerns of swimmers who hate cramped spaces, another resident dug down so far beneath the earth that his pool is 16 feet deep and has a high-diving board.        

Britain is not immune from the housing slump, and London is still reeling from last month&rsquo;s riots. But never mind. In a city that has some of the richest people and most expensive real estate in the world, well-off homeowners who have exhausted the traditional methods of home expansion &mdash; build up, or build out &mdash; are enthusiastically branching out the only other way possible: down.        

Far beneath London&rsquo;s surface, and to their neighbors&rsquo; considerable chagrin, they are using enormous machines to remove thousands of tons of dirt and replace it with new structures extending as many as four floors down.        

They are building not just swimming pools, but also cinemas, recreation centers, gyms, wine cellars, bowling alleys, squash courts, climbing walls, servants&rsquo; quarters, saunas, waterfalls, Jacuzzis, hair salons and multicar garages with special elevators to shuttle vintage car collections up and down.        

&ldquo;A good way of looking at it is to think of the super-yacht market,&rdquo; explained John Lees, chairman of Lees Associates, who regularly works on projects costing tens of millions of dollars. His underground pools, he said, have included one in which a film of moving sharks is projected on the walls while the &ldquo;Jaws&rdquo; theme song plays, and another covered in hand-made golden ceramic tiles embedded with tiny lights that twinkle and give swimmers the feeling of being enveloped in the night sky.        

&ldquo;You know the kind of kit they have and how big they are, and they keep getting bigger and bigger?&rdquo; he said, referring to yachts of the rich and famous. &ldquo;In London, a densely populated city, you need to find a way to go. And so down you go.&rdquo;        

London already has a wide selection of pools, in local gyms and tony health clubs. But people developing subterranean residential space argue that nothing beats swimming in your basement.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ll be able to wake up in the morning, swim for half an hour, exercise, and you don&rsquo;t have to get stuck in traffic,&rdquo; said Ravji Halai, 54, a building-supplies tycoon who is building a gym, a bar and a heated swimming pool (with jet action) under his house in Hendon, North London. It cost him $1.2 million to buy the house in 2007, he said, $55,000 to tear it down, and about $5 million (and counting) to build the new, souped-down incarnation.        

Excavating the dirt to construct the basement required the removal of 400 truckloads of earth over four months, an exercise that did not amuse the neighbors. But Mr. Halai made peace by promising to let them swim in the pool, too. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to be greedy,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;You get money, you spend money.&rdquo;        

He is lucky; most new basement owners seem to make mortal enemies of their neighbors. The projects &ldquo;are for today&rsquo;s Chelsea residents what cholera was in the mid-19th century &mdash; a miasma lurking invisibly, waiting to pounce,&rdquo; Terence Bendixson, honorary secretary of the Chelsea Society, a civic group, told The Evening Standard recently.        

London has strict zoning laws and forbids in many cases changing the footprint of a house or adding to its height.        

But the law was written only &ldquo;with that which takes place above the ground in mind,&rdquo; Tony Hillier, the chairman of the Heath and Hampstead Society, a civic group in North London, said in an interview. Using a British colloquialism for &ldquo;flout,&rdquo; he added: &ldquo;A number of people who seek to develop underground have been able to drive a coach and horses through the law by saying it doesn&rsquo;t actually prevent you from digging almost to the center of the earth.&rdquo;        

In a city in which rich people endlessly buy new houses and then renovate them, construction rage is not a new phenomenon: even Londoners who have refurbished their own properties tend to react with righteous indignation to their neighbors&rsquo; refurbishment efforts. But anger over the classic grievances &mdash; noise, extra traffic and maybe some dust &mdash; is small potatoes compared with the white-hot fury provoked by excavations.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;The past year has been a nightmare,&rdquo; Matthew Wright, a popular television and radio host, wrote recently in The Daily Mail, describing the basement project next door. So bad was the &ldquo;excavation, foundation drilling, concreting, underpinning (you want to try to live through underpinning), not to mention shuttering, grinding, drilling and so on,&rdquo; he said, that even earplugs &ldquo;meant for shotgun enthusiasts&rdquo; could not drown out the noise.        

Unable to sleep after the workmen arrived at 7:15 every morning, wielding pneumatic drills that caused his bed to vibrate, Mr. Wright said, he became too exhausted to continue hosting his late-night BBC radio show and had to quit.        

But the troubles go beyond annoyance. Last October, a dumpster fell through a road weakened by a basement renovation in Chester Row, in the heart of Chelsea, ripping a gaping 15-foot hole in the road (the neighbors are suing). Last year, too, the art dealer Charles Saatchi reportedly became so incensed with the multiyear project next to his house in Eaton Square that he hired workmen to remove his neighbors&rsquo; scaffolding, and then put his own house on the market.        

In an interview, one Chelsea resident described her family&rsquo;s extended feud with their neighbors over the neighbors&rsquo; three-year, $16 million, two-floors-down complex with staff bedrooms, a pool, a gym and a private theater.        

&ldquo;People think when they buy a house they have to gut it and make it what they want,&rdquo; she said, speaking on condition that her name not be used because, she said, she and the neighbors have already sued each other so many times. &ldquo;The average person makes do with new wallpaper and a new carpet,&rdquo; she added, &ldquo;but there&rsquo;s a minority who says, let&rsquo;s build a cinema.&rdquo;        

Cracks in the walls, noise beyond imagination, carpets coated with dirt, cement mixers blocking the roads, machines &ldquo;like giant hoovers&rdquo; and enormous weed-blowers brought in to suck out the earth and then blow soil back into the garden &mdash; the work was so disruptive and so violent, she said, that it caused the foundation of the house on the other side of the project to crumble completely.        

&ldquo;They are going to have to literally rebuild their house,&rdquo; she said. Recently, those neighbors posted their own planning application, she said, and guess what? &ldquo;They want to build a basement, too.&rdquo;        
