
LONDON &mdash; For years, Britain has struggled with its own version of the American debate over the prison at Guant&aacute;namo Bay, Cuba: how best to deal with individuals regarded as terrorist threats who cannot readily be brought to trial, usually because of concern that important evidence would compromise intelligence sources.        

Britain has no Guant&aacute;namo equivalent. But it has a major terrorism problem, with a network of Qaeda-linked extremists spread across the country, and its security services running dozens of investigations at any given time into possible attacks. It has found, under two governments, that some suspects are beyond effective prosecution, or deportation, leaving it to hold some indefinitely under &ldquo;control orders,&rdquo;  an extended version of house arrest.        

On Wednesday, the legal dilemmas involved came into sharp focus when the government of Prime Minister David Cameron unveiled new measures aimed at easing some controls on terrorism suspects in the hope of at least partly meeting the objections of human rights activists who have said that the existing system breaches Britain&rsquo;s centuries-old traditions of civil liberties.        

As it stands, the detention system subjects suspects to curfews that can run for 16 hours a day, forbids them access to cellphones and computers, and requires them to wear electronic tagging devices  monitored by the police.  Eight men are now being held this way, all of them accused of being Islamic militants, all born outside Britain and all with identities shielded by court orders.        

Home Secretary Theresa May  announced the changes on Wednesday, and said the measures would be presented for Parliament&rsquo;s approval as part of a new system, officially known as Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures, to take effect by the end of the year.        

For the first time, the detentions would be limited to a maximum of two years. Curfews would be replaced by a more flexible &ldquo;overnight residence requirement,&rdquo; cutting the stay-at-home rule to a period of perhaps 8 to 10 hours. Suspects could use cellphones and home computers, as long as they provided the police with their passwords. The government will also increase the securities services&rsquo; budget for surveillance of those under restriction by a figure that The Daily Telegraph reported as about $30 million.        

As before, the suspects would be prohibited from leaving the country, but their movements within it would be eased. Bans on visiting entire towns or neighborhoods would be narrowed to specific buildings &mdash; mosques or community centers, for example.        

The government also pledged to step up efforts to negotiate deals to deport the suspects to their home countries under guarantees protecting them from torture or other abuses, an approach that in the past has been  rejected in a number of cases by the European Court of Human Rights.        

The new proposals are the result of a wide-ranging review of Britain&rsquo;s counterterrorism laws and practices ordered by the Cameron government after it defeated the Labour government in May elections.        

While senior Conservatives had clashed with Labour over its counterterrorism measures, calling them too severe, urgency was added to the review by Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s need to placate the Conservatives&rsquo; junior coalition partners, the Liberal Democrats. They had demanded a wholesale reworking of the control measures, and made the scrapping of Labour&rsquo;s system a condition of joining the coalition.        

Mrs. May&rsquo;s changes also involve a rollback of other counterterrorism measures adopted by Labour. A law allowing terrorism suspects to be held  for 28 days without charge will be allowed to lapse, resetting the maximum to 14 days. Parliament can approve a temporary return to the longer limit in the face of a major terrorist alert. Stop-and-search powers &mdash; widely used by the police, and resented by many in  ethnic communities &mdash; will be curbed.        

The changes include some that are not specific to terrorism cases. Among these will be a requirement that a magistrate&rsquo;s approval would be sought to conduct targeted surveillance by closed-circuit TV, a practice that  has been used by hundreds of overzealous local councils to investigate minor offenses like failing to clean up after dogs and overstuffing household trash  bins.        

In the House of Commons, Mrs. May said the new government regretted having to keep the power to limit the freedoms of extremists. But the relief among Liberal Democrats was evident. Menzies Campbell, a senior Liberal Democrat lawmaker, hailed the changes, saying they would end the &ldquo;unbridled authoritarianism&rdquo; of the former Labour government.        

The attacks on Labour&rsquo;s record led to some bitter exchanges. Yvette Cooper, the Labour spokeswoman on law-and-order issues, accused the Conservatives of making the changes  to placate Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, a Liberal Democrat, and of unnecessarily weakening the government&rsquo;s powers to act in times of heightened terrorism threats.        
