
ROME &mdash; An Italian businessman and his wife were arrested Thursday, accused by Naples prosecutors of extorting money and favors from Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi in return for what prosecutors described as &ldquo;cooperation&rdquo; in an investigation into a high-end prostitution ring in the southern city of Bari.        

While the prosecutors consider Mr. Berlusconi a victim in the case, the arrests further weaken, and distract, him at a time when he is struggling to rally his fractious center-right coalition around a package of austerity measures expected to go before Parliament next week.        

Few details about the extortion case were officially released. But the Naples prosecutor Francesco Greco called &ldquo;credible&rdquo; an account that appeared in last week&rsquo;s edition of the newsweekly Panorama, which is owned by Mr. Berlusconi. Panorama said that the prime minister had paid the businessman, Gianpaolo Tarantini, about $715,000, as well as sizable monthly payments, to encourage him to strike a plea bargain if necessary to keep the case in Bari from going to trial.        

In that case, Mr. Tarantini admitted that he had paid a prostitute and other women to attend parties at Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s residences, saying he aimed to curry favor with the prime minister, a billionaire businessman himself.        

A trial would have the potential of uncovering yet more unsavory details of Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s dalliances. He is already on trial in Milan, accused of paying for sex with an under-age Moroccan woman. He denies wrongdoing.        

Mr. Berlusconi told Panorama that he did not deny the payments, but that he had simply wanted to help Mr. Tarantini, &ldquo;who found himself and still finds himself in very serious economic difficulty.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I have nothing to repent,&rdquo; Mr. Berlusconi told Panorama. &ldquo;On the contrary. I did nothing illicit. I limited myself to helping a desperate man without asking for anything in exchange.&rdquo;        

The Naples prosecutors say that Mr. Tarantini and his wife, Angela Devenuto, forced Mr. Berlusconi to pay their legal bills and housing costs, among other favors.        
