
A recently disclosed diplomatic cable shows that a top United Nations human rights official warned the United States government five years ago that he had received information indicating that Iraqi reports of American troops executing a family were true.        

Five of the victims, the official said, were children 5 years old or younger, and four were women.        

The March 15, 2006, attack in Ishaqi, Iraq, was one of the most disputed episodes of the war. Iraqi police officials maintained from the beginning that the family had been lined up and executed. A video later surfaced that showed graphic images of five dead children and three dead adults; most of the victims appeared to have been killed by bullets or other flying projectiles that punctured their head, abdomen or chest.        

Three months after the killings, and after the United Nations official&rsquo;s warning, the American military announced that its own investigation had determined the allegations of an execution were &ldquo;absolutely false.&rdquo; The military admitted, however, that the raid and subsequent air strike resulted in as many as nine &ldquo;collateral deaths,&rdquo; a euphemism for civilian fatalities.        

The Americans said the troops, who captured an insurgent leader on the mission, took gunfire from the house before the commander on the ground ordered them to return fire from machine guns and then from helicopters and jets, following proper rules of engagement. A senior Pentagon official said that both regular infantry and special operations forces took part in the operation.        

The human rights official, Philip Alston, wrote a letter to the United States Embassy in Geneva 12 days after the killings, outlining information he had received that was starkly different from the American account. Mr. Alston&rsquo;s letter was included in an unclassified diplomatic cable made public late last month by WikiLeaks and reported by McClatchy Newspapers on Wednesday on its Web site.        

A Pentagon spokesman, Lt. Col. Jim Gregory of the Army, said on Thursday that the information revealed in the cable did not change the conclusions of military investigators that no crime or cover-up had taken place.        

&ldquo;There has been nothing new we haven&rsquo;t already looked into here,&rdquo; Colonel Gregory said.        

On Friday, a spokesman for Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki said that based on the new information revealed in the cable, the Iraqi government would reopen its investigation of the incident. "We will not give up on enforcing the rights of the Iraqi people," said the spokesman, Ali al-Musawi.        

When he wrote the letter, Mr. Alston was the United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and according to the New York University Web site he is now a law professor there. He did not return a phone call and an e-mail message seeking comment.        

It was not clear from his letter to the embassy how he conducted his investigation into the killings or who provided him information. But in the letter he said the autopsies on the victims were carried out in a hospital in Tikrit, Iraq, and &ldquo;revealed that all corpses were shot in the head and handcuffed.&rdquo;        

Mr. Alston reported that information he had received indicated the episode unfolded this way: Someone in the home fired on the Americans, then a 25-minute gunfight ensued, and then troops &ldquo;entered the house, handcuffed all residents and executed all of them.&rdquo; After that, an American air raid destroyed the house, which Iraqis had viewed as an attempt to cover up the killings.        

He also said that United States forces attacked the house in part because they suspected that members of the family who lived there were involved in the killing of two American troops earlier that month.        

The killings and subsequent controversy over the nature of the deaths occurred as Iraq was spiraling into a sectarian civil war between Shiites and Sunnis, and American forces were coming under increasing criticism for raids that killed civilians.        
