
Thousands of people marched through a restive village near the capital of Bahrain on Thursday for the funeral of a 14-year-old boy killed during a protest against the government the day before, activists said.        

Photographs of the boy&rsquo;s face &mdash; smiling before his death and caked in blood shortly after &mdash; covered the coffin as it was lofted into the air in Sitra, an oil village six miles south of the capital, Manama, and a hub of opposition sentiment. Many in the crowd waved the red and white flag of Bahrain as they followed the body to its burial site.        

Activists said many people in Bahrain were outraged by the death of the boy, identified as Ali Jawad Ahmad. People filled the streets of Sitra on Thursday in protest and in mourning, holding photocopied images of the boy and chanting &ldquo;Down, down, Hamad!&rdquo; a reference to the country&rsquo;s leader, King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, according to a witness.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a huge march in Sitra village; it&rsquo;s tens of thousands,&rdquo; said Mohammed al-Maskati, the president of the Bahrain Youth Society for Human Rights, who attended the march. Images posted online showed a large crowd moving through the streets with the boy&rsquo;s coffin.        

Security forces did not confront the marchers, who dispersed peacefully after the burial in the early afternoon, Mr. Maskati said.        

However, overnight in the capital, hundreds of angry protesters clashed with security forces as they tried to retake a central square that had been the center of protests in the spring. They were pushed back by the security officers, who fired tear gas and blocked roads with buses, according to news reports.        

Sitra is known for its activist Shiite population, and it was a stronghold of antigovernment advocates at the height of demonstrations this year. The government of Bahrain, with help from Saudi Arabia, violently put down the country&rsquo;s peaceful protest movement in March.        

Witnesses said the boy was killed Wednesday morning when security forces fired a tear gas canister directly into a crowd at close range. He was struck in the head, the witnesses said, and died shortly afterward at a hospital.        

The government has denied that security forces were involved in the boy&rsquo;s death, and it has offered a large reward for information about the episode. The Ministry of the Interior, in a statement released after the boy&rsquo;s funeral on Thursday, said again that the boy was not killed by a tear gas canister and that an autopsy on Wednesday showed that he had died from injuries to the back of his neck.        

The dispute over how the boy died delayed his funeral for hours, Mr. Maskati said.        

&ldquo;The father refused to sign the certificate to release the body,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;because the certificate said the cause was unknown.&rdquo;        

It was unclear whether the certificate was eventually signed or whether the authorities released the body without a signature.        
