
PARIS &mdash; With Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi effectively overthrown, representatives of some 60 nations gathered here Thursday to help the new Libyan authorities navigate a fraught transition and restore stability and a functioning economy to a country ravaged by rebellion and 42 years of dictatorship. The specter of the quagmire of Iraq kept the tenor of the day hopeful but cautious.        

There was also concern over preserving potentially lucrative oil deals made under the Qaddafi government, and an undercurrent of economic competition for the contracts that will have to go out for the reconstruction and restoration of Libya&rsquo;s tattered infrastructure &mdash; oil, gas, utilities, housing and the like.        

Rebel leaders have promised to honor existing deals, most of them with Italian and French oil and gas companies. They have also said that in the future they would favor countries that had helped them defeat Colonel Qaddafi, a stance that would lift Britain, France and the United States ahead of those nations that objected to the NATO bombing campaign, including Russia, China and Germany.        

In comments made to French radio ahead of the international conference here, France&rsquo;s foreign minister, Alain Jupp&eacute;, called the rebel position &ldquo;fair and logical.&rdquo; He said that the priority was to help the new government with humanitarian needs and the restoration of water, fuel and power, but he added that investment opportunities were a factor.        

&ldquo;You know this operation in Libya costs a lot,&rdquo; Mr. Jupp&eacute; told RTL radio. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s also an investment in the future because a democratic Libya is a country that will develop, offering stability, security and development in the region.&rdquo;        

In what seemed a clear effort to sidestep the mistakes of postwar Iraq, there was no rush to send foreign troops to Libya. But the United Nations was asked to organize a technical mission to Libya to help with matters from policing to technical aid.        

The conference, which included the United Nations and nine other multinational organizations, was convened by President Nicolas Sarkozy of France and Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain, who had jointly pressed for military intervention and whose air forces have flown many of the bombing runs that protected rebels and enabled them to seize the capital, Tripoli.        

The conference took place on the 42nd anniversary of the 1969 coup that brought Colonel Qaddafi to power, which one of Libya&rsquo;s representatives, Mahmoud Jibril, said was an important marker for the Libyan people, especially with the colonel and at least two of his sons now in hiding and still trying to avoid surrender.        

Mr. Jibril is the prime minister of the rebels&rsquo; Transitional National Council; he and the council&rsquo;s chairman, Mustafa Abdel- Jalil, laid out the new government&rsquo;s need for reconstruction aid and technical assistance.        

Mr. Jalil said that Libyans had made a wager on the world&rsquo;s support, but that &ldquo;the world bet on the Libyans, and the Libyans showed their courage and made their dream real.&rdquo;        

The council is the dominant rebel organization, recognized as Libya&rsquo;s government by some 70 nations, but it faces an uphill battle for broad legitimacy in a country splintered by tribal and regional interests. Even the rebel militias who beat the Qaddafi loyalists with the vital aid of NATO aircraft, trainers and weapons supplies have varying loyalties and do not yet see themselves as &ldquo;a coherent army,&rdquo; a senior French official said.        

NATO countries also wanted to hear Libyans&rsquo; assessment of the situation around major the remaining Qaddafi strongholds, like Surt and Sabha, and of their plans for Colonel Qaddafi if captured. The Transitional National Council may seek short-term loans from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, American officials said. But as a nation with a small population and a great deal of oil to sell, Libya is expected to be able to finance its own reconstruction.        

The Libyans have been pressing for the release of the Qaddafi government&rsquo;s assets frozen at the beginning of the conflict, to pay salaries and restore services and oil production.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Western countries have been pushing the United Nations Security Council to release such assets, particularly cash, and several billion dollars has been released: the United States is releasing $1.5 billion, of which $700 million has been delivered, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said; Britain is freeing $1.6 billion, some of it in huge blocks of Libyan bank notes flown in by the Royal Air Force; and on Thursday, France was authorized to release $2.2 billion. Estimates of the global total vary from $50 billion to $150 billion.        

Mrs. Clinton held separate talks on Thursday with Mr. Sarkozy, the Libyan delegation and the Turkish foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, with whom she discussed the Syrian crackdown. The Turks have said they are out of patience with President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, but have not called for him to resign, as Washington has.        

With the Libyans, Mrs. Clinton emphasized the American willingness to help build &ldquo;Libya tomorrow,&rdquo; based on reconciliation and transparency, with democratic rights for all citizens, including women, and &ldquo;free from extremism,&rdquo; according to a senior State Department official. She called for the Libyan seat at the United Nations General Assembly to be transferred to the interim government. She underscored the American view that Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi &mdash; the Libyan convicted for the 1988 Lockerbie bombing and released from a Scottish jail in 2009 to die, but who remains alive in Tripoli &mdash; should be reimprisoned. &ldquo;Justice was aborted,&rdquo; she said.        

In a statement, Mrs. Clinton said &ldquo;it is vital that Libya&rsquo;s transition proceed in a spirit of national reconciliation and justice, not retribution or reprisal.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Libya&rsquo;s new leadership will need to continue to stand against violent extremism and work with us to ensure that weapons from Qaddafi&rsquo;s stockpiles do not threaten Libya&rsquo;s neighbors and the world.&rdquo;        

Mr. Jalil laid out the council&rsquo;s plan of action in Libya, which includes a democratic transition and a new constitution. Mr. Jibril outlined a procedure for a new government that would begin with an assembly of Libyans from all major cities, towns and regions to elect a group to write a new constitution and name a transitional government.        

The draft constitution will be put to a referendum by Libyans, and new elections overseen by United Nations observers will take place within four months for a new parliament and a new government to replace the transitional one, Mr. Jibril said. The process is supposed to take no more than 18 months.        

In another important sign of the legitimacy of the Transitional National Council, countries that did not support the United Nations-mandated war in Libya &mdash; notably Russia, China, Germany and Algeria &mdash; all sent delegations or observers here. South Africa, however, did not, in protest, President Jacob Zuma said, of what he called NATO&rsquo;s violation of the Security Council resolution mandating the use of force to protect civilians.        
