
KAMPALA, Uganda &mdash; Rebels in the Nuba Mountains of Sudan, where armed conflict is inflaming tensions between the government and the newly independent Republic of South Sudan, are not only preparing for a protracted war in the region but also vowing to take the fight nationwide to pursue political change in Sudan.        



Abdel Aziz al-Hilu, a rebel leader, said this week that his forces, which have been on the defensive against the Sudanese Army, were gaining recruits, preparing to go on the offensive and would &ldquo;continue until we reach Khartoum,&rdquo; the Sudanese capital.        

&ldquo;Everybody is a soldier,&rdquo; Mr. Abdel Hilu said. &ldquo;People have said enough is enough.&rdquo;        

He added, &ldquo;We have no choice: we have to continue fighting, to defend our people and also for regime change in Khartoum.&rdquo;        

The rebel leader, a losing candidate last year in an election for governor that helped ignite tensions in the region, denied being supported by South Sudan. He said that his insurgents had captured dozens of armored vehicles, retrieved weapons and shot down Sudanese military aircraft.        

The Nuban people fought alongside the southern Sudanese over decades of civil war against the north, which is predominantly Muslim. Although South Sudan was granted independence in July, the Nubans remain a part of the north.        

The Sudanese government has been accused by residents, human rights groups and some United Nations officials of carrying out a harsh counterinsurgency campaign in the Nuba Mountains that has killed many civilians. Sudanese officials contend they are taking aim exclusively at rebels, and this week the government complained to the United Nations that South Sudan was arming the Nuban rebels.        

&ldquo;We have parted ways,&rdquo; Mr. Abdel Hilu said of the Nubans&rsquo; military and political relationship with South Sudan. But, he added, &ldquo;we are part of a bigger organization&rdquo; that is &ldquo;fighting for the same objectives: of a new Sudan.&rdquo;        
