
JOS, Nigeria (AP) &mdash; Religious rioting in this troubled city in central Nigeria has killed at least 21 people in recent days as the authorities seem to be unable to curb the escalating violence.        

An Associated Press journalist counted 21 bodies awaiting burial at the city&rsquo;s central mosque Friday. At the Jos University Teaching Hospital, doctors collected at least 12 bodies with gunshot and machete wounds, while 82 people were wounded in fighting, said Dr. Stephen Yohanna, the hospital&rsquo;s chief medical director.        

Families began collecting the dead Friday, so it was unclear if the 12 bodies at the hospital were included among the dead at the city&rsquo;s central mosque. The Stefanos Foundation, a local Christian group that tallies the dead and wounded in conflicts in Jos, had yet to complete an accounting, said Mark Lipdo, a foundation coordinator.        

The violence in Jos, a city on the long-volatile dividing line between Nigeria&rsquo;s largely Christian south and Muslim north, began on Monday when a group armed with knives, machetes and bows attacked Muslims praying over the end of Ramadan in a primarily Christian neighborhood, Nigeria&rsquo;s National Emergency Management Agency said. At least four people died on Monday, and witnesses said more than 50 vehicles and 100 motorcycles were set on fire during the clashes that followed the attack.        

Though army and police units moved into the affected neighborhood late Monday, the violence spilled into other areas as the unrest continued throughout the week. Police and military officials declined to comment Friday on the violence.        

Jos sits in Nigeria&rsquo;s &ldquo;middle belt,&rdquo; where dozens of ethnic groups vie for control of fertile lands and political and economic power. While cutting across religious and ethnic lines, much of the conflict finds its root in simmering economic and political issues.        

The government of Plateau State, of which Jos is the capital, is controlled by Christian politicians who have blocked Muslims from being legally recognized as citizens. That has locked many out of prized government jobs in a region where the tourism industry and tin mining have collapsed.        

Sectarian violence has claimed more than 200 lives in the region since a series of church bombings on Christmas Eve.        
