
BAGHDAD &mdash; A spokesman for Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq said Friday that the government would reopen an investigation into a March 2006 raid in which American troops were accused of executing an Iraqi family.        

The decision came two days after McClatchy Newspapers reported on its Web site that a diplomatic cable made public by WikiLeaks disclosed that a senior United Nations official had warned the United States government in 2006 that he had evidence indicating that American troops had executed the family in the town of Ishaqi.        

The cable included a letter written by the United Nations official, Philip Alston. In it, he said that the autopsies of those killed during an assault on a house by American troops seeking an insurgent leader showed &ldquo;that all corpses were shot in the head and handcuffed.&rdquo; In addition, he said, five of the victims were age 5 or younger.        

That account and others provided by Iraqi security officials conflicted with the findings of an investigation by the American military, which concluded three months after the killings that the accusations of an execution were &ldquo;absolutely false.&rdquo; The American inquiry acknowledged that the raid and a subsequent airstrike had led to civilian deaths.        

An American military spokesman in Washington said Thursday that the information in the cable did not change the conclusions of the American investigation.        

Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s spokesman, Ali al-Moussawi, said, &ldquo;We will not give up on enforcing the rights of the Iraqi people.&rdquo;        

It is not clear how the Iraqi government could hold the American servicemembers accountable for the episode or whether the cable would have any effect on negotiations between the United States and Iraq over whether American troops will remain in the country after the end of the year.        

Daham Muhammad, whose family was killed in the raid, said in a telephone interview on Friday that the cable provided additional evidence that his family had been executed.        

&ldquo;I heard about the news that came out, but I don&rsquo;t think that it will make any difference,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;What difference does it make now? My family is buried and covered with dust. I&rsquo;m so distraught, I don&rsquo;t have a job. It would be better if I was dead with them.&rdquo;        
Duraid Adnan contributed reporting.
