
LONDON &mdash; A 30-year-old man was arrested Friday as part of investigations into phone hacking, the police said in a statement. He became the 15th person held since a wide-ranging new inquiry into criminality at Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s News of the World newspaper began early this year.        

An official at News International, the parent company of the now-shuttered News of the World, speaking on condition of anonymity, identified the man as Ross Hall, a former reporter with the newspaper. A spokeswoman for News International declined to comment.        

The police statement said that the man was arrested by appointment on Friday afternoon, &ldquo;on suspicion of conspiracy to intercept voice mail messages&rdquo; and obstructing justice, as part of Operation Weeting, the arm of the investigation focused particularly on phone hacking.        

The arrest came as the phone hacking scandal, bumped from the front pages here amid widespread riots last month, looks set to resume the steady pace of revelations that had struck the heart of the British media, politics and policing in recent months.        

On Tuesday, the day after members of Parliament return from their summer recess, the House of Commons will call several former senior executives from The News of the World and News International, including the former editor of the tabloid, Colin Myler, and the company&rsquo;s former legal manager, Tom Crone, to give evidence.        

The main issue at hand, two people with knowledge of the committee&rsquo;s deliberations said, is whether James Murdoch knew phone hacking was more widespread than acknowledged when he chose to make a record $1.4 million settlement in a 2008 lawsuit brought by the soccer union leader Gordon Taylor, which alleged voicemail interceptions. That settlement included a confidentiality clause. James Murdoch, Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s son, runs the European and Asian businesses of the News Corporation, the Murdoch global media empire.        

Documentary evidence indicating that at least one other reporter was involved in phone hacking would likely have become public had the case proceeded, and undermined the company&rsquo;s initial assertion that the hacking was limited to &ldquo;a lone rogue reporter.&rdquo;        

James Murdoch testified this year that he was not aware of that documentary evidence at the time and had made the settlement because it made financial sense. Mr. Myler and Mr. Crone later said he was &ldquo;mistaken&rdquo; in his testimony and was fully aware of the evidence, a claim they will likely expand on during Tuesday&rsquo;s proceedings. Committee members have said they may recall Mr. Murdoch to answer further questions.        

In light of the accusations, Mr. Murdoch has also faced calls to step down as the chairman of British Sky Broadcasting, also known as BSkyB, a satellite television company of which the News Corporation owns 39 percent.        

A $14 billion bid by the News Corporation to take full ownership of the broadcaster earlier this year became mired in political controversy as the phone hacking scandal broke, and was eventually withdrawn amid allegations that improper links between politicians and the Murdoch family had tainted the process.        
