
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; Sudan&rsquo;s internal conflicts have spread to yet another part of the country, with the Sudanese military shelling opposition strongholds and beginning a major ground offensive in Blue Nile State, Sudanese officials said Friday.        

Blue Nile State lies along the disputed border between Sudan and the newly independent Republic of South Sudan, and the violence there could further strain the tense relationship between the two Sudans, which have yet to agree on how to share profits from South Sudan&rsquo;s oil.        

Just this week, Sudanese officials formally accused South Sudan of aiding rebels in another border region, the Nuba Mountains, where many civilians have been killed in a harsh counterinsurgency campaign by the Sudanese government.        

According to Sudanese opposition leaders, the fighting in Blue Nile began around midnight Friday when Sudanese troops bombarded the home of Malik Agar, Blue Nile&rsquo;s governor and a longstanding opponent of the national government in Khartoum. Sudanese forces, including hundreds of soldiers and a dozen tanks, then attacked several other strategic positions in Ad Damazin, the state capital. Mr. Agar survived the attack, officials said, and it is not clear how many people may have been wounded or killed.        

&ldquo;The National Congress Party (N.C.P.) will answer for the result of this naked aggression and attacks on civilians,&rdquo; said a statement from the Sudan People&rsquo;s Liberation Movement northern branch, an offshoot of the party that governs South Sudan.        

The National Congress Party is Sudan&rsquo;s governing party, and government officials confirmed Friday that they were pursuing what they called rebels in Blue Nile, saying that they had started the fighting. &ldquo;Now there are two armies in one country and this is wrong,&rdquo; said Al-Sawarmi Khaled, a military spokesman. &ldquo;They are holding tanks, and they are dangerous.&rdquo;        

Blue Nile is a crucible of tension because it fought alongside southern rebels during the latter years of South Sudan&rsquo;s long struggle for independence, and state politics there are dominated by the offshoot of the governing party in South Sudan.        

It seems likely, analysts say, that Blue Nile will slide into the same cycle of violence currently engulfing the Nuba Mountains, which are home to thousands of opposition fighters who had also teamed up with southern rebels in years past. All summer long, the Sudanese military has been relentlessly bombing the Nuba Mountains, driving villagers to seek shelter in mountaintop caves. In May, Sudanese Army commanders ordered opposition fighters in Blue Nile and the Nuba Mountains to disarm or move into South Sudan, but they refused. In both areas, the fighters tend to be drawn from non-Arab ethnic groups that have long nursed their own grievances about the lack of development and mistreatment at the hands of the Arab-led central government.        

Relations between Sudan and South Sudan, which declared its independence in July, seem increasingly precarious. In a complaint to the United Nations this week, Sudanese officials announced they had &ldquo;documented proof&rdquo; that South Sudan was supporting the rebels in the Nuba Mountains. Elsewhere in the country, particularly in Darfur to the west, the United Nations has often condemned the Sudanese government for its violence against civilians.        

Compounding matters, Pagan Amum, a senior member of South Sudan&rsquo;s governing party, renewed the threat that his country was considering building its own pipeline to transport oil, which would deprive Sudan of billions of dollars in transit fees because the current arrangement is for South Sudan&rsquo;s oil to flow north, through Sudan, to the Red Sea. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s a lot of interest from companies from the Western world,&rdquo; Mr. Amum said, according to Reuters.        
Josh Kron contributed reporting from Kampala, Uganda.
