
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; A combined Afghan and coalition force killed a suspected insurgent leader in eastern Afghanistan, NATO officials said on Saturday. The man was believed to be a former detainee at Guant&aacute;namo Bay, Cuba, who at one time was accused of helping Osama bin Laden escape from Tora Bora after the fall of the Taliban.        

NATO officials could not confirm whether the man who was killed, whom they identified as Sabar Lal, was the same man as Sabar Lal Melma, who was released from Guant&aacute;namo in 2007 after five years. But a tribal elder from Kunar Province told CNN that the man who had been killed was the former prisoner.        

The elder, Haji Sahib Rohullah Wakil, was arrested with Mr. Melma in August 2002 while attending a meeting with United States military officials in Asadabad, according to documents leaked to the antisecrecy organization WikiLeaks and published by The New York Times.        

Mr. Melma was released in September 2007 to Afghan custody after being determined to be a &ldquo;medium risk.&rdquo; It was not clear on Saturday where he went next. Mr. Wakil, who was released about seven months later, told CNN that Mr. Melma &ldquo;chose a civilian life&rdquo; after his release and was not in the insurgency.        

But NATO officials said in a statement that Sabar Lal was responsible for attacks and the financing of operations in the Pech District, and was in contact with senior members of Al Qaeda in eastern Afghanistan and in Pakistan. Coalition forces located him at a compound near Jalalabad in Nangarhar Province after receiving tips from local residents.        

As they surrounded the compound on Friday night, he came out with an assault rifle and was killed, NATO said in a statement, adding that several suspected insurgents were taken into custody.        

In tribunal hearings at Guant&aacute;namo, Mr. Melma was accused of orchestrating a rocket attack against American forces, helping to smuggle Qaeda fighters in and out of Afghanistan and assisting in Bin Laden&rsquo;s escape as American bombers closed in on him in Tora Bora. Mr. Melma, who was a brigadier general in charge of 600 border security troops in Kunar at the time of his arrest, denied all the accusations and said he had tried to help American forces. The allegation that he assisted Bin Laden was later dropped.        

Meanwhile, the speaker of the Afghan Parliament on Saturday swore in eight of nine new members reinstated last month by the country&rsquo;s election commission, as hundreds of police officers armed with riot gear and machine guns blocked the entrance to the building to keep out members who had been replaced by the commission&rsquo;s ruling.        

The sedate swearing-in ceremony was witnessed by only a few dozen Parliament members. Dozens more, however, stood outside in solidarity with the ousted members, in a sign of a widening rift within Parliament, which up to now had appeared mostly unified against President Hamid Karzai&rsquo;s efforts to reshape the legislature.        

Supporters of the nine disqualified members took the police presence, which the president&rsquo;s office denied ordering, as a sign that Mr. Karzai was willing to use force to impose the decision.        

&ldquo;This is a coup d&rsquo;&eacute;tat by the president against the Parliament,&rdquo; said Abdul Jabbar Qahraman, a lower house member from Helmand Province. He is part of a coalition that claims to have about 140 members &mdash; more than half the lower house &mdash; who oppose the Independent Election Commission&rsquo;s latest ruling.        

The standoff, which remained peaceful, was the latest in a crisis that has frozen the legislative process here for much of the past year after Mr. Karzai, through the appointment of a special tribunal, tried to reinstate 62 candidates. Among them were many of his supporters, disqualified by the election commission.        

In a series of compromises, Mr. Karzai agreed to abolish the tribunal last month, and the election commission agreed to reinstate nine members.        
