
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; In life and death, Sabar Lal&rsquo;s story was riddled with conflicting narratives.        

After the fall of the Taliban government in 2001, he claimed to be on the side of the Americans in the hunt for Al Qaeda, but United States troops accused him of helping Osama bin Laden and his allies flee to Pakistan.        

After five years in the American detention center at Guant&aacute;namo Bay, Cuba, he returned to Afghanistan in 2007 and built a new life with his two wives and nine children. They lived comfortably in a wealthy section of Jalalabad, one of the safer big cities in the country.        

But suspicions lingered, and on Friday, coalition and Afghan forces killed him in a night raid at his residence, acting on intelligence that he had been using his wealth to help lead and finance insurgent attacks in the Pech Valley in Kunar, the northeastern province where he grew up.        

His death has angered members of the Afghanistan High Peace Council, who are responsible for reconciliation efforts with militants. Council members say that just days earlier they had won a promise from coalition forces to stop bothering Mr. Lal after they had detained him last month. NATO officials insist they had not detained him.        

These conflicting details, among many others, add to the puzzle of Mr. Lal&rsquo;s life before and after Guant&aacute;namo. His killing comes as the Peace Council, appointed by President Hamid Karzai, is struggling to persuade Taliban fighters to lay down their arms and rejoin society. Some council members worried Sunday that NATO&rsquo;s raid on Mr. Lal&rsquo;s compound could further undermine those efforts.        

&ldquo;It really hurts the prestige of the Peace Council among the people of Afghanistan,&rdquo; said Haji Deen Muhammad, a council member. &ldquo;More importantly, those Taliban members who were released through our process are going to have big concerns that this will happen to them.&rdquo;        

Council members said NATO and Afghan forces detained Mr. Lal, who was in his late 40s, in an operation early last month, then turned him over to the National Directorate of Security, Afghanistan&rsquo;s main intelligence agency. But after assurances from Afghan intelligence officials and high-level government officials that he did not pose a threat, the council, working closely with its NATO counterparts, obtained his release, said Farhadullah Farhad, the council&rsquo;s deputy chief executive officer.        

&ldquo;Everybody was involved,&rdquo; he said, adding, &ldquo;They would not have released him unless he was proven innocent.&rdquo;        

Lt. Col. Jimmie E. Cummings Jr., a spokesman for the NATO-led military coalition, said that until the operation that killed Mr. Lal, NATO forces had never &ldquo;detained him or had him in custody.&rdquo; Officials with the National Directorate of Security did not respond to questions on Sunday.        

White House officials have long worried about Guant&aacute;namo detainees reverting to terrorism after their release. More than 600 prisoners have been released or transferred to prisons elsewhere since 2002, a Defense Department spokeswoman said Sunday. Last year, the Obama administration told Congress that 117 former detainees were confirmed or suspected of turning to terrorist activity. The prison still holds 171 detainees.        

Mr. Lal, who was identified in Guant&aacute;namo records as Sabar Lal Melma, was viewed by officials there as someone more committed to self-interest than to any cause. He had come from a wealthy family in Kunar Province and had ties to prominent tribal elders. Through years of fighting against the Soviets in the late 1980s and later against the Taliban, he knew the treacherous mountain terrain along the Pakistan border intimately, information valued by American forces searching for Qaeda crossing routes.        

After the Taliban&rsquo;s fall in late 2001, he was given the rank of brigadier general and put in charge of 600 border security troops in Kunar.        

But as Americans searched for Bin Laden in the mountainous Tora Bora region south of Kunar, they suspected Mr. Lal of orchestrating rocket attacks against American forces. They also suspected that he and a prominent tribal elder were helping Arab fighters, perhaps even Bin Laden himself, escape to Pakistan.        
Sangar Rahimi and Abdul Waheed Wafa contributed reporting from Kabul, and an employee of the New York Times from Jalalabad.
