
BERLIN &mdash; Parties on the German left prevailed in a regional election in the northeastern state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania on Sunday, with the center-left Social Democrats swept back to power and the Greens elected to the regional parliament for the first time, according to preliminary results.        

The Social Democrats, led by Erwin Sellering, won 36 percent of the vote, six percentage points more than in 2006, according to the preliminary results. The outcome signaled a continuing upturn in the party&rsquo;s fortunes on the regional level and provided it with a boost before the federal election in 2013.        

Chancellor Angela Merkel&rsquo;s conservative Christian Democratic Union received 24 percent, down four percentage points from five years ago.        

Perhaps the biggest winner of the day was the Green Party, which won 8.5 percent of the vote, more than double the 3.4 percent it received in 2006.        

The Greens, who are part of the opposition on the federal level, have enjoyed success in several recent regional elections. They defeated the Christian Democrats in March in the prosperous southwestern state of Baden-W&uuml;rttemberg, taking over the governing of a German state for the first time.        

&ldquo;We have the wind on our backs,&rdquo; Cem &Ouml;zdemir, a federal Green leader, told ZDF, the German public television channel, on Sunday. &ldquo;We ran a focused campaign, concentrating on education and the environment.&rdquo;        

The Greens will face another significant challenge this month at the polls in Berlin, where they are trying to unseat the Social Democrats.        

The biggest losers in the state election in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania were the Free Democrats, a pro-business party that is a coalition partner with Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s Christian Democrats in the federal government. The party won only 3 percent of the state vote, after winning more than 9 percent in 2006. The Free Democrats will be excluded from the regional parliament because they failed to win at least 5 percent of the votes, the minimum required.        

Voters have been expressing disappointment with the performance of the Free Democrats in the federal coalition government, partly because of the party&rsquo;s initial opposition to closing the country&rsquo;s nuclear energy plants, but also because of persistent squabbling and concerns about a leadership widely viewed as weak and indecisive.        

The party&rsquo;s loss of a string of regional elections over the past year has weakened Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s center-right government and its overall standing in the polls.        

&ldquo;We have no illusions that we have to improve the standing of the Free Democrats,&rdquo; Christian Lindner, general secretary of the party, said Sunday night.        

It is still not clear whether Mr. Sellering, the leader of the Social Democrats, will continue to govern the state in a coalition with the Christian Democratic Union, as it has since 2006. The success of the Left Party, which won 18 percent of the vote, two percentage points more than in 2006, meant that Mr. Sellering could choose either party.        

&ldquo;It is up to Mr. Sellering to decide,&rdquo; Sigmar Gabriel, the federal leader of the Social Democrats, told ZDF. &ldquo;But one thing is sure. The results show that the federal coalition is in very bad shape.&rdquo;        
