
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; After the Muslim holy month of Ramadan ends with the Id al-Fitr holiday, Libyan employers traditionally throw a reception for their workers. On Sunday, the interim rebel government decided to make its reception a little different and declared an open house.        

Pretty much anyone was welcome who was willing to dress up and step through the metal detector at the door to the hall of the General Congress of the People; once inside they were encouraged to wander the halls and meet the men (and a woman or two) who are trying to put things back together again.        

During the decades of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s harsh and eccentric rule, the building housed the prime minister and his top officials. Since Tripoli, the capital, fell less than two weeks ago, the rebel leaders who have arrived here have settled into its hardwood-paneled offices and marble corridors to begin tackling the nitty-gritty problems inherited by the victors, ranging from restoring the water supply and phone service to dealing with the gunmen still roaming the streets.        

On Sunday, such challenges were put aside.        

&ldquo;We could never have entered this place before,&rdquo; said Mohadin Krekshi, who runs a legal translation agency and said he lost his government job 42 years ago, after Colonel Qaddafi seized power, for failing to declare allegiance to him. &ldquo;Can you imagine? This is like some kind of No. 10 Downing Street, and all of the Tripolitani are here.&rdquo;        

Mr. Krekshi wore a smile pasted across his face, like nearly everyone else, except for a few very nervous bodyguards.        

Refreshments were scant &mdash; canned soft drinks, a few sweets, a tray of baklava &mdash; but then most things are in short supply in Tripoli now, and most people were too busy grinning and chatting away to bother to eat. A young girl in a starched dress, with flowers in her hair and a bucket of single-stemmed roses, wandered among the guests, giving everyone a free rose and a smile.        

Mohammed al-Misrati raises Arabian racehorses, but he took time off from the business of rounding up escaped horses who had been frightened off by explosions to bring along his gaggle of six beaming children. &ldquo;Wonderful, wonderful,&rdquo; he said of the open house. He was soon animatedly discussing the writing of a new constitution and national elections.        

Othman Bisanti, a lawyer who once defended five Bulgarian nurses falsely blamed by the Qaddafi government for having deliberately contaminated hundreds of Libyan children with H.I.V., also turned out.        

&ldquo;Of course we&rsquo;re happy now,&rdquo; Mr. Bisanti said. &ldquo;We couldn&rsquo;t get near here before. We&rsquo;re practicing freedom now, without walls.&rdquo;        

A hand-sewn rebel flag &mdash; an adaptation of the flag from the royalist era before the Qaddafi years &mdash; was hanging above the wainscoting in one room, but otherwise the building was virtually the same as it was before.        

It was spared the looting and destruction visited on many other symbols of the Qaddafi government, said an aeronautics engineer who lives nearby, because neighbors banded together to guard it once Qaddafi officials had fled. Their neighborhood had organized secretly and many residents were already armed when the uprising entered its last days, said the engineer, who requested anonymity because of fear of reprisal. One neighbor was killed, he said, trying to save the building.        

Most members of the Transitional National Council, the rebels&rsquo; civilian leadership, have not yet arrived in Tripoli from their seat in the eastern city of Benghazi, so the council&rsquo;s deputy chairman, Ali Tarhouni, is the highest-ranking rebel official here. He is also finance and oil minister, and when he arrived at the open house, the crowd greeted him as a celebrity.        

Mr. Tarhouni fled Libya in 1972 and was put on a Qaddafi hit list. He trained as an economist and taught at the University of Washington in Seattle until he returned in March to join the rebels seeking to oust Colonel Qaddafi.        

He worked the crowded halls and rooms with a politician&rsquo;s 100-watt smile. &ldquo;This is the people&rsquo;s house, and they never had a chance in 40 years to come here,&rdquo; Mr. Tarhouni said, explaining the rebels&rsquo; motivation for organizing the open house.        

One of his bodyguards, Faisal Masmari, had his own particular take. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s freedom now because we are all heroes here &mdash; and because I am standing here, and he is not,&rdquo; Mr. Masmari said, referring to Colonel Qaddafi.        

Addressing the crowd, Mr. Tarhouni promised that Libyans had not overthrown one dictatorship only to be stuck with another.        

&ldquo;Whoever occupies this place, they will not be a permanent presence again,&rdquo; he said.        

Ducking out for a cigarette, Mr. Tarhouni elaborated on what the event represented. &ldquo;Look at these faces, they&rsquo;re really happy,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The reason is that they&rsquo;re free. It&rsquo;s amazing what freedom does to people.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a dream, it&rsquo;s a fantasy,&rdquo; Mr. Tarhouni added. &ldquo;To see your people walking around, not afraid of anything any more. Even though Qaddafi&rsquo;s still around, they&rsquo;re not afraid of anyone.&rdquo;        
