
BEIJING &mdash; China&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry admitted on Monday that state-run arms companies met Libyan officials this summer to broker arms sales to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s besieged regime, apparently confirming information in Libyan government documents found by a Canadian journalist in Tripoli.        

But a ministry spokeswoman denied that Chinese government officials knew of the talks, and said that no arms were delivered to the Qaddafi regime, either directly or through third parties.        

&ldquo;Chinese companies have not signed any military or trade contracts with Libya, let alone provided military exports to Libya,&rdquo; the spokeswoman, Jiang Yu, said at the ministry&rsquo;s daily briefing. &ldquo;China exercises strict management over all military exports.        

&ldquo;Relevant Chinese government departments with responsibilities over military exports will take this matter seriously,&rdquo; she said.        

Officials of Libya&rsquo;s transitional government had expressed outrage over the documents, which were first reported by The Globe and Mail of Toronto. The records indicate that, during meeting in Beijing in mid-July, Chinese arms merchants sought to sell Qaddafi representatives $200 million worth of sophisticated weapons, including portable surface-to-air missiles similar to the American-made Stinger that potentially could bring down certain military aircraft.        

Chinese arms brokers suggested that the weapons be delivered via South Africa or Algeria, and said that Algeria&rsquo;s existing stock of Chinese arms could be immediately transferred to Libya and replenished by fresh shipments from China.        

The Chinese spokeswoman, Ms. Jiang, did not say why the arms deals were not completed, but she noted that all arms sales must win government approval before the weapons are exported.        

The Chinese government abstained in March from the United Nations resolution that authorized &ldquo;all necessary measures&rdquo; to protect Libyan civilians, the basis of NATO&rsquo;s support for rebel forces. But China joined an earlier unanimous vote to approve United Nations resolution 1970, which banned military assistance to the Qaddafi government. China normally opposes sanctions but said at the time that civilian casualties in the Libyan conflict merited the embargo.        

&ldquo;As far as I know, since the adoption of United Nations Security Council resolution 1970, Chinese companies have not provided military equipment to Libya, directly or indirectly,&rdquo; Ms. Jiang said on Monday.        

Whether the Chinese government&rsquo;s denials would satisfy the Libyan rebels was not clear. Relations between China and the new National Transitional Council already have been soured by China&rsquo;s reluctance to follow the rest of the United Nations Security Council in recognizing the new government. China has said that it would fully back United Nations efforts to rebuild Libya&rsquo;s war-damaged infrastructure.        

Omar Hariri, who heads the transitional government&rsquo;s military council, told The Globe and Mail last Friday that he was &ldquo;almost certain that these guns arrived and were used against our people.&rdquo; A Libyan military spokesman, Abdulrahman Busin, said on Sunday that the rebels &ldquo;have hard evidence of deals going on between China and Qaddafi,&rdquo; as well as deals with other governments.        

But the arms-sale documents, found in a trash heap in a Tripoli neighborhood once occupied by wealthy Qaddafi supporters, indicate only that negotiations took place, and offer no hint as to their conclusion.        

The Libyan documents were written on the letterhead of the Qaddafi government Supply Authority, a procurement agency. They detailed meetings in Beijing with officials from three Chinese state-run weapons companies: China North Industries Corporation, known as Norinco; China National Precision Machinery Import-Export Corporation, known as CPMIEC, and China Xinxing Import and Export Corporation.        

Norinco&rsquo;s Web site states that the company makes &ldquo;precision strike systems&rdquo; and other weapons, including antiaircraft missiles and small arms. CPMIEC, a maker of shoulder-launched antiaircraft systems and other missiles, was sanctioned in the 1990s and early 2000s by the United States for supplying prohibited weapons technology to Pakistan and Iran. Xinxing largely makes body armor and other military gear.        
