
LONDON &mdash; A British panel investigating the behavior of the country&rsquo;s intelligence agencies toward terrorism suspects will examine new accusations of close cooperation between British spies and Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s government, Prime Minister David Cameron said Monday.        

The move came after Libyan intelligence files appeared to reveal that both Britain and the United States sent rendition subjects to Libya for questioning in recent years. Both countries support the rebels who rose up against Colonel Qaddafi as the Arab Spring unfolded, and Britain took a lead role in the NATO bombing campaign that effectively helped oust him last month.        

The British announcement was the latest international fallout from revelations stemming directly from Libya&rsquo;s chaos, as reporters and human rights advocates discover and peruse troves of documents amassed by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s intelligence services. Some in particular relate to his rapprochement with the West after forswearing terrorism and nuclear ambitions in 2004, a period when Western spies established a seemingly warm relationship with their Libyan counterparts.        

The documents appear to show that the Libyan cooperation with both the Central Intelligence Agency and Britain&rsquo;s MI-6 spy agency under Colonel Qaddafi was much closer than previously acknowledged. The cooperation appeared to be far greater with the American intelligence agency, which sent terrorism suspects to Libya for questioning at least eight times, despite the country&rsquo;s reputation for torture. Britain sent at least one suspect, according to the documents.        

The Obama administration is unlikely to conduct its own public inquiry. Early in his presidency, President Obama rejected the idea of a broad inquiry into rendition, torture, secret detention and other reported practices in the American campaign against terrorism, saying he wanted to look forward, not back. That stance has been denounced by human rights advocates and some Democrats in Congress.        

Last week, when the documents suggesting Libya acted as a partner in the American rendition program surfaced, a C.I.A. spokeswoman, Jennifer Youngblood, said that working with foreign governments against terrorist threats is &ldquo;exactly what we are expected to do.&rdquo;        

An American official said the cooperation was an important achievement. The C.I.A. had helped persuade Colonel Qaddafi to abandon his quest for nuclear weapons and to work against terrorists who were &ldquo;actively targeting Americans in the U.S. and abroad,&rdquo; said the official, who spoke of the intelligence cooperation on the condition of anonymity. The official noted that the documents in Tripoli also showed the C.I.A. had urged the Qaddafi government to respect the human rights of terrorism suspects.        

&ldquo;There are lots of countries willing to take terrorists off the street who want to kill Americans,&rdquo; the official said. &ldquo;That doesn&rsquo;t mean U.S. concerns about human rights are ignored in the process.&rdquo;        

In Britain, Mr. Cameron told Parliament on Monday that the existing panel &mdash; named for its head, the retired judge Sir Peter Gibson &mdash; on the handling of terrorism suspects would investigate reports that &ldquo;relations between the British and Libyan services became too close.&rdquo; Mr. Cameron established the panel in July 2010 to investigate complaints by former detainees at the Guant&aacute;namo Bay prison that British security personnel were complicit in mistreatment.        

Mr. Cameron also said that there must be &ldquo;no bolt-hole or pampered hiding place&rdquo; for Colonel Qaddafi and that NATO forces whose planes have destroyed much of his military power would continue their campaign &ldquo;for as long as we are needed.&rdquo;        

Earlier on Monday, a spokesman for Mr. Cameron said the Gibson inquiry was &ldquo;well placed&rdquo; to investigate reports that Britain was involved with the United States in the rendition of terrorism suspects including Abdel Hakim Belhaj, who is now a military commander for the rebels.        

In an interview with The New York Times on Wednesday in Libya, Mr. Belhaj gave a detailed account of his incarceration that closely matched events portrayed in one of the secret folders found in Tripoli last Friday and examined by journalists and Human Rights Watch.        

The documents included at least three binders of English-language papers, one marked C.I.A. and the other two marked MI-6, among a larger stash of files in Arabic.        

It was impossible to verify their authenticity, and none of them was written on letterhead. But details seemed consistent with what is known about the transfer of terrorism suspects abroad for interrogation and other agency practices.        

Mr. Belhaj is now reported to be seeking an apology from Britain for his 2004 rendition and subsequent imprisonment in Libya, during which, he has said, he was tortured, Britain&rsquo;s Press Association news agency said Monday.        

British officials have long insisted that they do not participate in or condone torture in any way.        

In a statement on Monday, the Gibson inquiry said it was &ldquo;looking at the extent of the U.K. government involvement in or awareness of improper treatment of detainees during rendition.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We will therefore of course be considering these allegations of U.K. involvement in rendition to Libya as part of our work,&rdquo; the statement said.        

The accusations relate to a period when Tony Blair&rsquo;s Labour Party was in office &mdash; before the victory of a Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition led by Mr. Cameron in May 2010. The Conservatives have long taunted Mr. Blair for courting Colonel Qaddafi, and the claims of complicity in rendition could offer potent political ammunition.        

In a radio interview on Monday, Jack Straw, who was Mr. Blair&rsquo;s foreign secretary at the time of some of the accusations, said that Britain&rsquo;s position was &ldquo;very clear, and that was that we were opposed to unlawful rendition, we were opposed to any use of torture or similar methods. Not only did we not agree with it, we were not complicit in it and nor did we turn a blind eye to it.&rdquo;        

But he qualified his remarks by saying, &ldquo;No foreign secretary can know all the details of what intelligence agencies are doing at any one time. That is why it is important that these allegations are thoroughly examined by Sir Peter Gibson&rsquo;s inquiry.&rdquo;        
John F. Burns reported from London, and Alan Cowell from Paris. Scott Shane contributed reporting from Washington.
