
PARIS &mdash; The trial of former President Jacques Chirac of France on corruption charges will proceed without Mr. Chirac having to be present, a court decided Monday, citing the poor state of Mr. Chirac&rsquo;s mental health.        

&ldquo;Mr. Chirac will not be ordered to appear in person, and as a result he shall be tried in his absence, represented by his lawyers,&rdquo; the court said in a statement. The court acted after assessing a neurologist&rsquo;s report provided by Mr. Chirac&rsquo;s lawyers, who had asked for the ruling.        

When the corruption trial reopened Monday after a six-month hiatus, Mr. Chirac was absent, and his lawyers told the court that he suffered from memory loss and was too ill to appear.        

Mr. Chirac, 78, is the first French former head of state to be put on trial since Marshal Philippe P&eacute;tain, who was convicted of treason at the end of World War II. Mr. Chirac is accused of breach of trust and embezzlement in approving the creation of 28 fake jobs in the 1990s for cronies and party political operatives.        

Mr. Chirac has denied the charges. If he is convicted, the maximum sentence would be 10 years in jail and a fine of just over $200,000, but it is highly unlikely that the court would sentence him to any time in jail.        

The trial was adjourned in March after a constitutional challenge, but the challenge was rejected by the Court of Appeals. On Friday, Mr. Chirac&rsquo;s lawyers submitted a medical report to the presiding judge, saying that Mr. Chirac was medically unfit to take part in the proceedings because his memory lapses meant he could not reliably testify about the events of 20 years ago. The report was prepared by Olivier Lyon-Caen, head of the neurology unit at La Piti&eacute;-Salp&ecirc;tri&egrave;re hospital here.        

The weekly magazine Paris Match reported that Mr. Chirac suffers from anosognosia, meaning a memory loss that the sufferer himself is unaware of and unable to recognize. Anosognosia is often seen in Alzheimer&rsquo;s patients, for example. Mr. Chirac&rsquo;s lawyers said that in his case the memory loss was a symptom possibly related to a 2005 stroke.        

The lawyers on Monday asked Judge Dominique Pauthe to let them act for Mr. Chirac in the trial because of his condition. Mr. Chirac &ldquo;will be present if you require it,&rdquo; and had never tried to &ldquo;escape his responsibilities&rdquo; or &ldquo;delay the outcome of this trial,&rdquo; said Jean Veil, one of Mr. Chirac&rsquo;s lawyers.        

Mr. Veil said that Mr. Chirac showed &ldquo;symptoms of different neurological illnesses&rdquo; and was &ldquo;no longer in a state to remember details of events 20 years ago.&rdquo;        

The anticorruption group Anticor, a plaintiff in the case, asked the judge to appoint a neutral expert to examine the issue. But prosecutors said they had no objection to the trial proceeding without Mr. Chirac in the courtroom.        

Mr. Chirac was mayor of Paris from 1977 to 1995, when he was elected president. He had immunity from prosecution until he left the presidency in 2007, and his lawyers have been fighting since then to avoid a trial.        

The City of Paris dropped its complaint against Mr. Chirac last year in return for a payment of more than $3 million, which came from Mr. Chirac and the governing political party, the Union for a Popular Movement, which is the successor to Mr. Chirac&rsquo;s party.        

France&rsquo;s affection for Mr. Chirac, a politician of Machiavellian talents and personal charm, has grown since he left office. Even if he is found to be guilty of the charges, many French citizens would prefer to see him left alone in his retirement, according to numerous opinion polls.        

The current foreign minister, Alain Jupp&eacute;, was a deputy financial adviser to Mr. Chirac when he was mayor, and served as general secretary of his party. Mr. Jupp&eacute; was convicted in 2004 on charges similar to those against Mr. Chirac; he received an 18-month suspended jail sentence and lost the right to run for political office for 10 years. He appealed and had his sentence reduced; in 2006 he was re-elected mayor of Bordeaux and later became a government minister again.        

Mr. Jupp&eacute; will be called as a witness in the Chirac trial, Judge Mr. Pauthe said. In Bordeaux on Monday, Mr. Jupp&eacute; said he was sad to see the decline in Mr. Chirac&rsquo;s health, and added, &ldquo;If the court wants to hear me, of course I will go.&rdquo;        

Also on trial in the case are two former chiefs of staff at the Paris City Hall and seven others said to have benefited from graft.        
