
CAIRO &mdash; The criminal prosecution of former President Hosni Mubarak stumbled badly on Monday after four senior police officials denied that he had ordered Egyptian security forces to use live ammunition against demonstrators challenging his rule.        

Victims&rsquo; lawyers were shocked and outraged, and violence erupted in and outside the courtroom &mdash; all four officers had been expected to testify against Mr. Mubarak.        

&ldquo;The prosecution cheated the people,&rdquo; the human rights lawyer Gamal Eid wrote in a Twitter message after the hearing ended. &ldquo;A mood of disgust and disappointment.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mubarak is the first autocrat put on trial by a government brought to power by the regional democracy movement known as the Arab Spring, and his trial has drawn worldwide attention. While Egyptian legal experts said it was too soon to draw conclusions about the ultimate verdict, for many Egyptians, the testimony on Monday raised for the first time the possibility that Mr. Mubarak might win acquittal.        

On Monday, in the trial&rsquo;s third session, the former ruler, now 83 and professing ill health, again arrived in court on a hospital gurney, delivered by helicopter and rolled to the cage that serves as a dock. But this time, the judge barred the television cameras that had previously hovered over the cage to capture such indignities as the former president yawning or picking his nose.        

The hearing was also the first since rebels drove Col. Muammar el- Qaddafi from his fortress in Tripoli, the Libyan capital, and their new provisional government has promised to apprehend him so that Libyans, too, can see their former leader in court. (Tunisia&rsquo;s former president, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, who fled to Saudi Arabia in January, has been convicted in absentia of crimes including embezzlement and the smuggling of drugs, guns and archaeological artifacts.)        

The Persian Gulf monarchies, distrustful of the agitation for democracy, have complained about Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s humiliation, diplomats say, and over the weekend a team of lawyers from Kuwait arrived in Cairo to join the Mubarak defense, reportedly sent by the Kuwaiti monarchy in gratitude for Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s support for the American-led war to drive Iraq from Kuwait in 1991.        

The Egyptian authorities, however, have not yet allowed them in court, and a scuffle broke out at a news conference announcing their arrival.        

Violence broke out in the courtroom as well. A fistfight and repeated scuffles erupted between lawyers representing demonstrators killed during the protests and lawyers for the defense. And after one such fight during an early recess, people in the courtroom began chanting, &ldquo;The people want to execute the murderer,&rdquo; Mr. Eid, the human rights lawyer, wrote in a Twitter message from the courtroom.        

Outside, relatives of some of the more than 800 people killed during the demonstrations that ousted Mr. Mubarak threw stones at baton-wielding riot police outside the courtroom, and about two dozen were reportedly arrested and another roughly two dozen injured.        

Mr. Mubarak is charged with complicity in the killing of civilian protesters during the 18 days of demonstrations that ended his rule, as well as separate charges of corruption. He is standing trial alongside his two sons, Gamal and Alaa, as well as his former interior minister, Habib el-Adly.        

To begin laying out its case on the murder charge, the prosecution on Monday called the four senior police officials who, according to state television, had indicated to investigators that Mr. Mubarak and Mr. Adly had authorized the use of deadly force to beat back the protesters.        

But instead all four said the opposite.        

Hussein Moussa, head of communications for the central security forces, absolved Mr. Mubarak and Mr. Adly of responsibility, and said that Ahmed Ramzy, the director of central security, had authorized the use of &ldquo;all necessary means&rdquo; to keep protesters from reaching Tahrir Square. Mr. Ramzy, the witness said, had also ordered the transportation of automatic weapons to the Interior Ministry headquarters.        

Mr. Moussa also acknowledged that he had been sentenced to two years in jail for destroying evidence.        

A second senior officer involved in the security police operations at the time said that Mr. Ramzy had told policemen to use self-restraint and treat the protesters like brothers. A third officer said the police were told to shoot only to defend the Interior Ministry and, he said, they were ordered to shoot into the air or at the legs, not to kill. A fourth witness, an officer in the streets at the height of the conflict, said he was ordered only to use sticks, body armor and tear gas.        

Some legal experts said it would be premature to presume the testimony would yield an acquittal. A retired judge noted that witnesses in Egyptian courts often back away from the accounts they gave in an interview or affidavit, and the judge is free to throw out the live testimony in favor of the earlier statement.        

Hossam Bahgat, executive director of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, which is representing some of the victims, said he still hoped the judge would subpoena recordings of phone calls between Mr. Mubarak and Mr. Adly during the peak of the protests.        

Still, many Egyptians, who have clamored for months to see Mr. Mubarak on trial or even executed, said they felt betrayed by what they considered a clumsy prosecution.        

Yosri Fouda, the influential host of a television news program, responded with sarcasm. The next session of the trial, Mr. Fouda wrote in a Twitter message, would go even further, to show that in fact it was the Tahrir Square protesters who &ldquo;killed Mubarak and Adly and 800 police officers.&rdquo;        
Heba Afify contributed reporting.
