
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Rebel negotiators have resumed talks with loyalist holdouts in the desert town of Bani Walid in an effort to persuade them to surrender peacefully before a Sept. 10 deadline set by the interim government, Libyan officials said Monday.        

Striking notes of increasing confidence, rebel officials announced they had made progress on several nonmilitary fronts. A group of rebel officials took a visiting United Nations envoy on a tour of their main detention center, Jadida Prison, while others announced that water service had been restored to Tripoli, the capital. Also, the government&rsquo;s acting economy minister said badly needed cash had begun flowing in from abroad after some of the country&rsquo;s foreign bank accounts were unfrozen.        

Those efforts to restore normalcy plowed ahead even in the continued absence of the rebels&rsquo; top leadership, who remain either in the eastern city of Benghazi or abroad. Only 14 of the 42 members of the Transitional National Council have come to Tripoli as yet.        

Rebel forces continued to observe the one-week extension given to Bani Walid to surrender, and the rebels&rsquo; acting minister of defense, Jalal al-Dghaili, said talks with supporters of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi there were continuing, according to the chairman of the transitional council&rsquo;s media committee, Jalil Elgallal. Rebel attention was focused on Bani Walid because figures from the Qaddafi government were last seen fleeing there, about 100 miles southeast of Tripoli.        

Negotiations were continuing in the beleaguered holdout coastal city of Surt as well, said Abdulrahman Busin, the military&rsquo;s press liaison.        

Rebel forces remained 60 miles from Bani Walid on both eastern and western approaches to the small city, but had left a road open to the north to allow families to flee if they wanted to do so, rebels at checkpoints near the city said.        

While rebels held their fire, NATO warplanes continued to attack, carrying out 52 airstrikes on Sunday, mostly in Surt. There were none that day in Bani Walid.        

In Tripoli, more shops and businesses began to open, many rebel checkpoints disappeared from the streets, and celebratory gunfire diminished noticeably. The Libyan dinar&rsquo;s value soared against the dollar on the official market, leading to the collapse almost overnight of a parallel or black market in the currency.        

While the police have not yet taken over security duties from rebel fighters, the acting minister of the interior, Ahmed Darratt, said Monday that 40 to 50 percent of police officers had returned to duty.        

Mr. Darratt also said that lists of corrupt policemen and those who had committed human rights abuses under Colonel Qaddafi had been compiled, but that they were a small number. &ldquo;The vast majority of the policemen are serving the people and they are coming back,&rdquo; he said.        

Ian Martin, an envoy from the United Nations secretary general, met with Interior Ministry officials to discuss technical cooperation on justice and human rights issues, and then visited the Jadida Prison, where rebel officials have started to move prisoners from a variety of temporary facilities.        

There are 700 there, he said, about half sub-Saharan Africans and half Libyans, most accused of supporting the previous government, although in many cases no specific charges had been levied.        

Mr. Martin said the authorities&rsquo; openness contrasted favorably with the denial of human rights issues during the Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s rule.        

&ldquo;You have to say it&rsquo;s a new beginning in terms of access and denial,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a transparency of access and recognition rather than denial that human rights are not being adequately protected, that there&rsquo;s a lot of serious work to do to get to a position where they&rsquo;re not detaining people arbitrarily.&rdquo;        

Black African migrant laborers have complained that they are frequently subject to arbitrary arrest and accused of having been mercenaries fighting for Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces.        

Water engineers from the rebels&rsquo; stabilization committee in Tripoli announced that delivery of water to Tripoli via the Great Man-Made River, a network of pipes that brings water 500 miles from underground aquifers in the southern desert, had resumed as of 1 a.m. Monday.        

They said that some parts of Tripoli would need work on clogged pipes before the water reached everyone.        

The water problem &ldquo;has been solved,&rdquo; said one engineer, Abdul Hakim Shweidy. He was among a team of nine engineers sent on what one rebel official, Alamin Belhaj, called &ldquo;a secret mission,&rdquo; driving to the southern desert in modest cars to avoid drawing attention in areas still under Qaddafi control.        

Access to the pumping equipment needed to get the Man-Made River flowing again lay in Shweara, a village where local tribesmen joined with rebel fighters to overthrow officials, said Mr. Belhaj, the chairman of the new government&rsquo;s stabilization committee.        

The acting economy minister, Abdullah Shamiya, said cash problems would begin easing. Restricted to withdrawals of 250 dinars, or about $200, Tripoli&rsquo;s residents have been lining up for hours at banks.        

Mr. Shamiya also said the council had discussed long-term economic policy and established some general guidelines, including a policy of encouraging a private sector.        

And while some businesses would be privatized, he said, that would not be the case with &ldquo;strategic sectors,&rdquo; including the oil industry, which accounts for 98 percent of Libya&rsquo;s economic activity.        
Bryan Denton contributed reporting from Misurata, Libya.
