
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; American and Pakistani officials celebrated their cooperation on Monday as Pakistan announced the arrests of three men they identified as senior operatives of Al Qaeda who had been planning attacks on American and other Western targets.        

The shift in tone was particularly noticeable for Pakistan, which has been bitter toward the United States in the four months since its military was surprised, humiliated and infuriated by the Navy Seals raid in Pakistan that killed Osama bin Laden.        

&ldquo;This operation was planned and conducted with technical assistance of United States intelligence agencies with whom Inter-Services Intelligence has a strong, historic intelligence relationship,&rdquo; the Pakistan&rsquo;s military said in a statement, referring to Pakistan&rsquo;s top military spy agency. &ldquo;Both Pakistan and United States intelligence agencies continue to work closely together to enhance security of their respective nations.&rdquo;        

One of the men arrested was identified as Younis al-Mauritani, who was captured in southwestern city of Quetta, which has long been thought of as a safe haven for Taliban and Qaeda leadership. American officials said Monday that he had a central role in planning attacks in Europe.        

The Pakistan military said he was &ldquo;responsible for planning and conduct of international operations&rdquo; for Al Qaeda. &ldquo;Al-Mauritani was tasked personally by Osama bin Laden to focus on hitting targets of economical importance in United States of America, Europe and Australia,&rdquo; the military said. &ldquo;He was planning to target United States economic interests including gas/oil pipelines, power generating dams and strike ships/oil tankers through explosive-laden speed boats in international waters.&rdquo;        

In Washington, the deputy White House press secretary, Joshua Earnest, praised his capture and the collaboration behind it. &ldquo;We applaud the actions of Pakistan&rsquo;s intelligence and security services that led to the capture of a senior Al Qaeda operative who was involved in planning attacks against the interests of the United States and many other countries,&rdquo; he said.        

The last time Pakistan announced the arrest of a Qaeda operative, in mid-May, the relationship between Pakistan and the United States risked spiraling out of control as the Pakistan Army and NATO helicopters exchanged fire on the Pakistan side of the border with Afghanistan. Two Pakistani soldiers were wounded in the firefight, which came as some in Washington questioned the $3 billion a year in aid to the country.        

Tensions have run high since the May 2 raid on Bin Laden&rsquo;s compound, which inflamed Pakistani sensitivities over sovereignty while at the same time heightening distrust of Pakistan in the United States.        

Monday&rsquo;s announcement sought to strike a note of respect for a relationship portrayed as longstanding. &ldquo;The intimate cooperation between Pakistan and United States intelligence agencies has resulted into prevention of number of high-profile terrorist acts not only inside Pakistan/United States but elsewhere also in world,&rdquo; the Pakistan Army statement said.        
Eric Schmitt and Jackie Calmes contributed reporting from Washington.
