
KANDAHAR, Afghanistan &mdash; Every morning, jobless young men gather by the hundreds at the busy central square here in this southern city, desperate for whatever work they can find. In other places, this would be an army recruiter&rsquo;s dream. Not so in Kandahar.        

Many of the men here have brothers and cousins in the insurgency, or are former fighters themselves. Others fear what would happen to them or their families if they joined the Afghan Army. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to be killed by the Taliban,&rdquo; Janan, 30, who like many Afghans goes by one name, said on a recent day as he jostled with the crowd under a scorching sun.        

Afghan and NATO officials have long struggled to entice young men in the heavily Pashtun south &mdash; the Taliban heartland &mdash; to join the Afghan Army. Despite years of efforts to increase the enlistment of southern Pashtuns, an analysis of recruitment patterns by The New York Times shows that the number of them joining the army remains relatively minuscule, reflecting a deep and lingering fear of the insurgents, or sympathy for them, as well as doubts about the stability and integrity of the central government in Kabul, the capital.        

The influx of tens of thousands of American troops, who have pushed the Taliban back in much of the south, has done little to ease those concerns or to lift recruitment. In some places, the numbers of southern Pashtun recruits are actually shrinking, causing an overall decline of nearly 30 percent in the past five months, compared with the same period a year ago.        

With the deadline for the withdrawal of most foreign forces in 2014, the need to enlist more southern Pashtuns is pressing if Afghanistan is to have a national army that resembles the ethnic and geographic makeup of the country. It is no small concern. The absence of southern Pashtuns reinforces the impression here that the army is largely a northern institution &mdash; to be used against them &mdash; and what Afghan and Western officials worry is a dangerous division of the country.        

&ldquo;If you go and talk to ordinary Afghans in Kandahar, they believe the government will collapse in a week or two,&rdquo; said Dr. Mahmood Khan, a member of Parliament from Kandahar. &ldquo;People are still kind of under the spell of the Taliban. They believe it is not only stronger than the government, but that their intelligence is stronger. They can find out very soon if your son or brother is serving in the army.&rdquo;        

The predominantly Pashtun southern and southeastern provinces &mdash; Kandahar, Helmand, Oruzgan, Zabul, Paktika and Ghazni &mdash; make up about 17 percent of Afghanistan&rsquo;s total population, yet they contributed just 1.5 percent of the soldiers recruited since 2009.        

Some progress has been made, but merely in percentage terms; Kandahar and Helmand more than doubled their number of recruits last year from the previous year. The raw numbers, however, are discouraging, and Afghan officials worry that the recent erosion of security in Kandahar City could reverse the few gains they have made.        

The two provinces are home to nearly two million people. Yet since 2009 they have contributed fewer than 1,200 soldiers to the army, less than 1 percent of the nearly 173,000 enlistees in that period. By comparison, Kunduz, a northern province of about 900,000 people, enlisted more than 16,500 recruits.        

Oruzgan, a province of more than 300,000 residents, had 14 recruits all of last year.        

Not surprisingly, the vast majority of recruits come from provinces in the north and northeast, where the insurgency is weaker. While the overall representation of Pashtuns, Afghanistan&rsquo;s largest ethnic group, in the army is equitable &mdash; they make up about 42 percent of the population and roughly the same percentage of the army &mdash; the vast majority come from a few northeastern provinces. More than a third come from Nangarhar Province alone.        
Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar, and Sangar Rahimi and Abdul Waheed Wafa from Kabul, Afghanistan.
