
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Rebel negotiators pressed fighters loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in the town of Bani Walid to surrender on Tuesday, as a dozen senior members of his government fled the country in a convoy that crossed the southern desert into Niger, according to the State Department.        

A flurry of confusing reports lent an air of mystery to the convoy and set off excited speculation among Libyan rebels that Colonel Qaddafi had fled the country &mdash; bringing joy that he could do no more harm here, and disappointment that he might have escaped Libyan justice &mdash; though by day&rsquo;s end they were in doubt that he had fled.        

The colorful and contradictory accounts from rebel leaders and officials of various countries seemed to reflect the unpredictability of the conflict and of the colonel himself, and the difficulty that rebel forces, preoccupied with securing Libya&rsquo;s main cities near the Mediterranean Sea, face in trying to snare fleeing loyalists in the vast desert south.        

Some versions said the convoy included more than 200 military vehicles, the kind of grand entourage that Colonel Qaddafi sometimes took on his travels. Others said it was made up mainly of Tuareg fighters who had sided with him as mercenaries or irregulars. Rebel leaders issued conflicting statements, with some saying one of his sons had fled with gold looted from the country&rsquo;s banks.        

But later, in Washington, the State Department&rsquo;s spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, confirmed that a convoy had left Libya for Niger carrying &ldquo;some dozen or more senior members of the regime,&rdquo; including senior military commanders, but not Colonel Qaddafi.        

The American ambassador to Niger, Bisa Williams, spoke to officials there and urged them to detain and return to Libya any exiles wanted by international prosecutors, Ms. Nuland said.        

She said that Nigerois officials had been strongly urged &ldquo;to detain those members of the regime who may be subject to prosecution, to ensure that they confiscate any weapons that are found and to ensure that any state property of the government of Libya &mdash; money, jewels, etc. &mdash; also be impounded so that it can be returned to the Libyan people.&rdquo;        

Senior rebel officials were left trying to learn who, if anyone, had slipped through their fingers even as their fighters pressed for the surrender of encircled loyalist strongholds in Surt and Bani Walid.        

Ali Tarhouni, the deputy chairman of the Transitional National Council, said in a statement, &ldquo;We&rsquo;re in direct contact with officers on the ground and our friends at NATO, and we are trying to verify the facts about the convoy.&rdquo;        

Col. Ahmed Bani, the rebels&rsquo; military spokesman based in Benghazi, said in an interview that he thought about 15 people had fled.        

&ldquo;We can&rsquo;t confirm how many vehicles were in the convoy or who was in the convoy,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They are saying that there was gold and money in the convoy, but we can&rsquo;t confirm that.&rdquo;        

One thousand miles of desert separate population centers in Libya and Niger, and while rebels say they have troops in southern Libya, it is unclear whether any rebels were near roads or border crossings that the convoy might have taken.        

Rank-and-file rebels said that they were disappointed by the escape of senior officials, like Mansour Dhao, Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s security chief, who was blamed by many Tripoli residents for the crackdown there and was said by a Nigerois official to be in the convoy. But they said the escape had provided more evidence that the old government had lost its bite.        

&ldquo;We know that they don&rsquo;t have the power to do anything significant,&rdquo; said Rabei Dehan, 21, a Tripoli resident who said he had fought in the western mountains and spoke for a rebel unit called the Red Thuraya Battalion.        

Niger&rsquo;s government sought to play down the scale and composition of the convoy and said Colonel Qaddafi was not traveling in it. In a telephone interview, Marou Amadou, Niger&rsquo;s minister of justice, described the convoy as small &mdash; &ldquo;three vehicles maximum&rdquo; &mdash; and unarmed. Niger had allowed the group to cross into its territory for purely humanitarian reasons, he said.        
Anne Barnard reported from Tripoli, Libya; Adam Nossiter from Dakar, Senegal; and Alan Cowell from Paris. Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Washington, and Steven Erlanger from Paris.
