
BEIJING &mdash; China will tighten its procedures for selling weapons abroad after the disclosure last week that state-owned arms manufacturers were negotiating arms sales to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s government as it sought to fend off rebel fighters this summer, a Foreign Ministry spokeswoman said Tuesday.        

The spokeswoman, Jiang Yu, also said China would continue to obey a United Nations embargo on weapons sales to Libya that was approved in February with Chinese support.        

The rebels, who now hold power in Tripoli, the capital, have said they think Chinese companies shipped weapons to Qaddafi forces. China has insisted that the negotiations took place without the government&rsquo;s knowledge and that no arms were shipped.        

The proposed arms deals, totaling $200 million, were outlined in Libyan procurement documents found in a Tripoli trash heap by a Canadian journalist after the rebels moved into Tripoli. The papers give no indication that any of the proposed deals with three Chinese companies was completed.        

Speaking at the Foreign Ministry&rsquo;s daily news briefing, Ms. Jiang said the government would &ldquo;further strengthen management over military exports.&rdquo;        

She said, without elaborating, &ldquo;Competent authorities for military trade will handle the matter in a serious manner in accordance with regulations.&rdquo;        

Word of the proposed arms deals has shaken China&rsquo;s relationship with the rebels&rsquo; interim government, the Transitional National Council. Rebel leaders have said they have evidence of arms shipments from companies in China and from other nations despite the embargo, and they have pledged to retaliate should sales to Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s military be proved.        

Before the revolt in Libya began in February, China sold arms to the Qaddafi government and was a major customer for Libyan oil, buying about 3 percent of its annual requirements from Libya.        

Ms. Jiang said China supports the transitional council, although it was the only one of the United Nations Security Council&rsquo;s five permanent members yet to formally recognize the rebel government. Russia, which was a strong critic of the NATO military campaign in support of the rebels, extended recognition on Thursday. The other permanent members are the United States, Britain and France.        

&ldquo;Our lines of communication with the N.T.C. are smooth,&rdquo; Ms. Jiang said, adding that China would recognize the government &ldquo;when conditions are ripe.&rdquo;        
