
BEIJING &mdash; Two months after Asia Television, a broadcaster based in Hong Kong, carried an apparently false report that the former Chinese president Jiang Zemin had died, two of the broadcaster&rsquo;s top news executives have taken responsibility for the report and resigned.        

The two executives &mdash; Leung Ka-wing, a senior vice president, and his deputy, Tammy Tam Wai-yee &mdash; disclosed their resignations late Monday. Asia Television&rsquo;s news channel reported in a bulletin on July 6 that the 85-year-old Mr. Jiang, who led the Communist Party in China from 1989 to 2002, had died. The channel later retracted the report and apologized.        

China was swept by rumors of Mr. Jiang&rsquo;s illness or death after he failed to appear at an observance of the Communist Party&rsquo;s 90th anniversary in early July. Though the official Xinhua news agency rejected the Asia Television report as &ldquo;pure rumor,&rdquo; there has been no official word on Mr. Jiang&rsquo;s condition.        

The Hong Kong Broadcasting Authority has said that it is investigating 41 complaints about the report.        

Some Hong Kong news reports said the resignations were a sign that journalistic standards were being compromised at the influential company, which started Hong Kong&rsquo;s first over-the-air television station. In an interview on Monday with the network, though, Mr. Leung said he had quit &ldquo;because I failed to stop the news report from being aired despite my all-out efforts.&rdquo;        

Why that had happened was not explained.        

Mr. Leung quit his post once before, in 2008, in what was apparently a dispute over editorial independence and the appointment of a new chief executive, but he agreed to stay on after the executive left. The Standard, a Hong Kong newspaper, reported Tuesday that Mr. Leung had recently clashed with managers over a plan to combine a news department program with one conceived and run by the company&rsquo;s advertising department.        

Press freedom is an especially delicate issue in Hong Kong, which has strived to maintain its British tradition of free speech even as the former colony has in other ways been steadily integrated with mainland China. Asia Television, whose ownership has changed several times, has been criticized in recent years for restricting coverage of pro-democracy activities in Hong Kong in favor of upbeat coverage of supporters of the mainland government.        

The company counts more than 100 million viewers for its broadcasts in Mandarin, Cantonese and English, including a Cantonese channel it operates in the United States and a channel that rebroadcasts Chinese state television&rsquo;s international service.        
