
BAGHDAD &mdash; Insurgents attacked a minibus filled with Iraqi soldiers in Anbar Province on Tuesday, killing all nine people aboard in a storm of gunfire, another episode in a wave of violence that has roiled Iraq in recent weeks.        

Attacks across the country, particularly in the western province of Anbar, have increased significantly as insurgents have deployed a variety of deadly means including ambushes, improvised explosive devices and car bombs to kill civilians and Iraqi security forces. The recent increase has raised fears about a resurgence of Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, which once controlled large areas of Anbar and said in August that it would conduct 100 attacks to avenge the killing of Osama bin Laden.        

Around 10 a.m., the minibus, which was transporting soldiers back to work from days off, approached two vehicles that were blocking the main highway near the district of Haditha, about 100 miles west of Ramadi, the provincial capital.        

As the minibus slowed, gunmen fired on it, killing eight soldiers and the driver. The gunmen then burned the bus and fled, local officials said. Each body in the bus had dozens of bullet wounds, they said.        

A journalist living in Haditha said the district&rsquo;s residents had received threatening letters on Tuesday morning from Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia.        

&ldquo;We are coming back soon,&rdquo; the letter said, according to the journalist. &ldquo;We have no mercy.&rdquo;        

The United States military&rsquo;s spokesman in Iraq, Maj. Gen. Jeffrey Buchanan, said in a recent e-mail that Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, also known as Al Qaeda in Iraq, or A.Q.I., had been very active in the past few weeks after having been significantly weakened at all levels by two years of counterterrorism operations.        

&ldquo;A.Q.I. has never changed its desire to drive a wedge between the people and government of Iraq,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;It conducts high-profile attacks to discredit the Iraqi security forces and to undermine the government&rsquo;s legitimacy.&rdquo;        

Elsewhere in Iraq on Tuesday, police officers found three Katyusha rockets that were aimed at the Kalsu military base in Babil Province. An official for the United States military said in an e-mail that there were no reported attacks on American forces.        
Zaid Thaker and Yasir Ghazi contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an Iraqi employee of The New York Times from Ramadi, Iraq.
