
ROME &mdash; Thousands of workers took to the streets in Italy in a general strike on Tuesday to protest a package of ever-changing austerity measures, adding to tensions in a crucial week for the future of the euro.        

The strike placed mounting pressure on the government of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, which last month grudgingly proposed the austerity package of 45.5 billion euros, or about $64 billion, in exchange for the European Central Bank buying Italian debt to help Italy help fend off a sovereign debt crisis.        

It also added to broader concerns over the government&rsquo;s ability to push through labor reforms and whether Europe could solve its spreading debt crisis. European stocks were down 0.7 percent on Tuesday, after a battering of more than 4 percent on Monday. The Dow Jones industrial average lost 100.96 points on Tuesday.        

Many traders were looking ahead to Wednesday, when Germany&rsquo;s Constitutional Court was expected to issue a significant ruling on whether Germany could participate in the bailout of Greece, which risks default without foreign loans.        

Last week, officials from the European Union, the International Monetary Fund and the European Central Bank abruptly left Athens after a dispute over Greece&rsquo;s failure to implement reforms or meet its deficit-reduction targets.        

In the year since its first foreign bailout, Greece has cut public-sector wages and begun the privatization of some state industries, but it has also struggled to implement a range of labor market reforms.        

Now, Italy is facing some of the same difficulties, as Mr. Berlusconi appears reluctant to push through measures that are unpopular even within his own fractious governing coalition.        

After the Milan Stock Exchange plunged more than 5 percent on Monday, President Giorgio Napolitano of Italy, who has a largely symbolic role yet wields moral suasion, told the government to act swiftly and decisively in passing the austerity measures.        

On Tuesday, the government reversed itself and authorized putting the austerity measures to a confidence vote in the Senate, where Mr. Berlusconi has a significant majority. Such a move would help secure their passage, because a vote against the measures would risk bringing down the government.        

Most significantly, the latest incarnation of the austerity package would change Italian labor law to allow businesses to bypass national labor contracts, making it easier to hire and fire workers &mdash; a move that economists say is crucial for making the Italian economy more flexible but that labor unions vehemently oppose.        

On Tuesday, Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s office said the measures would also raise the VAT, or value-added tax, to 21 percent from 20 percent; add a &ldquo;solidarity tax&rdquo; of 3 percent on Italians who earn more than 500,000 euros, or about $700,000, annually; and increase the retirement age for women in the private sector in 2014.        

The Northern League, the most powerful party in Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s coalition, had been opposed to raising the retirement age for women, since public day care is scarce in Italy and grandmothers often serve that role.        

The disarray in the governing coalition has led a growing number of analysts to question its ability to act effectively. In a front-page editorial on Tuesday in Il Sole 24 Ore, Italy&rsquo;s leading daily business newspaper, the editor in chief, Roberto Napoletano, wrote that the government should bear the &ldquo;honor and burden&rdquo; of representing the country &ldquo;if it is capable of doing so.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Or if it is not,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;it should have the honesty and dignity to face the consequences.&rdquo;        

Those consequences could include putting the euro zone, the nations that use the euro, at risk. On Monday, Mario Draghi, the departing Bank of Italy president and the next president of the European Central Bank, became the latest European leader to pressure Mr. Berlusconi to approve the austerity measures swiftly.        

He said that Italy should &ldquo;not take it for granted&rdquo; that the European Central Bank would continue buying Italian debt.        

Were that to stop happening, Italy&rsquo;s borrowing costs would be likely to rise, putting intense strain on a country whose economy is expected to grow no more than 1 percent this year, not enough to help pay down a debt that is 120 percent of gross domestic product, second in the euro zone after Greece.        

But critics say the hastily-proposed austerity measures hit the middle class too hard. On Tuesday, Pierluigi Bersani, the leader of the center-left opposition, said: &ldquo;This package should be strengthened and made more equitable. It&rsquo;s useless to pass it quickly if it&rsquo;s not done well. Otherwise we will end up having a new austerity package every week.&rdquo;        

The eight-hour strike on Tuesday shut down transit and businesses nationwide. It was called by the C.G.I.L. union, which represents six million current and retired public- and private-sector workers.        

Addressing an estimated 70,000 people in Rome on Tuesday, Susanna Camusso, the leader of C.G.I.L., called the change to the labor law &ldquo;unjust&rdquo; and threatened more strike actions if it were not removed.        

&ldquo;If Parliament doesn&rsquo;t strike this from the bill, they have to know that we will use every path and initiative possible so that this shameful measure is removed,&rdquo; she told the crowd outside the Colosseum.        

After dropping 1.8 billion euros, or about $2.5 billion, in cuts to regional governments, the austerity package would crack down on tax evasion, which Finance Minister Giulio Tremonti estimates will bring in billions in revenue.        

But the austerity measures are not popular with many Italians, who are feeling increasingly squeezed. As he walked around Rome&rsquo;s Piazza Navona, Pasquale Nappo, 47, a public employee in the Rome Province, wore a butcher&rsquo;s apron covered in fake blood to protest what he called the &ldquo;social butchery&rdquo; of the austerity measures.        

&ldquo;The politicians don&rsquo;t seem to understand, and haven&rsquo;t for years, that they need to give people answers,&rdquo; said Mr. Nappo, who added that three of his four children were unemployed. &ldquo;They don&rsquo;t understand that if I earn 1,300 euros a month, I can&rsquo;t pay a rent of 1,200 euros, which is what it costs to live in Rome.&rdquo; That would be a rent of roughly $1,700.        
Gaia Pianigiani contributed reporting.
