
WISHTATA, Libya &mdash; At this village on the highway to the loyalist stronghold of Bani Walid on Tuesday, negotiators from both sides sat down in the small mosque to talk peace, an event broadcast live by Al Jazeera.        

Four elders from Bani Walid, one of a handful of holdouts still loyal to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, came the 35 miles to the nearest major rebel checkpoint here to explain that 90 percent of their town supported the rebels, but that many believed government propaganda warning that the rebels would rape and pillage when they took over.        

Rebel negotiators, seeking to reassure them, borrowed a phone to call their prime minister, Mahmoud Jibril, who has rarely been in Libya since assuming his post. Over a scratchy cellphone speaker, he reassured the elders that there would be no reprisals and that civil authorities were waiting nearby to deliver food and restore water, electric and medical services to the town.        

The elders, representing some of the most prominent families in Bani Walid, said that they favored ending everything peacefully, but that they would have to return to consult with other leaders in the town.        

No sooner had they stepped outside the mosque than rebels began firing sidearms and heavy weapons wildly into the air. One even set off a grenade. They were celebrating news &mdash; false, as it turned out &mdash; that Surt, another holdout place, had surrendered. Still, the gunplay did not seem calculated to reassure the loyalist negotiators that they would be in safe hands, and they left in a clearly nervous state.        

Most of the fighters here are from Bani Walid themselves, forced to flee early in the rebellion when the town stayed pro-Qaddafi. Some were imprisoned and released only on Aug. 21, when Tripoli fell.        

Between arrests and fear of arrests, half the population of Bani Walid left, these fighters said, and after the fall of places like Zintan and Misurata, loyalists from those places headed into Bani Walid, on the edge of Libya&rsquo;s southern desert. Some in Bani Walid say that it is those loyalist outsiders who are the biggest impediment to a peace deal. The town is also dominated by the Warfalla tribe, Libya&rsquo;s largest, whose members packed the Qaddafi government&rsquo;s civil and military service.        

One of the rebel sympathizers imprisoned in Bani Walid was Muhammed Gnaya, an engineer. He was arrested during peaceful protests in the town on May 28 and locked up at the notorious Abu Salim prison. He said that he and other rebels had been talking to their friends and relatives in the town and that surrender was only a matter of time. &ldquo;People are hungry, there is no food, no water, no gas, no electricity,&rdquo; Mr. Gnaya said.        

&ldquo;They will hand over their weapons,&rdquo; said Jamal Abdul Muktalib, a former Libyan Foreign Ministry employee who fled the town even before the revolution because it was so pro-Qaddafi. He does not buy the theory that 90 percent of the town is pro-rebel &mdash; perhaps 50 percent, he said. &ldquo;But they have seen the power of the freedom fighters and the power of the NATO airstrikes,&rdquo; Mr. Muktalib said.        

Every conceivable military target in and near the town has been destroyed in NATO airstrikes, so much so that strikes against Bani Walid seem to have halted over the past few days.        

Many of the rebel fighters say they have heard from people inside the town that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons Seif al-Islam and Saadi were there with their entourages until two days ago. They also said they had heard Moussa Ibrahim, the Qaddafi government spokesman, on the local radio broadcasting from Bani Walid.        

Rebels found some encouragement from reports that a convoy had crossed into Niger.        

The endgame in Bani Walid has attracted an enormous amount of attention, with scores of journalists waiting at the last major checkpoint. The town is thought to have been a likely escape route for Colonel Qaddafi if he fled the capital. It is far smaller than Surt, an oil port along the main highway linking eastern and western Libya that is another focal holdout.        

Rebels said they suspected that if Bani Walid and its powerful Warfalla families gave up, Surt and other holdouts would soon follow.        

Jamal Gorgy, 38, was imprisoned at Abu Salim with three of his brothers, one of whom died there. Now he expects to be among the first Bani Walid natives and rebels to enter the town.        

&ldquo;If Bani Walid had fallen to us on Feb. 17th,&rdquo; Mr. Gorgy said, referring to the first day of the uprising against Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s rule, &ldquo;by Feb. 18th Qaddafi would have fallen too.&rdquo;        

When he gets to Bani Walid, Mr. Gorgy said, the first thing he wants to do is not to visit his relatives, but to put up the rebel flag.        

That will have to wait, however. After a few hours, the elders from Bani Walid returned &mdash; after having been turned away by loyalist fighters from their own community. &ldquo;They wouldn&rsquo;t even listen to them,&rdquo; said a rebel fighter, Jawad bin Dullah. &ldquo;They said go back to the rebels.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Everything,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;is waiting for the zero hour.&rdquo;        
