
Peter Twiss, a British test pilot who set a world aviation speed record in March 1956 when he became the first flier to officially exceed 1,000 miles an hour in level flight, died on Aug. 31 in Titchfield, England. He was 90.        

His death was announced by his family.        

In the decade after World War II, the British government began promoting research into flight at speeds approaching and exceeding the speed of sound as a precursor to a new generation of military and perhaps commercial aircraft.        

On the morning of March 10, 1956, Mr. Twiss, a test pilot for Britain&rsquo;s Fairey Aviation, climbed into the cockpit of the delta-winged Fairey Delta 2, a research plane powered by a single turbojet engine, and took off from an experimental aircraft station near England&rsquo;s south coast.        

He flew to 38,000 feet and then made two runs of 9.4 miles each in opposite directions over West Sussex.        

As he ended his first run, Mr. Twiss became something of a sightseer.        

&ldquo;A wide sweep out to sea, with the Thames Estuary away to one side and the French coast on the other,&rdquo; he wrote in a first-person account for The New York Times Magazine a few weeks later. &ldquo;I noticed stubble fields being burned off in Normandy and how the smoke was blowing across the Channel toward the white cliffs of England. But this was no time to relax.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;There was no sensation of speed,&rdquo; Mr. Twiss recalled, but he was hardly comfortable. Though the outside temperature was 60 degrees below zero, air friction over the plane&rsquo;s smooth skin had caused the temperature inside to rise to more than 100 degrees, and he was perspiring.        

Under the rules governing international aviation speed records, Mr. Twiss was required to make two runs without dropping by more than 328 feet or climbing by more than 2,460 feet, even when turning between his runs.        

Using radar and information provided by ground observers, he carried out his navigational feats superbly, landing 24 minutes after he had taken off, with an average speed of 1,132 miles an hour for his runs.        

Mr. Twiss easily eclipsed the previous record speed for level flight, set in 1955 by Col. Horace A. Hanes of the United States Air Force&rsquo;s flight-test center at Edwards Air Force Base in California. Colonel Hanes flew a North American F-100C Super Sabre at an average speed of 822 miles an hour, the first level flight exceeding the speed of sound. The Air Force pilot Chuck Yeager was the first to break that barrier, in 1947, but he did it in a rocket plane propelled from a bomber that had carried it aloft.        

The British Aircraft Corporation built a revamped version of the Fairey Delta 2 for aerodynamic research in the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic development program, employing its distinctive feature that dropped the cockpit and nose by 10 degrees during takeoffs and landings, enabling the pilot to see the ground easily. British Airways and Air France made their first Concorde commercial flights in January 1976.        

Lionel Peter Twiss was born on July 23, 1921, in Lindfield, England, the son of an Army officer. He flew fighter planes for the Royal Navy in World War II, supporting Operation Torch, the 1942 Allied invasion of North Africa, and later carrying out missions over Germany.        

He left military service as a lieutenant commander and joined Fairey Aviation in 1946. &ldquo;He decided after leaving the navy that he didn&rsquo;t want to become a commercial pilot because that would become a bit boring for him,&rdquo; his wife, Jane, told The News of Portsmouth, England, upon his death. &ldquo;He said it would be like driving a bus.&rdquo;        

Mr. Twiss joined Fairey&rsquo;s boating division in 1960 and was in charge of day cruises. He pursued his love of speed by competing in powerboat racing.        

In addition to his wife, Mr. Twiss is survived by two daughters and several stepchildren, The Guardian reported.        

Apart from his genuine achievements, Mr. Twiss had some adventurous moments in motion pictures. He piloted a Fairey Swordfish torpedo bomber in the 1960 movie &ldquo;Sink the Bismarck!&rdquo; reprising the British attack on that German battleship in World War II. In 1963 he was at the helm of a Fairey speedboat during a chase scene in &ldquo;From Russia With Love.&rdquo; He wasn&rsquo;t in quest of a speed record this time. He was a bad guy in pursuit of Sean Connery&rsquo;s James Bond.        
