
Seven Danes, including a family with three children, have been released after being held hostage in Somalia since February, when their yacht was hijacked by pirates in the Arabian Sea, the Danish Foreign Ministry said Wednesday.        

The parents, Jan Quist Johansen and Birgit Marie Johansen, and their children, ages 12 to 16 at the time of the hijacking, along with two Danish crew members, were in good health &ldquo;considering the circumstances,&rdquo; the ministry said in a statement.        

The statement did not elaborate on the circumstances that led to their release or whether a ransom had been paid.        

Reuters reported that it had spoken by telephone to a pirate in Somalia who identified himself as Hussein and said that a group he belonged to had received a $3 million ransom on Tuesday. That report could not be independently confirmed.        

Denmark has often favored negotiation over more aggressive means to pursue the release of hostages held by Somali pirates.        

The Danes were flying home to Denmark, according to Danish news reports.        

The family&rsquo;s yacht was sailing through the waters off the Horn of Africa in late February when pirates boarded the vessel. The ministry said the family and crew had been held by pirates since Feb. 24.        

The capture of the Johansens and their sons Rune and Hjalte and daughter Naja came a week after Somali pirates killed four Americans aboard a pleasure vessel in one of the deadliest episodes of piracy in recent years in the Gulf of Aden and the waters off Somalia.        

Despite the presence of dozens of warships, cargo ships and seafaring vacationers remain vulnerable to attack.        

Governments have urged vessels to stick to designated shipping lanes when passing through the Arabian Sea.        

Somali pirates have increased their attacks in recent years, according to a report in January by the Piracy Reporting Center of the International Maritime Bureau. According to the report, 1,181 people were taken hostage and eight were killed in attacks on 445 ships in 2010.        

The Danish Foreign Ministry said that two Danish citizens and four Filipinos from a Danish freighter, Leonard, were still being held in Somalia by pirates, and that the authorities were monitoring their situation. Their ship was hijacked Jan. 12 near Oman in the Gulf of Aden.        
