
KARLSRUHE, Germany &mdash; Germany&rsquo;s ability to come to the rescue of troubled European partners won crucial backing from the country&rsquo;s constitutional court on Wednesday, a victory for Chancellor Angela Merkel that also provided at least a temporary reprieve for markets that had begun to worry that Europe&rsquo;s common currency could collapse.        

The ruling, which defied some expectations that the court would hamstring Mrs. Merkel, removed one obstacle to German leadership of Europe at a time when Germans are being relied on more than ever to figure out a solution to the debt crisis that has ensnared weaker members of the euro zone, including Greece, Ireland and Portugal. Stock markets in Europe and the United States recovered sharply on news of the court&rsquo;s action.        

Europe has swung from gloom to cautious optimism repeatedly during its financial crisis, and few analysts considered the ruling a decisive turning point. While the court did not require full parliamentary approval for future bailouts, it did mandate approval by a smaller panel.        

But analysts say that confirmation of Germany&rsquo;s leadership role could push Greece and Italy to make pledges of austerity in return for European help, and could also put pressure on Finland and Slovakia, two euro-zone members that have introduced obstacles to their participation in bailouts, to support the rescues.        

&ldquo;The ship is full-steam ahead on its determined course,&rdquo; said J&uuml;rgen Matthes, who studies international economic policy at the Cologne Institute for Economic Research. &ldquo;It will exert force on the other countries, not least Slovakia and Finland, when Germany can move ahead without obstacles.&rdquo;        

Italy also took steps on Wednesday to reassure markets, as the Senate approved the government&rsquo;s multibillion-euro package of budget cuts and tax increases. That eased fears that Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi would backtrack on promised budget measures to manage Italy&rsquo;s towering debt.        

Mrs. Merkel struck a confident note in speaking before Parliament, saying the ruling by the Federal Constitutional Court had &ldquo;absolutely confirmed&rdquo; her government&rsquo;s &ldquo;transparent&rdquo; handling of Europe&rsquo;s debt crisis in close consultation with Parliament. &ldquo;That is exactly the path we have followed,&rdquo; she said.        

Had the court declared the bailouts unconstitutional, the repercussions for the euro and the fragile European banking system would almost certainly have been devastating. &ldquo;If the euro collapses, so does Europe,&rdquo; Mrs. Merkel said, adding that &ldquo;Germany&rsquo;s future is inseparable from Europe&rsquo;s future.&rdquo;        

The court rejected three appeals against the legality of earlier bailouts, which have stirred a furious political debate among Germans. The suits had been brought by a coalition of German lawmakers, economists and business executives who argued that Germany&rsquo;s participation in loans and support funds for Greece undermined Parliament and infringed on provisions underpinning the country&rsquo;s democracy.        

The court&rsquo;s president, Andreas Vosskuhle, warned that the ruling did not represent a &ldquo;constitutional blank check for additional rescue packages.&rdquo; The court required the government to seek the approval of Parliament&rsquo;s budget committee before making money available for future bailouts of European countries struggling under mounting debt.        

That requirement could still hamper Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s ability to take quick measures, but it represented much less of a political hurdle than if the court had required approval by the full Parliament for each decision, which many analysts had predicted.        

For now the chancellor seems more concerned with winning passage of the deal reached between European leaders in July to expand the bailout funds. Mrs. Merkel is hoping that the approval of the court, with its high public standing in the eyes of Germans, helps her put down a rebellion in her own coalition over the measure. The vote is expected on Sept. 29, and numerous legislators from her party have threatened not to support the increase, which would raise Germany&rsquo;s share to about $297 billion.        

The constitutional court, despite its distance from the capital, or perhaps because of it, is consistently found to be the most respected player in German government. Analysts say that Germans have a deep respect for judges and the judiciary, and the court has not been shy in wielding its power. It declared in a 2009 ruling on the Lisbon Treaty that it had jurisdiction to overturn European policies, rules and decisions it found unconstitutional.        
Reporting was contributed by Alan Cowell from Paris, Judy Dempsey and Victor Homola from Berlin, and Jack Ewing from Frankfurt.
