
ROME &mdash; The Italian Senate approved a much-revised package of austerity measures on Wednesday aimed at helping Italy to fend off a sovereign debt crisis that would threaten the stability of the euro.        

The measures &mdash; tax increases, spending cuts and fewer labor protections &mdash; are intended to trim 54 billion euros, or about $76 billion, to balance Italy&rsquo;s budget by 2013. To ensure passage after weeks of bitter political fights, the center-right government of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi resorted to a confidence vote in the Senate, meaning that a majority &ldquo;no&rdquo; vote would have not only scuttled the bill, but also brought down the government. The measures passed, 165 to 141.        

During the voting, an estimated several hundred people demonstrated near the Senate, some scuffling with the police. The bill now moves to a vote next week in the lower house, where the government has a narrower majority.        

The passage of the measures, on a day when a German court upheld Berlin&rsquo;s part in European bailout packages, was another sign that Europe&rsquo;s governments were acting to safeguard the euro.        

Italy&rsquo;s national debt is 1.9 trillion euros (about $2.7 trillion), or 120 percent of gross domestic product &mdash; the highest rate of debt in the 17-member euro zone after Greece. Borrowing costs have soared on a lack of investor confidence, raising the prospect of a solvency crisis that could upend the euro.        

Mr. Berlusconi, who once promised never to raise taxes, reluctantly introduced the measures last month in answer to conditions set by the European Central Bank for buying Italian debt to drive down the country&rsquo;s borrowing costs.        

The austerity bill has gone through myriad changes in recent weeks, unnerving investors and dragging down shares in Italian banks at a time when European bank shares are under intense scrutiny.        

But after European leaders expressed concern that Italy had watered down the measures in response to criticism from within the center-right coalition, the government on Tuesday strengthened them, adding changes to the pension system and raising the value-added tax on goods and services to 21 percent from 20 percent.        

The total package would now trim 54 billion euros to balance the budget by 2013, the Finance Ministry said Wednesday.        

The package includes a much-debated change to Italian labor law making it easier to hire and fire workers. Economists say that is crucial to make the Italian economy more flexible, but labor unions vehemently oppose the change and have promised more labor unrest this fall.        

The bill would impose a &ldquo;solidarity tax&rdquo; of 3 percent on Italians who earn more than 300,000 euros annually, or about $420,000. That tax would last through 2013. The bill also cuts spending to regional governments and makes some forms of tax evasion a criminal offense.        

The center-left opposition has criticized the overall package, saying it would stifle growth and hit the middle class too hard. Some economists warn that the tax increases would further stifle Italy&rsquo;s economy, which is expected to grow less than 1 percent this year.        

Over strong opposition from within the governing coalition, the government this week also added a measure that would incrementally raise the retirement age for women in the private sector to 65 from 60 starting in 2014, in line with European Union norms.        

At a news conference announcing the austerity package in mid-August, Mr. Berlusconi acknowledged that he had pledged never to raise taxes, but that the attention of world markets had forced him to do so.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re personally pained to have to take these measures, but we are satisfied,&rdquo; he said at the time.        

In the ensuing weeks, however, the government backed down on several major elements in the package, including some cuts to regional governments, a solidarity tax on annual incomes over 90,000 euros (about $127,000) and the elimination of several nonreligious state holidays, all meeting with opposition from within Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s center-right coalition.        
