
CAIRO &mdash; The judge presiding over the criminal trial of former President Hosni Mubarak on Wednesday ordered testimony from the top two officers in the ruling military council, sharpening doubts about whether the court is acting independently or is cooperating with the president&rsquo;s former allies.        

The trial has proved to be a soap opera, opening with dramatic images of the former president lying on a gurney behind bars in the prisoners&rsquo; dock, then descending into a confusion of questionable testimony.        

On Monday, four senior police officers, who were testifying for the prosecution, contradicted previous statements that Mr. Mubarak had ordered the use of live ammunition against demonstrators. On Wednesday, a fifth officer, Mohamed Abdel Hamkim, reversed his statement that he had been provided with shotgun shells for use against protesters, and the prosecutor attempted without success to charge him with perjury.        

By then, both the defense and prosecution had petitioned for the testimony of Egypt&rsquo;s military rulers, though the courtroom responded with gasps. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to hear a sound until I am done with reading the decisions,&rdquo; the judge said, according to Reuters.        

It was unclear whether the two officers, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi and Gen. Sami Enan, had volunteered or would even agree to appear. Nor was it clear that the judge could require them to testify: the military council that is Egypt&rsquo;s sole governing authority suspended the Constitution when it took power from Mr. Mubarak in the name of the revolution.        

The judge, Ahmed Rafaat, also summoned Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s former intelligence chief and vice president, Omar Suleiman, who has disappeared from public view since the day in mid-February when he made the televised announcement that Mr. Mubarak was surrendering power.        

Adding to suspicions that Mr. Mubarak might be acquitted of the most serious charges, the judge also stipulated that the three men would testify under the strictest secrecy. Not only did he order a closed session for their testimony, he placed news organizations under strict constraints about what they could report.        

Mr. Mubarak is being tried on charges of corruption and of conspiring to order the killing of unarmed demonstrators in his final days in power. The three witnesses &mdash; especially Field Marshal Tantawi, the longtime defense minister, and Mr. Suleiman, the former president&rsquo;s most trusted aide, were within the president&rsquo;s inner circle at the time.        

Both Field Marshal Tantawi and Mr. Suleiman were considered among Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s most loyal aides &mdash; and Mr. Suleiman has never broken with him &mdash; and it is unlikely that either is eager to incriminate him. The courtroom had veered toward chaos before the judge&rsquo;s decision. And when the fifth prosecution witness reversed himself about the instructions to shoot protesters, a lawyer in the courtroom shouted, &ldquo;You liar, you liar,&rdquo; according to a Reuters reporter in the room. &ldquo;You have been paid. This is the blood of your brother.&rdquo;        

The prosecutors, holdovers from the Mubarak government, have come under increasing criticism for their witnesses&rsquo; self-defeating testimony.        

Skeptics said Wednesday that they feared the secret testimony of Field Marshal Tantawi, Mr. Suleiman and others had been choreographed to set up an acquittal on the most serious charges. A military spokesman did not respond to calls seeking confirmation that Field Marshal Tantawi or General Enan would indeed testify. But lawyers for people killed during the protests called the judge&rsquo;s decision a victory and said they relished the chance to question the few who knew the most.        

&ldquo;This will be a huge turning point in this case, and a lot of secrets will be revealed in these secret sessions,&rdquo; said Amir Salem, a prominent civil rights lawyer representing some of the people killed during the protests. He speculated that &ldquo;there will probably be conflicts between Tantawi and Mubarak; we will seek that.&rdquo;        

Field Marshal Tantawi is scheduled to testify on Sunday, followed by General Enan on Monday and Mr. Suleiman on Tuesday.        

After each witness testifies, lawyers in the Wednesday hearing said, Mr. Mubarak will be offered a chance to comment.        
