
BANGKOK &mdash; The Vietnamese government calls it labor therapy, a program to move drug addicts off the streets and into treatment centers, where they process cashew nuts, sew garments, weave baskets &mdash; any work that might help them get back on their feet.        

But a report released Wednesday by Human Rights Watch says that labor therapy is nothing more than sweatshop servitude in the guise of a social program.        

Drug addicts are paid little or nothing for their work and are subject to beatings with truncheons, electric shocks and solitary confinement, says the report, which was based on interviews with 34 people who were detained as part of the program. Some of the products made in the treatment centers are destined for export to the United States and Europe.        

&ldquo;Forced labor and physical abuse are not an adjunct to drug dependency treatment in Vietnam,&rdquo; the report says. &ldquo;Rather, they are central to how the centers operate.&rdquo;        

Vietnam, like many other countries in East Asia, uses a special administrative system for people who are accused of being drug addicts that is separate from the criminal courts. Addicts are sent, often by the police, to rehabilitation centers rather than to jail. That is the theory, at least.        

Nguyen Thi Kim Ngan, who oversees the centers as the minister of labor, invalids and social affairs, did not respond to an e-mail seeking comment about the Human Rights Watch report. But Vietnamese government documents in recent years have promoted the system as a way for addicts, many of them heroin users, to restore their dignity and learn the value of work.        

The camps, which have their roots in a re-education system established by Hanoi after the South Vietnamese government fell in 1975, have been judged a success by the government, and over the past decade the number of drug rehabilitation centers has more than doubled, to 123. At the start of this year, the Labor Ministry reported that the centers held about 40,000 people. The government has extended the maximum time that addicts can spend in the camps to four years from one year.        

Human Rights Watch says the system has turned into a profit-making network of de facto factories. The centers are given tax exemptions for the goods they produce and are expected to be self-financing. The focus of the centers is to make money, not to treat drug addiction, the report says. Relapse rates, it notes, are often above 80 percent. The report quotes one former detainee as saying that the only attempt at rehabilitation was marching and chanting slogans like &ldquo;Try your best to quit drugs!&rdquo;        

In the generally opaque world of Vietnamese manufacturing, with layers of contractors and subcontractors, some foreign companies have discovered that their products have been created by the detainees in these centers.        

One center produced mosquito nets for a Swiss company, Vestergaard Frandsen. Detainees in another center sewed jacket liners destined for Columbia Sportswear, an American company. The detention center&rsquo;s involvement was a &ldquo;surprise to us,&rdquo; Peter Bragdon, senior vice president for legal and corporate affairs at Columbia Sportswear, said in a telephone interview.        

Mr. Bragdon said a contractor had subcontracted the work to the rehabilitation center. The company has stopped doing business with the contractor, he said, and plans to give the 847 pieces stitched by the detainees to charity. &ldquo;Involuntary labor of any kind is unacceptable to us,&rdquo; Mr. Bragdon said.        
