
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Hampered by internal divisions, leaders in Yemen&rsquo;s governing party on Wednesday appeared to fail for a second time to reach an agreement on how to move the country out of its prolonged political deadlock.        

A high-ranking Yemeni official speaking on the condition of anonymity because, he said, the negotiations were continuing, said that moderates in the governing party, including Vice President Abed Rabbo Mansour al-Hadi, were trying to push for the immediate and binding transfer of presidential powers to the vice president, while the more conservative officials in the party were reluctant to take strip President Ali Abdullah Saleh of his power.        

&ldquo;The vice president wants a clear, irrevocable mandate&rdquo; in order to pave the way for early elections, said the official, who added that the &ldquo;hard-liners are nothing but an echo to the president&rsquo;s desire to remain in power.&rdquo;        

Yemen has been caught in a political stalemate since January when protesters took to the streets demanding that Mr. Saleh step down. The streets are still filled daily with demonstrators. The opposition remains fragmented and unable to force a resolution. Mr. Saleh remains in Saudi Arabia, where he was treated for severe wounds suffered in a bombing attack, and his party has been unable to find a &ldquo;practical mechanism&rdquo; for carrying out a transfer of power.        

On Wednesday, party leaders, including the vice president, met for a second time to try to unite behind a single plan. But a statement issued by the official Saba news agency did not mention any agreement on steps for a transfer of power.        

Without an official mandate declaring that Mr. Hadi has all presidential authority, Mr. Saleh could potentially return to Yemen from Saudi Arabia. That could set off renewed fighting.        

Since Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s departure to Saudi Arabia, Mr. Hadi has been in an awkward position as a temporary leader with little power. Technically, the president retains his authority, and his family continues to hold sway in Sana, the capital, with family members holding powerful positions in the military. Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s allies have blamed tribal rivals and Islamists for the popular uprising.        

Now Yemen is coming undone. The economy is faltering in the absence of any international investment. The already limited public services are dwindling, and fighting rages on at least three different fronts outside of Sana.        

In Abyan Province in southern Yemen, the military continues its war against Islamic militants there who appear to be affiliated with Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. With relative ease, the militants took over at least two cities in Abyan starting in March, including the provincial capital, Zinjibar, after government forces pulled out, according to residents. However, dozens of militants have been killed in recent weeks as the government has stepped up attacks against them.        

On Wednesday, a military officer in Abyan, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that seven militants and three soldiers were killed in clashes, while four militants were killed in a separate airstrike.        
Yasser Alarami contributed reporting.
