
PARIS &mdash; John Galliano, the British fashion designer whose career imploded after a videotaped anti-Semitic rant, was found guilty and given a suspended fine of 6,000 euros on Thursday by a French tribunal in connection with two separate bar clashes in Paris with people who accused him of hate crimes.        

Mr. Galliano, 50, who faced the judges in a one-day trial in June, did not appear in court in the Palais de Justice for the verdict, writing to the judges that he wanted to avoid the news media.        

The tribunal issued a fine and then suspended it, less than the fine of 10,000 euros ($13,900) sought by the prosecutor, Anne de Fontette. Mr. Galliano was charged with public insults for reasons of religion, race or ethnicity, a charge that carries a maximum penalty of six months in prison and a 22,500 euro fine.        

Mr. Galliano, who was fired six months ago as the creative director of the fashion house Dior, had told the French court that he remembered nothing about the incidents and at the time was debilitated by job stress and addiction to Valium and alcohol. He condemned racism and anti-Semitism and apologized to the victims, saying he had experienced discrimination himself because of his homosexuality. But the prosecutor had accused him of indulging in an ugly variety of &ldquo;racism and anti-Semitism of the parking lot and the supermarket.&rdquo;        

Mr. Galliano&rsquo;s apology and humility, expressed during his trial in a low voice and a British accent that sometimes baffled a court translator, resonated with the judges, who convicted him of the hate crime but reduced his sentence.        

Mr. Galliano clashed with a woman in October and a couple in February. A third incident last December was recorded and circulated by The Sun, the British tabloid, showing Mr. Galliano sputtering &ldquo;I love Hitler.&rdquo; After the video surfaced, Dior fired him from his post, which he had held since 1996.        

The judges watched the video during the trial, but it was not part of the criminal accusations against Mr. Galliano.        

The tribunal gave him a suspended fine of 4,000 euros for the dispute on Feb. 24. At trial, the couple told of an argument at La Perle, a trendy bar a short walk from the designer&rsquo;s home in the Marais, a mixed gay and Jewish quarter. They said he had told them to &ldquo;shut up&rdquo; and then spewed curses and insults about &ldquo;dirty Jews&rdquo; and Asians. A second suspended fine, for 2,000 euros, involved a similar incident in October at the same bar.        

Mr. Galliano will not have to pay the fines unless he commits similar offenses. He is also required to pay about 16,500 euros in court costs for a number of antiracism groups that supported the accusers.        

His lawyer, Aur&eacute;lien Hamelle, told reporters that the court&rsquo;s ruling was a strong gesture and a &ldquo;wise judgment&rdquo; and that he did not plan to appeal, allowing the affair to end.        
