
ROME &mdash; Tullia Zevi, who fled Fascism as a teenager and led Italy&rsquo;s Jewish community during a period of improving relations with the Vatican, died on Saturday in Rome. She was 91.        

Her death, in a hospital near her home in Rome&rsquo;s Jewish Ghetto after a short illness, was confirmed by her granddaughter, Nathania Zevi.        

As president of the Union of Italian Jewish Communities from 1983 to 1998, Ms. Zevi was among those who greeted Pope John Paul II when he visited the Rome synagogue in 1986, the first by a modern pope to a synagogue and a watershed in Catholic-Jewish relations.        

She also helped negotiate a groundbreaking agreement between Jewish leaders and Italy as part of a reform in which Roman Catholicism lost its status as an official state religion and the symbols and property of other faiths were granted equal status under the law.        

Elegant, poised and multilingual, Ms. Zevi played a major role as the dialogue between the Vatican and the world Jewish community blossomed, and she helped negotiate thorny issues, like moving a Carmelite convent away from the gates of the Auschwitz concentration camp after Jews objected.        

The Vatican issued a rare condolence note, praising her contribution &ldquo;to sincere and fruitful dialogue between Jews and Christians.&rdquo;        

Tullia Calabi was born on Feb. 2, 1919, one of four children in an upper-middle-class family in Milan. She was on summer vacation in Switzerland with her family in 1938 when Mussolini passed the racial laws that restricted Jews&rsquo; ability to own property or engage in a range of professions.        

Her father moved the family to France and then to New York, where they became involved in anti-Fascist circles. Ms. Zevi continued her studies in philosophy and music; an accomplished harpist, she performed with orchestras, including one backing a young Frank Sinatra.        

It was in New York that she met the architect Bruno Zevi, who was a member of a clandestine anti-Fascist group and later an important proponent of Modernism in Italy. They married in 1940.        

As a journalist, Ms. Zevi was one of the few women to cover the Nuremberg trials. For the next 40 years or so, she reported from Italy, Russia and the Arab world for various publications.        

Ms. Zevi had strong ties to Italian center-left politics. In 1962, she helped arrange a meeting at her Rome apartment between the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. &mdash; whom she had befriended in New York in the 1930s, when he had asked her to dance and she declined &mdash; and leaders of the Italian Socialist Party. An adviser to President John F. Kennedy at the time, Mr. Schlesinger had been dispatched to investigate center-left political blocs in Europe.        

The Socialists were then splitting from the Communist Party, and the meeting was intended &ldquo;to show them that there were people on the left who didn&rsquo;t eat babies,&rdquo; Ms. Zevi said in &ldquo;Ti Racconto la Mia Storia&rdquo; (&ldquo;I&rsquo;ll Tell You My Story&rdquo;), a 2007 book of conversations with her granddaughter.        

An outspoken critic of intolerance, Ms. Zevi believed that the Jews of Europe should stand in solidarity with the Muslims of Europe against currents of racism and xenophobia.        

Such views did not always make her popular with Italy&rsquo;s politically conservative Jews. Nor did her handshake with Yasir Arafat when he spoke at Rome&rsquo;s City Hall in 1996.        

That meeting was aimed at &ldquo;making possible a new dialogue between Jews and Muslims,&rdquo; she said in &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll Tell You My Story,&rdquo; adding that her support for the State of Israel was always &ldquo;total, but critical.&rdquo;        

Besides her granddaughter, Ms. Zevi is survived by her son, Luca, and a daughter, Adachiara Zevi, both of Rome; a brother, Eugenio, of Philadelphia; and a grandson, Tobia, of Rome. Bruno Zevi, from whom she had been separated, died in 2000.        

In the book of interviews, Ms. Zevi said that she did not believe in an afterlife and that she had lived her life with one guiding idea: &ldquo;hic et nunc,&rdquo; Latin for &ldquo;here and now.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;What we have to do is here,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;The rest is just hypothetical.&rdquo;        
