
NEW DELHI &mdash; The Indian police on Thursday interrogated at least two people from a cybercafe in the restive region of Kashmir, as the authorities were investigating an e-mail purportedly from a terrorist group claiming responsibility for a fatal bomb attack at a courthouse in New Delhi.        

The attack has sent a shiver of alarm through India&rsquo;s capital as the official toll rose to at least 12 people dead and more than 70 wounded. The blast occurred Wednesday morning at the Delhi High Court when a briefcase exploded at an outdoor reception area where scores of people were waiting to obtain passes to enter the building.        

The attack has brought sharp criticism to the New Delhi police and renewed questions about the ability of the Indian government to prevent terrorism. In late May, the same courthouse suffered a minor bombing episode, prompting official promises to heighten security. Yet requests to install surveillance cameras have gotten bogged down in red tape, while lawyers at the court described security as still porous.        

&ldquo;The government cannot wish away the terror threat,&rdquo; editorialized The Times of India, the country&rsquo;s largest English-language newspaper. &ldquo;It must be fought with resolve, passion, 24/7 focus and scientific countermeasures.&rdquo;        

Investigators on Thursday were trying to judge the credibility of two e-mails sent to different media outlets, each claiming responsibility for the attack. The first claimed to be from a Pakistan-linked extremist group, Harkut-ul-Jihad al-Islami. This e-mail led investigators to the cybercafe in Kashmir&rsquo;s Kishtwar district, where the police were interrogating suspects. Indian media reported that three people had been detained, but a local police official put the number at two.        

&ldquo;Our investigations are still on,&rdquo; said M. K. Sinha, deputy inspector general of the police in Kishtwar. &ldquo;We already detained two suspects and are questioning them. We may detain more later. It is premature to say more at this stage.&rdquo;        

Meanwhile, U. K. Bansal, an official in India&rsquo;s Home Ministry, confirmed that the authorities were also examining a second e-mail putatively from a domestic group, the Indian Mujahedeen. The Indian Mujahedeen is an Islamist militant group that has taken responsibility for several past attacks in India.        

Security was heightened around New Delhi on Thursday, as Parliament was in session. Lawmakers had been criticized for adjourning on Wednesday after the attack, even as the Delhi High Court reopened within hours of the blast. Several witnesses described seeing one or more men running away from the explosion scene on Wednesday, and the police released sketches of the suspects.        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
