
KYOTO, Japan &mdash; Investigators concluded Thursday that a nuclear plant operator that tried to manipulate public opinion with fake e-mails was acting under instructions from a high-ranking local government official, adding a new twist to a scandal that has hampered Japan&rsquo;s efforts to restart idled nuclear reactors after the Fukushima disaster.        

An independent investigative committee found that the governor of Saga Prefecture told the operator, Kyushu Electric Power, to send e-mails supporting the restart of two reactors at the company&rsquo;s Genkai Nuclear Power Station. The company has already admitted to ordering employees to pose as regular citizens by sending e-mails during an online town-hall-style meeting in June over whether to allow the restart of the reactors.        

Despite the company&rsquo;s admission, the committee did not accuse the governor, Yasushi Furukawa, of explicitly asking officials to send e-mails masquerading as coming from the public, but only of asking it to send e-mails. Mr. Furukawa has denied requesting any faked e-mails, saying a Kyushu Electric vice president misunderstood his remarks during a private meeting earlier in June.        

Mr. Furukawa&rsquo;s deliberations over whether to allow the restart have been the focus of national attention because his decision could sway other local leaders facing similar decisions about restarting reactors in their districts.        

If they denied every request to restart reactors, the local leaders could virtually shut down Japan&rsquo;s nuclear power industry, which provides almost a third of the nation&rsquo;s electrical generating capacity. Currently, 43 of Japan&rsquo;s 54 reactors are sitting idle, only some because of damage from the huge earthquake and tsunami on March 11 that crippled the Fukushima Daiichi plant. Most have been shut for legally required maintenance checks that must take place every 13 months. Facing a public backlash against nuclear power, the national government is asking local governors and mayors to sign off before restarting those undamaged reactors.        

If none are restarted, the last operating reactor will have to be shut down by next April.        

Seeking to allay fears about the safety of the reactors, the previous prime minister, Naoto Kan, began a series of so-called stress tests to confirm the reactors&rsquo; ability to withstand large earthquakes. The tests, which have also been embraced by the new prime minister, Yoshihiko Noda, are scheduled to be finished by the end of the year.        

However, by seeming to confirm widespread suspicions here that government is working secretly with industry to advance nuclear power despite growing public opposition, the scandal over faked e-mails could make it even more difficult for officials to grant permission to restart the reactors.        

Many Japanese blame such cozy ties for the national government&rsquo;s failure to require tougher defenses against tsunamis at Fukushima Daiichi, which was crippled by the earthquake and tsunami. Earthquake risk is one reason the vast majority of Japanese now want to phase out nuclear power altogether, according to opinion polls.        

In an effort to appease public anger, Kyushu Electric created the investigative committee, which was headed by Nobuo Gohara, a well known former prosecutor. The committee said it made its findings after teams of lawyers interviewed 127 people, including top company executives.        

The scandal has already forced the resignation of a local lawmaker in Saga who headed a panel in the prefectural assembly that was also looking into whether to allow the restart of the reactors. The lawmaker, Hobun Kihara, admitted taking donations from Kyushu Electric.        
