
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Three weeks after Tripoli fell to rebel forces, the man acting as their interim government&rsquo;s prime minister, Mahmoud Jibril, made his first public appearance in Tripoli, the capital, at a news conference.        

Then he left.        

&ldquo;He will be back soon,&rdquo; said a spokesman, Mohammed Kish. Mr. Jibril predicted that the interim government would move completely from the eastern city of Benghazi by the end of next week.        

Other interim government officials had predicted earlier the move would come by the end of this week, but the top figures on the Transitional National Council and a majority of its members still remain in the east.        

While most members of the rebels&rsquo; Executive Committee, which handles government functions, have come to Tripoli, Mr. Jibril, its chairman, a post described by the rebels as their prime minister, has not only not been here previously, but he spends relatively little time in any part of Libya.        

Although at least 57 nations have recognized the transitional council as the legitimate government of Libya, most are reluctant to reopen embassies here until the interim government takes up residence. An exception so far is Turkey, whose embassy has been open for the past week. Turkish Airways even announced that it would resume flights to Libya next Tuesday &mdash; although at first to Benghazi, as the Tripoli airport remains closed.        

Most investors and businessmen are reluctant to return in the absence of diplomatic representation, and many companies owned or run by foreign entities remain closed.        

Mr. Jibril said it was premature to talk about business returning to normal in Tripoli, because the war was still not over and would not be until Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and his remaining holdouts were defeated. He said many people were misled by the growing appearance of normalcy in most of the country; only four widely scattered towns or cities remain under control of Qaddafi loyalists.        

&ldquo;The battle of liberation is not finished yet,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Some thought that the old regime has collapsed completely and Libya is completely liberated and we have regained all our frozen money and we are in the process of reconstruction, but that is not so.&rdquo;        

He also criticized some Libyans who he said were prematurely beginning to practice politics, when a constitution has yet to be drafted that would set the terms for political activity. It was unclear to whom he was referring.        

As a result of commitments made by the transitional government, Libya has 240 days from the time it declares itself liberated from Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s rule to elect an interim council, which will lead to drafting a constitution and forming a government. A Western diplomat speculated that if the members of the transitional council came to Tripoli, there would be pressure on them to declare victory and the clock would start ticking on what is likely to be a difficult and contentious process.        

Still, the diplomat said, &ldquo;it looks bad and it limits our ability to help them on the ground.&rdquo; He spoke on the condition of anonymity because the matter is politically delicate.        

Mr. Jibril said it was not surprising that the interim government may take three weeks or more to move to Tripoli, a city that fell in three days once the rebels advanced. &ldquo;There is really no secret to this, the reason behind this is primarily logistical,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We are making sure there are good people on the ground, communications and security and so on.&rdquo;        

Mr. Jibril also said that regime holdouts in the besieged town of Bani Walid had taken advantage of an extension until Saturday in the deadline for them to surrender, and had used the extra time to arm themselves. He ruled out any additional extension of the deadline. &ldquo;We had hoped we could avoid any further loss of life,&rdquo; he said.        

Elsewhere in the capital, four community leaders from Bani Walid called on the transitional government to extend the deadline, even though their own efforts to negotiate peace terms failed in dramatic fashion on Tuesday.        

The four met with rebel leaders 35 miles from Bani Walid and agreed to peace terms, which included an agreement that only fighters from Bani Walid would enter the town after it surrendered. When they returned to Bani Walid to convey those terms, however, they were stopped at gunpoint by angry Qaddafi loyalists who would not allow them back into the town.        

&ldquo;We all hope the transitional government will give them some more time,&rdquo; said Abdulgader Ganiya, a university lecturer and engineer, and one of the four negotiators. &ldquo;We are trying very hard to end this without a fight,&rdquo; said another of them, Younis al-Robus, a history lecturer.        

In other developments on Thursday, the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in The Hague asked Interpol to circulate a notice requesting the arrest of Colonel Qaddafi, as well as one of his sons, Seif al-Islam Qaddafi and his former intelligence chief, Abdulla al-Senussi. The court has accused them of crimes against humanity.        

And an audio recording said to be from Colonel Qaddafi surfaced, in which he dismissed reports that he had fled and vowed to continue to fight.        

The authenticity of the message, broadcast on Arrai TV, could not be independently confirmed. It was the third message said to be from Colonel Qaddafi to be broadcast on Arrai TV, based in Syria, since rebel forces ended his 42-year rule last month.        

&ldquo;We will not leave our ancestral land,&rdquo; Colonel Qaddafi said in the message, according to a translation by Reuters.        
Marlise Simons contributed reporting from Paris.
