
BEIJING &mdash; A little-known Islamic group has claimed responsibility in an online video for recent violent attacks that killed dozens in China&rsquo;s western Xinjiang region, according to an American organization that tracks militant activity.        

The American organization, the SITE Intelligence Group, posted the video, by the Turkistan Islamic Party, on its Web site on Wednesday, reporting that it had been issued in late August. In the video, according to SITE, the group&rsquo;s leader, Abdul Shakoor Damla, claimed that attacks in July in Hotan and Kashgar, two southern Xinjiang cities, were acts of revenge for the Chinese government&rsquo;s repression of the region&rsquo;s ethnic Uighur population.        

The Turkistan Islamic Party has previously made similar claims that remain unverified. Its highest-profile threat, to disrupt the 2008 Beijing Olympics with chemical, biological or conventional weapons, was never carried out.        

Some terrorism experts remain concerned about the group&rsquo;s threats, and its members have been linked to other Islamic militants, including Al Qaeda. But one Chinese analyst, Zhao Guojun of the Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences, was cautious in a telephone interview on Thursday.        

While the group could have carried out the attacks, Mr. Zhao said the claim was probably made to blow a &ldquo;trumpet for themselves.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a way to increase their influence,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Zhao said the organization was believed to have fewer than 100 members, most of them Uighur. The Uighur are an ethnic Turkic group that once made up the majority of Xinjiang&rsquo;s population. In recent decades, however, they have been edged out by China&rsquo;s majority Han population, as Beijing has moved to exploit the area&rsquo;s mineral resources and develop its economy.        

A July 2009 protest march by Uighurs in the regional capital, Urumqi, exploded into ethnic rioting that killed nearly 200 people, most said to be Han. Government surveillance and police actions directed at Uighurs have risen sharply since then, and the area has experienced sporadic outbreaks of violence.        

Many Uighurs now bridle against local restrictions on their practice of Islam, police harassment and what they say is job discrimination. China&rsquo;s government says its economic development efforts have brought prosperity and jobs to Xinjiang&rsquo;s Uighurs and blames outside agitators and foreign-based terrorist groups for the unrest.        

The latest video shows a Uighur man identified as Memeti Tiliwaldi at what is said to be a terrorist training camp, probably somewhere in Afghanistan or in Pakistan&rsquo;s lawless region near the border with China. Chinese police officials reported in early August that they had shot and killed Mr. Tiliwaldi, 29, after he was identified as one of those who staged a series of attacks in Kashgar on July 30 and 31, which left at least 18 people dead.        

At the time, the authorities said the perpetrators had prepared for the attacks at a training camp inside Pakistan. Xinjiang has been under a security crackdown since early July, when an attack and battle at a police station in Hotan killed 18 people, most identified as Uighur attackers.        

While the attacks in Hotan and Kashgar almost certainly were planned in advance, some analysts have noted that they bore few of the hallmarks of the actions of a sophisticated terrorist group. For the most part, the attackers&rsquo; weapons were knives and automobiles that they drove into crowds of bystanders. The bombs detonated in the Kashgar attacks also appeared to be comparatively primitive.        

China has frequently blamed a group called the East Turkestan Islamic Movement for violence in Xinjiang. The Turkistan Islamic Party may be an offshoot of that group, formed in 2003 in alliance with the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, Mr. Zhao said.        

The group&rsquo;s former leader, Abdul Haq al-Turkistani, became a member of Al Qaeda&rsquo;s executive council in 2005, according to the United States Treasury Department, which designated him a global terrorist in 2009. Mr. Turkistani was reported to have died last year in a Predator drone strike in the Taliban-controlled North Waziristan region of Pakistan.        

In January 2010, the group issued a statement claiming that 15 of its members were killed in an American airstrike inside Afghanistan.        

The group has also claimed involvement in other violence in China, including a 2008 explosion on a Shanghai bus that killed three people and attacks in the coastal cities of Wenzhou and Guangzhou. The Chinese government calls those claims unverified.        
Li Bibo contributed research.
