
SUKHUMI, Georgia &mdash; After nearly two decades of searching mostly in vain for international acceptance, Abkhazia, a tiny rebel region in the former Soviet republic of Georgia, has found an unusual ally.        

Though shunned by all but a handful of countries, Abkhazia is considered a respected &mdash; nay, vaunted &mdash; global power among the spotted-tile enthusiasts of world domino competition.        

Even before Russia became the first country to recognize the territory as sovereign in August 2008, the International Domino Federation, which organizes domino competitions around the world, bucked Georgia&rsquo;s protests and welcomed Abkhazia into its ranks as a full-fledged member.        

And next month, Abkhazia will host the World Domino Championships here in the capital, Sukhumi.        

The honor, typically reserved for United Nations members, is a reflection of this obscure region&rsquo;s prowess in a game that itself remains largely overshadowed by higher-profile tabletop pastimes like checkers and chess. The federation&rsquo;s 25 member countries chose Abkhazia in a unanimous vote last year in Las Vegas.        

Never mind that only four other countries, two of which are tiny Pacific islands, have followed Russia&rsquo;s lead in recognizing Abkhaz independence. From Oct. 17 through 21, Abkhazia will be the center of the domino universe.        

&ldquo;For us this is hugely significant, not only as an athletic competition,&rdquo; said Ruslan Tarba, a journalist and domino enthusiast in Abkhazia. &ldquo;People are going to come here and be able to see that we are not wild men climbing in palm trees, carrying automatic weapons. Most importantly for us is for people to leave convinced of the fact that Abkhazia was, is and will be an open and friendly country.&rdquo;        

Though possessed of a stark natural beauty, Abkhazia, a former Soviet vacation spot on the Black Sea, by no means looks like a tame place for international competitions of any kind.        

Nearly 20 years have passed since Abkhaz rebels expelled Georgian troops in one of the bloodiest conflicts to erupt from the Soviet collapse. Buildings here in Sukhumi remain pocked with bullet and shrapnel damage. Several old hotels and restaurants are still in ruins, and the burned-out shell of the former government headquarters stands as a monument to the ferociousness of the fighting.        

But the rat-a-tat of Kalashnikovs here has long since been replaced by another sound: the smack of ivory-colored dominoes hitting tables. Largely cut off from the outside world, the Abkhaz at first turned to domino &mdash; in most countries the game is referred to in the singular &mdash; as a remedy for endemic listlessness.        

Some have come to see the game as a tool for waging Abkhazia&rsquo;s struggle for legitimacy.        

&ldquo;Following the war that Abkhazia went through, every step forward we make, whether it is in domino or other areas, is an important one,&rdquo; said Artur Gabunia, president of the Abkhaz Domino Federation.        

Since becoming internationally competitive in 2007, the Abkhaz domino team has gradually moved up in the rankings, taking 10th place in both the 2009 and 2010 team championships in Panama and the Dominican Republic. The team hopes to make it into the top three at the competition in Sukhumi next month.        

&ldquo;They are very competitive,&rdquo; said Manuel Oquendo, president of the National Domino Federation in the United States, who traveled to Abkhazia last year to check out the Abkhaz team. &ldquo;The sport of domino is mainly concentrated in Latin America, so I was surprised to see people playing domino by the Black Sea. I was impressed.&rdquo;        

Whether deserved or not, domino has the reputation of a game for idlers, and in that sense Abkhazia is fertile ground. After years of political and economic isolation unemployment runs high here, and there are plenty of people with a lot of time on their hands.        

On any given day, white-haired war veterans and fashionable young men in oversized sunglasses gather at the waterfront here across from the Ritsa Hotel, one of the few fully restored buildings in town. Fueled by cigarettes and sticky sweet coffee the consistency of crude oil, the men play for hours in the shade of costal pine trees.        

The competitions can get combative, with little sympathy afforded to dawdlers or the indecisive.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;Faster, faster, faster,&rdquo; Leonid Lolua, a former mayor of Sukhumi, chided a more pensive opponent during a recent game here. &ldquo;Really, it&rsquo;s a shame they don&rsquo;t let me on the national team,&rdquo; said Mr. Lolua, 67, thwacking his last tile down for a win.        

Other men can be seen playing chess and sometimes cards, but the domino players seem to have command of the boardwalk. Women in this highly patriarchal society are rarely present at the tables, but locals insisted that they also played in their kitchens and courtyards.        

&ldquo;In Abkhazia, almost everyone plays domino,&rdquo; said Armen Mkrtchyan, a two-time Abkhaz domino champion who will be competing in October.        

Georgia, which considers Abkhazia to be a part of its sovereign territory, is apparently miffed about the championship. Officials from the International Domino Federation said Georgian envoys had approached them several times to try to persuade them to move the event elsewhere. Georgia is not a member of the federation.        

Giorgi Kandelaki, a Georgian parliamentarian, said Georgian officials had tried to dissuade would-be participants from attending by informing them about the plight of Abkhazia&rsquo;s ethnic Georgians, many of whom were driven out of the territory during the war in the 1990s and refused re-entry.        

He did not say whether Georgia would take more overt measures to stop the event, for example by denying participants permission to enter Abkhazia through the Georgia-controlled border region. They could alternatively cross into Abkhazia from Russia, but that would violate Georgian law.        

Officials have vowed to press ahead with the championships in Sukhumi, and Abkhaz officials have promised not to disappoint. Organizers expect more than 200 players from nearly two dozen countries, including the United States, to participate. The Abkhaz government, which is largely dependent on Russia for support, has said it will allocate $100,000 in prize money for the champion, the largest purse in the history of the event, domino officials said.        

It is not clear whether the decision to grant Abkhazia such recognition will help domino enthusiasts in their own push for more international recognition. After the championships in Sukhumi, officials from the International Domino Federation plan to restart a long-running campaign to make domino an Olympic sport.        
