
BERLIN &mdash; Two men were arrested here Thursday on suspicion of planning a terrorist attack, after the police tracked their purchases of bomb-making materials, a Berlin police spokesman said.        

The men, a 24-year-old German of Lebanese descent and a 28-year-old from Gaza, had obtained chemicals that could be used to build explosives, according to the spokesman, Martin Otter, who did not provide any specifics about the chemicals. Mr. Otter said the effort to obtain them was what brought the men to the attention of the police.        

The impending 10th anniversary of the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, has heightened concerns about terrorism in recent days. German officials are also preparing for the arrival of Pope Benedict XVI later in the month.        

But the police did not link the arrests to those events. &ldquo;We have no evidence at this point that it has anything to do with the pope&rsquo;s visit or Sept. 11,&rdquo; Mr. Otter said. Neither did investigators say they had reason to believe at this point that the suspects were connected to Al Qaeda or any other terrorist organization.        

The police searched the apartments of the two men on Thursday, and found suspicious fluids &ldquo;that now have to be tested,&rdquo; said Ralph Knispel, a senior prosecutor. The police also searched an Islamic cultural center where the suspects passed a great deal of time and even occasionally spent the night.        

On Thursday afternoon, police officers in black berets stood watch outside the center, the Islamic Cultural Center for Religious Enlightenment, in Wedding, a working-class neighborhood. Officers in green police vests carried several Dell computers out of the center and into a waiting van.        

Mr. Otter said there was no suspicion that the director or other members of the center were involved in any plot.        

A statement released by the police said they were searching for bomb-making materials, directions for their construction and order forms for the chemicals. A newspaper, Berliner Morgenpost, reported that the chemicals were a coolant and an acid used in agriculture. The police said the suppliers of the chemicals had alerted the police to the unusual quantities that the men had bought.        

&ldquo;As the tips from the suppliers indicate, the level of alertness has increased,&rdquo; said Wolfgang Bosbach, chairman of the German Parliament&rsquo;s committee on internal affairs. Citing a government estimate that 1,000 Islamic militants live in Germany, Mr. Bosbach said there was &ldquo;no reason to panic, but certainly for precautions and attentiveness.&rdquo;        

Germany has not suffered the kind of large-scale terrorist attacks that have struck the United States, Britain, Spain and some other Western countries in recent years, but neither has it entirely escaped the reach of terrorism. Mohammed Atta and other Sept. 11 plotters lived in Hamburg for a time, and in March, a Muslim immigrant from Kosovo who said he was inspired by extremist ideology killed two American airmen at the Frankfurt airport.        

In April, the police arrested two suspects in D&uuml;sseldorf and another in Bochum after a long-running investigation found that the men, who are suspected of having ties to Al Qaeda, were planning a bomb attack in the D&uuml;sseldorf area. In those arrests, the authorities said the suspects had been acquiring chemicals like hydrogen peroxide and acetone that can be used in bomb production. The suspects downloaded bomb-making recipes from the Internet and tried to extract chemicals for a detonator from a charcoal lighter, the authorities said.        
