
BAGHDAD &mdash; Anger at Iraq&rsquo;s security forces boiled over Thursday after a suicide bomber detonated a car bomb beside an outdoor funeral service, killing dozens and sending residents storming into the street, some firing warning shots at the police they said had failed to protect them.        

The bomb killed at least 48 people and wounded 120 in the predominately Shiite neighborhood, adding to a recent spate of attacks that have taken nearly 200 lives in the past 10 days.        

Iraqi Army troops rushed to the scene on Thursday to support the police, leading to a lull in the violence. But the crowd erupted again shortly afterward, with more people flooding the street, throwing rocks and bottles at the security forces.        

The neighborhood revolt was eventually quelled, with the military imposing a curfew to stop further demonstrations. But such open defiance of the security forces, which is rare here, came as Iraqis had been watching scenes of unrest around the region and wondering aloud about whether their own country would be further destabilized.        

Their fears have been stoked in part by the recent uptick of sectarian attacks. There have been nowhere near as many as during the worst years of the violence between Sunnis and Shiites, but enough to feed anxiety that Iraq might be slipping backward.        

The neighborhood where the bombing took place, Shula, is a former hotbed of sectarian bloodshed and stronghold of the Mahdi Army, the militia loyal to the anti-American cleric Moktada al-Sadr. The militia, which was accused of some of the worst sectarian violence in 2006 and 2007, portrayed itself at the time as a protector of the Shiites when the government was unable to keep them safe.        

One resident said at least some of the shooters on Thursday appeared to be members of the militia, which had gone quiet as Mr. Sadr, who has become a powerful dealmaker, worked to transform it into a political force. The recent attacks against Shiites have inspired calls by some in the movement for a return to the streets.        

On Thursday, residents made clear that they distrusted the security forces, which include Sunnis and Shiites, with some saying they might be collaborating with Sunni militants. Others suggested that the police were, at best, inept, pointing out that the bomber must have made it past the many checkpoints that surround the neighborhood.        

&ldquo;Checkpoint after checkpoint, and all this is happening to us!&rdquo; one man shouted. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what&rsquo;s the use of all this.&rdquo; Earlier in the day, four roadside bombs exploded around Baghdad, killing four people and wounding 16.        

Unrest also shook the disputed northern region of Kirkuk, where protests broke out in three cities over the lack of electricity. One demonstrator on Thursday consciously linked the protests to the groundswell that toppled the government in Tunisia and has challenged other leaders in North Africa and the Middle East.        

The funeral in Baghdad was for Hussein Aeed al-Sa&rsquo;adi, who died of natural causes three days earlier during a Shiite pilgrimage to Karbala. The annual procession was a target for repeated attacks in the past week.        

During Thursday&rsquo;s episode, Amal al-Mussawi, a resident, threw stones at the security forces and screamed, &ldquo;We will keep on protesting and stay in the street until they find a solution!&rdquo;        

A woman who identified herself as Um Abed Own, or mother of Abed Own, yelled at the troops, &ldquo;God shall take revenge on you!&rdquo;        

Another neighbor, who gave his name as Abu Mustafa, or father of Mustafa, called for the return of the Mahdi Army.        

Many in the crowd questioned how the bomber could have gotten past the checkpoints around the neighborhood without help from inside the forces.        

&ldquo;The problem is in the security forces,&rdquo; said Hakim al-Zameli, a lawmaker from the Sadrist Trend, Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s political party. &ldquo;In the last weeks, people from the neighborhood were telling us about the battalion commander in the area, that he is not loyal to the Iraqi Army and that he is coordinating with Al Qaeda.&rdquo;        

After the attack, the battalion commander was suspended pending an investigation.        

Mr. Zameli said that despite the recent attacks, security was not deteriorating.        

But the anger did not dissipate. As military checkpoints stopped cars carrying wounded people, one driver screamed, &ldquo;You let the suicide bomber go inside and bomb us, but you don&rsquo;t let the wounded people go out to the hospital?&rdquo;        
Duraid Adnan, Yasir Ghazi and an Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting.
