
PARIS &mdash; When the stern policeman finished his lecture, I turned to my sister, Paula, whose command of French puts mine to shame, and said, &ldquo;You know, it&rsquo;s funny, for a second there, I thought he said they exploded my suitcase.&rdquo;        
Ten years after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, a special report on the decade’s costs and consequences, measured in thousands of lives, trillions of dollars and countless challenges to the human spirit.

&ldquo;He said they exploded your suitcase,&rdquo; she said.        

I had a queasy vision &mdash; exaggerated, as it turned out &mdash; of my laptop in little pieces and my family&rsquo;s clothes, burnt and shredded. But my next reaction was that here we were, not many days away from the 10th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks and the &ldquo;credible but unconfirmed&rdquo; reports of a serious terrorist threat timed for the occasion, receiving a lesson in what vigilant security looks like.        

At the Gare Montparnasse, one of this city&rsquo;s cavernous railroad terminals, as we squeezed nine family members and their luggage into three taxis, we had somehow left one bag at the taxi stand. Realizing our mistake, we returned little more than an hour later, and in that time, the police had cleared the area, summoned a special squad equipped with robots, X-rayed the suitcase and detonated a small explosive designed to set off any bomb that might have been inside.        

As much as travel security in the United States has changed over the last decade, I had to wonder whether the response would have been as swift back home.        

In the United States, the &ldquo;If you see something, say something&rdquo; mentality is a post-9/11 innovation, but Europeans have long experience with terrorist attacks by assorted ideological and separatist groups. In many European cities, the ordinary police presence, with heavily armed teams that look more like special forces than the friendly gendarme, can seem overbearing to American eyes.        

In fact, unsettling encounters with law enforcement have been a regular feature of my family&rsquo;s European trips. The police in Madrid once questioned my mother, apparently on the theory that a plainly dressed, middle-aged American high school teacher searching for an all-night pharmacy might actually be a prostitute trolling for business. British customs officers once detained my father when, in response to their rote question about the purpose of his travels, he said dryly, &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve come to London to visit the queen.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I feel like Europe kind of wrote the book on security, like they just don&rsquo;t mess around,&rdquo; said Rick Steves, the travel writer. In contrast, he said, American security can seem more like &ldquo;giving the appearance of security.&rdquo;        

At the Montparnasse station, the police assured us there was no particular security alert in place, and nothing out of the ordinary about what we had experienced. They lectured us at some length about what a serious matter this was, about how much it cost to call out the bomb squad, about the fine of 150 euros ($205) &mdash; which they waived in our case &mdash; for being responsible for such an event.        

We said they had done what they were supposed to do, and we meant it. And after the police gave us back the suitcase, we were impressed not only with their speed, but also with their precision.        

They had singled out the only thing that looked potentially threatening on the X-ray &mdash; my laptop. They used an explosive charge so small that it tore a hole just eight inches wide in the nylon mesh of the suitcase, and just two inches across in the outer shell of the laptop.        

We were relieved to find most of the clothes unscathed, though we were picking bits of scorched nylon out of our shirts for days. My 12-year-old actually liked the powder burns on his cargo shorts, which he figured would make a great story back at school.        

Then my wife, Patty, pointed out that our things had probably been sprayed with the kind of explosives residue that airport security tests for. We imagined telling a French officer, &ldquo;Yes, but you people put it there,&rdquo; which did not seem like an exchange that would go well. So we decided to buy a new suitcase, wash the clothes and wrap the computer in plastic before heading home.        

But one thing still irked me. In those tense minutes describing my purple bag to a succession of police officers, when I seriously wondered whether I was about to be arrested, I also wondered why my sister kept smiling, and even seemed to be stifling a giggle.        

&ldquo;You said &lsquo;une valise violet,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;but &lsquo;valise&rsquo; is feminine, so it should have been &lsquo;une valise violette.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

Yeah, so why is that funny? &ldquo;It sounded like you were saying &lsquo;une valise viol&eacute;e,&rsquo; a suitcase that&rsquo;s been violated. Which it had.&rdquo;        
