
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Tens of thousands of Syrians took to the streets on Friday to call for international protection from President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s crackdown on pro-democracy activists who have been trying to topple his government for more than five months.        

Political and human rights campaigners said that large crowds demonstrated in several cities and towns across the country after noon prayers, and that security forces fired live ammunition at them, killing at least 10 protesters, including a 15-year-old in the northern province of Idlib and a 19-year-old in the eastern city of Deir al-Zour.        

Activists also said that at least eight soldiers were killed in al-Kiswah and Zabadani, two suburbs of Damascus, the capital, for refusing to fire at protesters. Defections among low-level soldiers have increased in the past couple of weeks but have yet to threaten the unity of the army. Many of those who desert their positions in the mostly Sunni rank-and-file army are either arrested, killed or simply drop out of sight, residents have reported.        

Friday&rsquo;s demonstrations were an outcry for the international community to interfere on behalf of Syrians, who face the wrath of troops and armed men in plain clothes loyal to Mr. Assad on a daily basis.        

Activists say that many Syrians are growing more and more frustrated as they are realizing that street demonstrations alone might not lead to the toppling of the government without the help of foreign powers.        

Posters and banners held across the country on Friday read &ldquo;The Syrian people demand international protection for civilians,&rdquo; and &ldquo;After all these killings and assaults, where is international protection?&rdquo; Many chanted, &ldquo;The people want the execution of the president.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We know this is a sensitive slogan &mdash; to ask America and Europe to protect us from our brothers in the country &mdash; but what can we do?&rdquo; said a political activist in Damascus who spoke on the condition of anonymity. &ldquo;We have entered the sixth month and there is no hope that the Assad regime will stop the killings and arrests.&rdquo;        

Activists said that the number of Syrians who would welcome foreign involvement against the leadership has greatly increased in the past month, encouraged by the fall of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in Libya, whose government fell with the help of foreign military assistance.        

The United States and European countries have imposed a series of economic sanctions on Syria that singled out top officials and government institutions, and many have called on Mr. Assad to step down, but a military intervention similar to the NATO bombing of Libya has not been seriously considered.        

Even Syria&rsquo;s closest ally, Iran, has called on its leadership to end the crackdown and hold talks with the opposition, in surprising comments delivered this week by President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, which signaled growing unease with the unrest there.        

Iran crushed its own pro-democracy protesters in 2009 after Mr. Ahmadinejad was re-elected to a second term in office.        

&ldquo;I can say that half of the Syrian people will accept international intervention to finish the bloodshed in our country,&rdquo; said Hani, 30, a protester from al-Midan neighborhood in Damascus. &ldquo;I think foreign countries will have more sympathy for us than the Assad regime.&rdquo; One person was killed in al-Midan, according to the Local Coordination Committees, a group of activists who are involved in tracking and documenting the uprising.        

But there remain many voices that are warning against foreign intervention and want the uprising to stay peaceful in the face of the government&rsquo;s security measures.        

Residents and activists said that large demonstrations broke out in Homs, a restive city nicknamed by Syrians as the capital of the revolution. Homs was raided by the army and security forces several times in the past week in the search for more than a dozen soldiers who defected there and for activists involved in planning demonstrations. At least seven people were killed when security forces fired at demonstrations in different neighborhoods.        

They also reported big protests in Deir al-Zour, in the east near the Iraqi border, a region that was attacked last month; in the Kurdish northeast; in Idlib, near Turkey; and in southern Syria, near Jordan.        

Activists said that at least 27 civilians died in the military assault on Homs this past week. Human Rights Watch said that security forces forcibly removed 18 wounded people from a hospital in the city on Wednesday and prevented medical workers from reaching those who were hurt in the attack.        

The crackdown on pro-democracy activists has killed at least 2,200 people from mid-March to mid-August by the United Nations&rsquo; account, but other activists say that the number now exceeds 3,000 with thousands of others in jails and secret detention centers.        

The government of Mr. Assad, who came to power in 2000, disputes the numbers and says that it is facing a foreign conspiracy to divide Syria, and that it is battling foreign armed groups who have killed more than 500 police officers and soldiers.        
