
CAIRO &mdash; Acknowledging a credibility crisis after it allowed a mob to invade the Israeli Embassy here, the military-led transitional government said Saturday night that it would exploit a reviled &ldquo;emergency law&rdquo; allowing extra-judicial detentions as part of a new crackdown on disruptive protests.        

&ldquo;Egypt is undergoing a real crisis that is threatening its internal and external security,&rdquo; Osama Heikal, minister of media, said in statement after an emergency meeting of the cabinet with the military council that seized power this year with the ouster of former President Hosni Mubarak. &ldquo;What happened has damaged Egypt&rsquo;s image and its international position, and it cannot be condoned.&rdquo;        

The statement marked an abrupt reversal for the military council, which had promised to eliminate the 30-year-old emergency law, a measure allowing indefinite detentions without trial that was considered emblematic of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s authoritarian rule. Its repeal was a signature demand of the revolution.        

It is not yet clear how the military government will apply its new declaration &mdash; a council of officers has already governed for seven months in suspension of the Constitution, obviating the right to a fair trial, and it has previously warned with little effect of its intolerance of disruptive protests. But the statement appeared to threaten a rollback of Egypt&rsquo;s new freedoms.        

It also underscored the severity of the challenge facing the military-led government as it struggles to restore order to the Egyptian streets without jeopardizing its own tenuous legitimacy. Although it has sometimes surprised protesters with heavy handed force and sent as many as 12,000 civilians to swift military trials, the military council has also sought to avoid confrontation with street protesters or to accommodate their demands in order to preserve its own standing in the eyes of the public.        

That strategy proved disastrous Friday night when thousands of protesters attacked the Israeli Embassy. They first methodically demolished a week-old protective wall as Egyptian security forces stood by. A few scaled the building and tore down the Israeli flag, while about two dozen broke into the offices and began tossing binders of documents into the street. And when a battalion of riot police finally began filling the streets with tear gas, the protesters fought back with rocks and Molotov cocktails for most of the night.        

Egyptian officials said Saturday that at least two protesters had died from the clashes around the embassy &mdash; one from a bullet wound and the other from a heart attack &mdash; while as many as 1,200 had been injured and at least 19 arrested. Signaling its new crackdown, the military council said Saturday that all those arrested would be sent to military trials instead of civilian courts.        

But at least one protester who had broken into the embassy early Saturday morning said that Egyptian military police had forced him out but then let him go free, raising questions about the consistency of the military&rsquo;s new crackdown.        

Israeli officials, for their part, said Saturday that six members of their staff had been trapped inside the embassy until an early morning rescue by Egyptian commandos. &ldquo;This went on for 13 hours and there was real concern for the safety and lives of our people,&rdquo; an Israeli official said. &ldquo;The mob penetrated the embassy and at the end there was only one wall separating it from six of our people.&rdquo;        

The Israeli ambassador and about 85 diplomats and their family members were evacuated at dawn. Only one diplomat, a deputy ambassador, remained, and he took refuge in the protection of the American Embassy, diplomats familiar with the arrangements said.        

Diplomats said allowing the invasion of a foreign embassy was an extraordinary breach of Egypt&rsquo;s international commitments that immediately raised new security concerns at other embassies around the city. &ldquo;It has led to a complete loss of credibility in the government internationally from all directions,&rdquo; a Western diplomat said, speaking on condition of anonymity because of the delicacy of the situation.        
Heba Afify contributed reporting from Cairo, and Ethan Bronner from Jerusalem.
