
NEAR BANI WALID, Libya &mdash; A rebel push to take control of the loyalist holdout Bani Walid stalled Saturday after encountering resistance, with rebel spokesmen giving varying accounts of the fighting there and NATO carrying out airstrikes against the defenders.        

At a staging area that rebels said was only about two miles north of Bani Walid, rebel officials prevented journalists from going farther as ambulances coming out of the city occasionally raced by.        

Abdullah Kenshil, the head negotiator for the Transitional National Council, said that the fighting had stopped after one rebel was killed and five were wounded overnight, and that rebels were now negotiating with loyalists. &ldquo;We hope this chapter will end with roses, not with blood,&rdquo; he said.        

A few minutes later and a few yards away, the rebels&rsquo; military spokesman, Abdulrahman Busin, said the rebel forces had entered Bani Walid and fighting was continuing. He predicted it would be in rebel hands within 48 hours.        

He confirmed, however, that rebel forces had been forced to retreat at one point because of heavy resistance.        

Officials at Tarhuna Hospital said one of the five wounded rebels died there.        

&ldquo;There were a thousand Qaddafi forces there and they used every type of rocket &mdash; Grads, everything,&rdquo; said one of the wounded, Lutvi Omar Meshri, who said he had been imprisoned in Tripoli until rebels opened the prisons. Another wounded fighter, Ahmed Harija, said that his unit had managed to force its way into a loyalist military base when several of them were wounded and that their commanders then received a request from NATO to pull back so it could launch airstrikes.        

Reuters reported that NATO carried out five airstrikes in Bani Walid, but NATO&rsquo;s update reported only one on Friday.        

Mr. Kenshil said the rebels had withdrawn because forces loyal to the ousted Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi were firing Grad missiles at them from inside residential buildings and the rebels were afraid that returning fire with heavy weapons would cause civilian casualties.        

Mr. Busin also said the rebels were refraining from using heavy weaponry to avoid civilian casualties.        

Most residents in the town wanted to surrender to the rebels, according to elders from Bani Walid, but the loyalist forces included members of the regular military from the Qaddafi government, and the rebels said they suspected they were protecting senior government figures, including Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons Seif al-Islam and Saadi.        

Mr. Kenshil also said the rebels had taken six prisoners, including a brigadier general from the Libyan Army. The prisoners were seen in a pickup truck being taken to the rear.        

Rebel officials said they had begun the campaign on Bani Walid after peace negotiations failed and loyalist forces opened fire. The drive there is part of a larger push against towns still loyal to Colonel Qaddafi, including the city of Surt.        

Signifying the ascension of the interim government, Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, the chairman of the Transitional National Council appeared in Tripoli on Saturday. Many of the council&rsquo;s leaders have remained in the east, even weeks after Tripoli&rsquo;s fall.        

Bani Walid is the home of the country&rsquo;s largest tribe, the Warfallah, which had previously been a strong supporter of Colonel Qaddafi. It is believed that some of his former officials may have taken refuge there. Surt is on the main coastal highway 200 miles east of the capital. Loyalist forces holding it have effectively been able to cut the country in two between east and west.        

The fighting came after Interpol issued arrest warrants for Colonel Qaddafi and two others on Friday, and after reports came from Niger of a new convoy of high-ranking Libyan officials arriving across the desert.        

There was no suggestion that Colonel Qaddafi or the two other wanted men were known to be among those who arrived in the latest convoy to Niger. The country has been under intense international pressure to turn over any former officials of the Qaddafi government.        

Despite an international search, the whereabouts of Libya&rsquo;s top officials have been uncertain since rebels took Tripoli.        

Since then, Colonel Qaddafi has taunted the transitional rebel government in audio messages and urged loyalists to continue fighting.        
