
IMPHAL, India &mdash; She arrived in an ambulance, thin and ghostly pale, a tube dangling from her nostril. Flanked by police officers, she was ushered into the judge&rsquo;s chambers for a fortnightly ritual she has repeated hundreds of times. Was she ready to end her fast?        

Irom Chanu Sharmila, a 39-year-old poet and activist, gave her usual reply: no. With that, she was taken back to the hospital room where she spends her days in isolation, force-fed a sludgy mix of nutrients though the tube in her nose. This routine has gone on, remarkably, for 11 years.        

A recent 12-day fast by the social activist Anna Hazare paralyzed India&rsquo;s political system, captured the nonstop attention of its hyperkinetic 24-hour cable news media and inspired hundreds of thousands of people across the country to rally in his crusade against corruption.        

But in India, where hunger strikes serve as a common tool of protest &mdash; playing a prominent role even in the modern state&rsquo;s creation &mdash; not all of them grip the public imagination in quite the same way. Ms. Sharmila&rsquo;s lonely, nonviolent struggle has endured in obscurity, along with her cause: to get India to remove laws that shield security forces from prosecution in this remote, insurgency-racked corner of the northeast.        

She spends her days cut off from her supporters, her family and the news media. The authorities tightly control access to her. Still, her determination is unwavering. &ldquo;I am strong,&rdquo; Ms. Sharmila averred, eyes ablaze, in a brief interview in the judge&rsquo;s chambers. &ldquo;I am just waiting for God and his infallible judgment.&rdquo;        

India&rsquo;s capacious borders encompass an astounding diversity of terrain, culture, religion and ethnicity, and at its edges the country has struggled to stay true to its democratic ideals. Nowhere is that clearer than here. Manipur sits on India&rsquo;s northeastern fringe, along its border with Myanmar, one of the seven northeastern states that sit across the narrow neck of territory that traces Bangladesh&rsquo;s northern frontier and abuts China, Bhutan and Myanmar.        

In appearance and culture its people have more in common with East Asia than distant New Delhi. Multiple insurgencies have fought for independence and autonomy in this fractious region, and the government has responded with tough military crackdowns.        

Soldiers here have a much freer hand because they are shielded from prosecution by a law known as the Armed Forces Special Powers Act of 1958. Under the law, military personnel can arrest people without a warrant, shoot to kill on suspicion and use deadly force to break up gatherings of five or more people. They cannot be prosecuted without explicit permission from the central government, which rarely comes.        

Unsurprisingly, the law has led to decades of human rights abuses. Thousands have been killed, injured, arrested and tortured with impunity, human rights workers here say.        

The episode that prompted Ms. Sharmila to begin her fast took place on the afternoon of Nov. 2, 2000, in a village at the edge of Imphal called Malom. A mysterious explosion along the main road leading to the village sent a company of soldiers of the Assam Rifles flooding into the village. The soldiers killed 10 people, including teenagers and a 62-year-old grandmother. Seven of the dead were shot at close range while lined up at a bus stop; the other three were gunned down elsewhere in the village.        

The soldiers claimed that they had been fired upon, but a judicial inquiry found no evidence to support their assertion.        

&ldquo;The firing by the Assam Rifles personnel have resulted to the death of 10 (ten) innocent persons,&rdquo; said the inquiry report, which was completed last year, nearly a decade after the killings.        

Among the dead were Chandramani Singh, a 17-year-old high school student who had won a national award for bravery for saving his younger brother from drowning in a fish pond when he was 4 years old. He had traveled to New Delhi to receive a clover-leaf-shaped medal from then-Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. His older brother, Robin, was also killed.        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
