
BAGHDAD &mdash; The anti-American cleric Moktada al-Sadr called on his followers on Saturday to cease their attacks on United States military forces in Iraq, saying that he did not want the Americans to have an excuse to remain in the country, according to a statement posted on a Web site of his political party.        

But if the American troops do not leave by the end of the year, the attacks should resume, the statement said.        

It could not be independently confirmed that the statement was from Mr. Sadr.        

A 2008 agreement between the United States and Iraq calls for the withdrawal of American troops by the end of this year. But in August, the Iraqi government said it would negotiate with the Americans about some troops remaining to continue to train the fledgling Iraqi security forces.        

Last week, it was revealed that Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta had endorsed a plan for 3,000 to 4,000 troops to stay in Iraq beyond December to conduct training. Also last week, the United States military told the Iraqi government that it had begun to withdraw its 46,000 troops from the country.        

Mr. Sadr, whose Mahdi Army twice fought significant battles with American and coalition forces, became a prominent political player in Iraq after candidates loyal to him won 39 seats in last year&rsquo;s parliamentary election.        

In his statement, Mr. Sadr said, &ldquo;I am concerned about the complete independence of Iraq and the withdrawal of the occupying forces from our holy lands.&rdquo; He added, &ldquo;And if the withdrawal is not completed and Iraq remains unstable, the military operations will resume in a new and stronger form.&rdquo;        

Mr. Sadr did not address Mr. Panetta&rsquo;s plan or whether a contingent of American military trainers would lead his followers to attack the Americans.        

American officials blamed Shiite militias like Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s that are backed by the Iranian government for many attacks against the United States military in June, when 15 American fighters were killed, the highest monthly number in three years.        

In response to the increased attacks, the United States put pressure on the Iraqi government to crack down on the militias. The attacks dropped off significantly in August, leading to the first month in the entire eight-and-a-half-year war here that not a single American fighter died.        
