
TOKYO &mdash; Japanese officials moved to control diplomatic damage after an air traffic controller was questioned here for posting secret American flight information on his blog, including the detailed flight plans of Air Force One last November.        

The Transportation Ministry said Saturday that the controller, who works at Haneda Airport in Tokyo, could face charges of leaking national secrets. Japanese officials appeared embarrassed by the breach, which also included the flight data of an American military reconnaissance drone.        

Tokyo is apparently worried that the episode could raise new doubts in Washington about Japan&rsquo;s ability to handle delicate information, after a scandal four years ago over the leak of American naval radar secrets. The newspaper Yomiuri Shimbun reported that Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda may personally apologize to President Obama for the breach during a meeting this month in New York.        

The ministry said the controller, who was identified only as a man in his 50s, posted the flight plan of Air Force One during Mr. Obama&rsquo;s visit to Asia in November. It said the blog contained two pages of detailed information about the flight, including numerical data and a map showing the plane&rsquo;s route.        

Air Force One&rsquo;s flight details are usually kept secret to protect the president. The ministry said the blog contained no explanation of the numbers or images, which would have been largely incomprehensible to a layman.        

It said the controller was being questioned after a caller tipped off officials last Monday. The ministry also said that the controller did not appear to have acted with ill intent and told the authorities he posted the information to show his friends.        

The controller posted 12 pages of delicate information that included flight plans of a Global Hawk drone that was gathering radiation readings near the crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, the ministry said.        

For Japan, the episode is uncomfortably similar to a leak in 2007 of classified information about the United States Navy&rsquo;s advanced Aegis combat radar system, which is also on Japanese warships. A Japanese Navy officer was arrested for copying data about the radar onto CD-ROM disks and distributing them to classmates at a naval school.        
