
TOKYO &mdash; Just over a week after he took office, Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda of Japan suffered his first political setback on Saturday when the new minister of trade and industry resigned after a joke about radiation caused a public uproar.        

The industry minister, Yoshio Hachiro, stepped down after apologies failed to quell calls for his resignation within his own governing Democratic Party. The party appeared to be moving quickly to control damage to Mr. Noda&rsquo;s government.        

&ldquo;It was an inappropriate remark,&rdquo; Mr. Noda said Saturday. &ldquo;I want to apologize and correct the remark.&rdquo; Mr. Noda, Japan&rsquo;s seventh prime minister in five years, is trying to avoid the fate of many of his predecessors, who were undermined by similar scandals over gaffes by members of their governments.        

The problem began on Thursday, after Mr. Hachiro returned from a trip to evacuated areas around the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant. According to Japanese newspaper reports, Mr. Hachiro, who was wearing protective clothing, moved as if to wipe his sleeve against a reporter and jokingly said, &ldquo;Look out, radiation!&rdquo;        

The jest caused outrage largely because Mr. Hachiro&rsquo;s ministry, which was in charge of promoting as well as regulating nuclear power, has been widely blamed for lax oversight that allowed the Daiichi plant to operate without adequate defenses against tsunamis. The plant was crippled by a huge earthquake and tsunami on March 11, causing the world&rsquo;s worst nuclear accident since Chernobyl in 1986.        

Earlier on Thursday, Mr. Hachiro had raised eyebrows by calling the evacuated communities around the plants &ldquo;dead towns,&rdquo; a statement seen as insensitive to the approximately 80,000 people who had been driven from their homes by the nuclear accident.        

Mr. Hachiro apologized the same day for that remark. But then he made the comment about radiation on his clothing, which was criticized in newspapers on Saturday as a serious lapse of judgment.        

Mr. Hachiro later said that his recollection of the episode was &ldquo;not very clear,&rdquo; though he admitted that he had pretended to rub his sleeve on a reporter.        
