
ZANZIBAR, Tanzania (Reuters) &mdash; Nearly 200 people drowned when an overloaded ferry capsized off East Africa as it sailed from Zanzibar to Pemba island, the police said Saturday.        

Fishing boats, tour operators and diving instructors spent the night scouring the sea off the coast of Tanzania looking for survivors, many clinging to strewn cargo. One photograph showed two men and a child floating on a mattress, clinging to a refrigerator.        

Mohamed Mhina, a police spokesman, said 192 bodies had been recovered and 606 passengers rescued so far.        

&ldquo;There is a possibility that more bodies still remain at sea,&rdquo; Mr. Mhina said. &ldquo;Rescue workers are still searching for survivors and retrieving bodies.&rdquo;        

Pemba is about 25 miles from Zanzibar. Passengers who regularly take ferries between the islands said they are in poor condition and often overcrowded.        

&ldquo;They normally pack us in like sardines in a can,&rdquo; said Mwnakhamis Juma, a resident. &ldquo;And for that I really fear this could be a very big disaster.&rdquo;        

At the northern tip of Zanzibar, dozens of soldiers carried bodies onto white sand beaches, where thousands of people anxiously awaited news.        

&ldquo;The ferry flipped and capsized,&rdquo; a rescue worker, Ali Ramadhan, said at the port. &ldquo;There could be more bodies trapped inside the hull of the ship with the cargo. We suspect the ship was overcrowded with more than 800 passengers on board. It is normal for these ferries to overload passengers and cargo.&rdquo;        

The Zanzibar police commissioner, Mussa Alli Mussa, said early Saturday that more than 500 people were listed as being on the ship. Abdual Said, registrar of Zanzibar&rsquo;s seafaring vessels, said the ferry, the MV Spice Islander, was licensed to carry 600 passengers.        

Tanzania&rsquo;s worst maritime disaster was in May 1996 on Lake Victoria, when the MV Bukoba ferry sank with as many as 1,000 on board. Only 114 passengers survived, and the captain and eight officials were charged with the murders of 615 people.        
