
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Yemeni armed forces freed a cornered military brigade and appear to be preparing to enter the city of Zinjibar, which has been under the control of Islamic militants for months, according to the official Saba news agency.        

President Ali Abdullah Saleh of Yemen, who is currently recuperating in Saudi Arabia from a bomb attack, congratulated the &ldquo;heroes of the armed forces and security on what they have achieved,&rdquo; in a statement published on Saba&rsquo;s Web site.        

Mr. Saleh has been battling for months to stay in power, despite large street protests against his rule and international pressure. Militants have taken advantage of the chaos to capture territory in the south.        

Local news reports said that the armed forces had entered Zinjibar, which would be the first time that has happened since Islamic militants took over the city in late May. However, those reports could not be independently confirmed.        

In May, Islamic militants took over government buildings in Zinjibar after residents said security forces pulled out of the city. The governor of the volatile province of Abyan, where Zinjibar is located, fled to nearby Aden. For months, the only commander actively fighting the militants was Gen. Muhammad al-Somli, whose brigade was cornered by the militants just east of Zinjibar. General Somli complained publicly that his troops were running low on supplies.        

Yemeni opposition members speculated that the government had essentially handed over the city to the militants, intentionally creating havoc in the country so it would seem that the timing would be bad for the embattled Mr. Saleh to step down.        

However, in recent weeks, armed forces have been engaged in fierce clashes with the militants and carried out a barrage of aerial strikes on the region. Dozens of militants and soldiers have been killed, according to state-run news media reports.        

The militants call themselves Ansar al-Shariah, which means supporters of Shariah, or Islamic law; they were an unknown group before they started gaining ground in southern Yemen. A video released online by the militants in August showed footage of them, turbans wrapped around their faces, waving a flag bearing the logo of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, Yemen&rsquo;s branch of the terrorist network that has tried twice, unsuccessfully, to stage attacks in the United States. Additionally, local reports have noted the presence of foreigners among those fighting, lending credibility to the notion that the group has links to the Qaeda affiliate.        

Yemen has been rocked by street protests since January, with its government torn apart after many officials resigned over the use of violence against protesters.        
