
LUND, Sweden &mdash; Four people were arrested in Goteborg on Saturday night on suspicion of planning acts of terrorism there, the police said. The authorities also evacuated an arts center in the city.        

In a statement released Sunday, the Swedish Security Service said that the four men were arrested with the help of the National Task Force, which is deployed in urgent situations like those involving terrorism or hostages.        

There was no evidence that the case was connected with the 10th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks, and the Security Service said that &ldquo;there currently is no cause for public concern.&rdquo; The authorities did not raise the threat level and declined to provide further information about the continuing investigation.        

Officials around the world are on high alert because of the anniversary. The arrests in Sweden were a reminder of the anger provoked in Scandinavia over drawings of the Prophet Muhammad, first in Denmark and then by the Swedish artist Lars Vilks in 2007.        

The daily newspaper Expressen reported that the Roda Sten art center in Goteborg was evacuated and that the surrounding area was cordoned off on Saturday night because of a &ldquo;serious risk to human life.&rdquo;        

Mia Christersdotter Norman, the managing director of the arts center, said by telephone on Sunday that about 400 people were celebrating the opening of the Goteborg International Biennial for Contemporary Art when the police asked her to inform the guests that they needed to gather their belongings and leave the building.        

&ldquo;There was no panic,&rdquo; Ms. Christersdotter Norman said, describing an orderly evacuation. The police called her early Sunday and said that they had searched the entire building and had not found anything.        

&ldquo;They didn&rsquo;t say what it was, just that there was a serious threat,&rdquo; she said.        

The center, located in an old boiler house at the foot of the Alvsborg Bridge, is a landmark.        

Prosecutors have three days to charge the four people arrested. In a statement published on the Swedish Prosecution Authority&rsquo;s Web site, Agneta Hilding Qvarnstrom, a prosecutor who is leading the preliminary investigation, said it was not possible to give any specifics about the case. &ldquo;At this point, I can&rsquo;t say when there will be more information,&rdquo; she said.        

Magnus Ranstorp, a terrorism expert at the Swedish National Defense College who testified before the Sept. 11 commission, said the police and prosecutors had been unusually mum about the arrests. &ldquo;They are surprisingly tight-lipped. Nothing is leaking out,&rdquo; he said.        

&ldquo;Whether it&rsquo;s a Breivik, Al Qaeda-related or coming from the left, we don&rsquo;t know,&rdquo; he said, referring to Anders Behring Breivik, who admitted to killing 77 people in Norway in July.        

&ldquo;It can be anything, but the fact that this happens so rarely and that it happened now,&rdquo; on the eve of Sept. 11, Mr. Ranstorp said, &ldquo;is a huge coincidence. You can&rsquo;t rule out anything.&rdquo;        

Sweden was the target of a terrorist attack in December when a suicide bomber, Taimour Abdulwahab al-Abdaly, an Iraqi Swede who had studied in Britain, killed himself and wounded two others in the heart of Stockholm&rsquo;s city-center shopping district two weeks before Christmas.        

The Stockholm attack came as a shock in Sweden, a country that prided itself on having created a stable and peaceful society.        
Christina Anderson reported from Lund, and Nicholas Kulish from Berlin.
