
SANTIAGO, Chile &mdash; A Chilean judge has opened the first official investigation into the death of former President Salvador Allende, the democratically elected Socialist who died during the 1973 military coup led by Gen. Augusto Pinochet.        

Mr. Allende, 65, was found dead by the military forces that stormed the presidential palace after hours of a gun battle and bombings. At the time, an autopsy suggested that Mr. Allende had killed himself. But many of his supporters have contended for decades that he might have been killed by troops or snipers.        

The inquiry is part of new investigations into 726 human rights-related crimes in which the victims or their relatives never filed suit. Judge Sergio Mu&ntilde;oz, who is in charge of coordinating all human rights inquiries, had asked a prosecutor to determine the number of cases in which no investigations had been undertaken and to file legal complaints on behalf of the suspected victims. That included the case of Mr. Allende&rsquo;s death.        

The judicial prosecutor of the appeals court, Beatriz Pedrals, said the purpose of the investigation was to seek &ldquo;uniformity of criteria, in other words, what has not been investigated, the courts will investigate.&rdquo;        

Judge Mario Carroza, who will conduct the investigation, said this was &ldquo;more than an important duty.&rdquo;        

The autopsy report concluded that Mr. Allende had died of a gunshot wound, fired from a short distance into his mouth, &ldquo;that could have been made by himself.&rdquo;        

But in 2008, Luis Ravanal, a thanatologist who analyzed the original report, said that he found evidence of gunshot wounds from two different weapons.        

Those who were with Mr. Allende that day claim that the president had already killed himself by the time the military entered the palace.        

Dr. Arturo Jir&oacute;n, one of Mr. Allende&rsquo;s personal doctors who was with him, said that he saw Mr. Allende just seconds after he shot himself. His colleague, Dr. Patricio Guij&oacute;n, &ldquo;went into the hall where Allende was to get a gas mask, and he saw the president shoot himself,&rdquo; Dr. Jir&oacute;n said.        

&ldquo;We will not change our version of the events,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;That is what happened. It is the truth.&rdquo;        

In his last radio broadcast as the presidential palace was under siege, Mr. Allende insinuated that he would not be taken alive. &ldquo;I will not resign,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Placed in this historic juncture, I will pay with my life the loyalty of the people.&rdquo;        

The military dictatorship that ensued lasted 17 years.        
