
PARIS &mdash; On Sunday, however briefly, nations around the world came together with the United States to remember the attacks on New York and the Pentagon that killed nearly 3,000 people from 90 countries.        

Commemorations were held from Indonesia to Israel, with many political and religious leaders expressing their commitment to democracy and the fight against terrorism. But there was also weariness, with smaller-than-expected crowds in some cities and numerous commentaries noting the wars that followed Sept. 11 and the attacks&rsquo; more negative impacts &mdash; on civil liberties, air travel, international law and the United States&rsquo; reputation.        

There was an overnight suicide bombing involving an explosives-packed truck in Afghanistan, the arrests of terrorism suspects in Berlin and Sweden and heightened security alerts most everywhere. There was analysis about how democratic values have triumphed in the Arab Spring, which has been seen as a defeat for Al Qaeda. But even with Osama bin Laden dead, Al Qaeda or its offshoots remain active in the chaotic areas of Yemen, Somalia, Pakistan and the Maghreb, and its ideology still inspires some to plan attacks against the United States and its allies.        

Although NATO is at war against Al Qaeda and the Taliban, 10 years later, the European allies have tired of the war and are pressing for negotiations with the Taliban.        

In Pakistan, where opinion surveys show most people doubt that Al Qaeda was responsible for the 9/11 attacks, the government ignored the anniversary, except to put an advertisement in The Wall Street Journal describing Pakistan as a victim, not a perpetrator, of terrorism. In Germany, where the attacks were planned, there was a quiet commemoration, an interfaith service at the American Church in Berlin. Three days after the attacks, about 200,000 people had gathered near the Brandenburg Gate, but barely 200 showed up for a moment of silence on Sunday.        

&ldquo;I thought there would be a few more people,&rdquo; said Alan Benson, who helped organize the program and held an American flag. &ldquo;First there was empathy with Americans, but as a consequence of the wars there are a lot of misgivings now.&rdquo;        

In Hamburg, Germany, where the lead 9/11 hijacker, Mohammed Atta, and several of the other plotters lived at Marienstrasse 54, Mayor Olaf Scholz ordered flags at half-staff on public buildings.        

Britain, which lost 67 of its citizens on Sept. 11, held several commemorations. It has been America&rsquo;s principal military partner in Afghanistan and Iraq over the last decade, and 559 British soldiers have died in the wars there.        

In London, remembrances were led by Prince Charles and Prime Minister David Cameron and included many relatives of the 9/11 victims. The ceremony was held at the London memorial garden for the victims in Grosvenor Square, across a park from the United States Embassy.        

After family members read the names of those who were killed, relatives, including children not yet born on the day of the attacks, walked into the arbor and laid white roses on a memorial stone that is atop a piece of twisted metal taken from the rubble at ground zero.        

Prince Charles said he could identify with the families&rsquo; grief, having lost his uncle and mentor, Lord Louis Mountbatten, in a 1979 terrorist bombing in Northern Ireland. &ldquo;For so many of those left behind,&rdquo; he said, it had been &ldquo;a continuing, awful agony that has to be endured day by day.&rdquo;        

In Rome, the Colosseum was illuminated on Sunday night as a gesture of mourning. The Italian president, Giorgio Napolitano, wrote President Obama of the need to &ldquo;look forward and reinforce that international and multilateral solidarity that supported us 10 years ago.&rdquo; Pope Benedict XVI urged world leaders to address &ldquo;the grievances that give rise to acts of violence.&rdquo; Terrorism in the name of God, the pope said, was a kind of abomination, adding, &ldquo;No circumstances can ever justify acts of terrorism.&rdquo;        

In Paris, the main commemoration was across from the Eiffel Tower on the rainy Place du Trocadero, where 10-story replicas of the twin towers were covered with the names of the victims and messages from the French. Some 1,300 people came. A large sign in French and English read: &ldquo;Sept. 11, 2001. The French will never forget.&rdquo; One organizer, the businessman Patrick du Tertre, said, &ldquo;We want the Americans to know that we love them, that we are their allies, that we remember and that we share their sorrow.&rdquo;        

On Friday, the American ambassador to France, Charles Rivkin, held a small ceremony in his garden with President Nicolas Sarkozy, who delivered a fiercely pro-American speech.        
Reporting contributed by Ellen Barry in Moscow; John F. Burns in London; Jane Perlez in Islamabad, Pakistan; Henrik Pryser Libell in Oslo; Nicholas Kulish in Berlin; Elisabetta Povoledo in Rome; Michael Wines in Beijing; Isabel Kershner in Jerusalem; and Elvire Camus and Alan Cowell in Paris.
