
MEXICO CITY &mdash; Guatemalans streamed to the polls on Sunday to elect a new president, Parliament and local leaders in an election defined by rising concerns about gangs and drug cartels. Voters waiting to cast ballots from the countryside to the capital said they were motivated mostly by the fear of violent crime, and demands for a stronger government response.        

&ldquo;There are innocent people dying in the streets, in the neighborhoods, all over the country,&rdquo; said Domingo Cabinal Rodr&iacute;guez, 23, an agronomist in Cotzal, a mountain town north of Guatemala City. &ldquo;What we most urgently need is security.&rdquo;        

Mr. Cabinal said he was voting for Otto P&eacute;rez Molina, a former general who was seen as the front-runner before Election Day. Mr. P&eacute;rez Molina was one of 10 presidential candidates, and it was not clear whether he would attract enough votes &mdash; 50 percent plus one vote &mdash; to win outright.        

Experts said that a runoff was more likely, with Mr. P&eacute;rez Molina facing either Manuel Baldiz&oacute;n, 41, a wealthy businessman from northern Guatemala who is running as a populist, or Eduardo Suger, 72, an academic who built a network of private universities.        

Each of the three candidates has pledged to strengthen security, partly by expanding and better equipping the Guatemalan military. Mr. P&eacute;rez Molina, whose campaign symbol is an iron fist, said in a recent interview that at least 400 communities had sent formal requests to the Defense Department for soldiers &mdash; a sign, he said, of how desperate Guatemalans had become.        

Indeed, in a country where 200,000 people were killed in a long civil war &mdash; mostly by state security forces claiming to attack Communists, according to a United Nations commission &mdash; the widely supported plans for an expanded domestic role for the military is a stunning reversal of public opinion. As recently as 2007, when Mr. P&eacute;rez Molina lost his first presidential campaign, the public was still wary of strengthening the security forces. But after a year that has included several gruesome massacres attributed to Mexican drug cartels, those views seem to be changing.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s like Colombia in 2001 and 2002, when insecurity and crime and violence were the dominant reality of daily life,&rdquo; said Cynthia Arnson, an expert at the Woodrow Wilson Center for International Scholars. &ldquo;People want order.&rdquo;        

There are some, however, who would prefer another approach. Seventy-five percent of Guatemalans live in poverty, and many of the poorest indigenous communities that suffered greatly during the civil war are now being strangled by drug cartels, which have seized territory for their business with intimidation, corruption and killings. Residents like Mauricio Vaquez, from a village near Cotzal, said that sending more men with guns to areas like his, where cartels had wide influence, would create only more conflict, not peace.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve already seen the work the generals do,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;A lot of people say they know the mountains. They know because they pursued us here, and that&rsquo;s why we don&rsquo;t want them.&rdquo;        
Nadia Sussman contributed reporting from Cotzal, Guatemala.
