
MAKHACHKALA, Russia &mdash; Here in the dangerous mountains of Dagestan, an elite soccer player from the top tier of the game ran out onto the green field of a tiny stadium on Sunday to begin what he said was an adventure into the unknown.        

The player, Samuel Eto&rsquo;o, 30, was bought just last month from the Inter Milan soccer club in Italy by a Russian oligarch for a sum that sportswriters say makes him the world&rsquo;s highest-paid soccer player.        

He has left behind a life in the limelight on the European circuit to play for an obscure team here in Makhachkala, a city so unsafe that he will fly in only to play, as he did this weekend, and then fly out again to Moscow, where he and his team live and train.        

In his first home game, Mr. Eto&rsquo;o scored one of two goals in a 2-1 victory over Volga. Supporters chanted his name and the name of his new club, Anzhi. As he walked off, small boys ran out to touch him, chased and sometimes tackled by security men with black batons.        

His new club&rsquo;s owner, the oligarch Suleyman Kerimov, signed the Cameroonian player away from Inter Milan, putting an unusual twist on a brilliant career that has included three European Champions League titles with Barcelona and Inter Milan, as well as a gold medal in the Sydney Olympics in 2000 with his national team, making him the biggest name ever to play for a Russian team.        

&ldquo;I have already swept all possible awards, and I&rsquo;d like to start a new stage in my career,&rdquo; he said at a news conference at the stadium.        

&ldquo;Anzhi&rsquo;s new history is just beginning, and I want to go all the way from A to Z with the club. I will be happy to write my name into this history.&rdquo;        

All of this has puzzled many soccer players and others who follow the sport.        

&ldquo;I really think that in choosing to go over there to Russia he has to some extent signed his sporting death warrant,&rdquo; said a former goal keeper of the Cameroon national team, Joseph-Antoine Bell. In transferring to an obscure club, he said, Mr. Eto&rsquo;o is squandering the twilight years of a great career.        

Clearly the money drew him: $30 million per season, according to news reports, although team officials deny disclosing that figure, calling it a trade secret.        

Mr. Kerimov has promised to build a new stadium to replace the city&rsquo;s run-down facility that now seats fewer than 16,000 people.        

It was not clear how much Mr. Eto&rsquo;o knew about Dagestan, a mountainous region on the western shore of the Caspian Sea that has surpassed Chechnya as the most violent republic in the North Caucasus.        

Dagestan&rsquo;s violence grows from a seemingly intractable knot of clan and business rivalries, religion, separatism, crime and extortion, feuds, and vendettas whose roots run deep into its region&rsquo;s history.        

Every year, according to reports, 100 police officers are killed here.        

On the night before Mr. Eto&rsquo;o&rsquo;s arrival, two gun battles were reported in Dagestan, killing five people.        

&ldquo;Plenty of people will be looking out for my security, and if I took this decision it&rsquo;s because I don&rsquo;t consider that my life or that of my family are in any danger,&rdquo; he said on his Web site. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll travel there on the day of the match or the eve of the match and then I&rsquo;ll go back to Moscow. It&rsquo;s that simple.&rdquo;        

A team official said that Mr. Eto&rsquo;o&rsquo;s wife and children would live with him in Moscow.        

Many people who live here, beaten down by poverty and almost daily violence, appear to be watching the billionaire oligarch&rsquo;s indulgences without rancor. Dagestan has an unemployment rate of at least 40 percent and survives on subsidies from the Kremlin that make up 75 percent of the region&rsquo;s budget, said Biyakai Magomedov, of the newspaper Chernovik.        

&ldquo;The baron does what the baron wishes,&rdquo; said Kamil Isayev, 39, manager of a telephone shop, using a phrase that echoes the feudal nature of Dagestan. &ldquo;He decides where his money goes. He spends here, he spends there.&rdquo;        

Soccer fans, of course, were thrilled.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;Now he&rsquo;s ours, he&rsquo;s a Dagestani,&rdquo; said Magomed Dosanov, 22, a professional boxer as he waited outside the stadium to see Mr. Eto&rsquo;o. &ldquo;Soon we&rsquo;ll have everything. It all starts with soccer.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kerimov, 45, who like many in Dagestan is more interested in wrestling than in soccer and is chairman of the board of trustees of the Russian Wrestling Federation, made his billions in oil, mining and finance and is now reported to be worth $7.8 billion.        

He has spent tens of millions of dollars since he bought the Anzhi club in January to buy big-name soccer players, and the team&rsquo;s position in the standings has been creeping upward. Foreigners now make up 30 percent of the team.        

Some say he is spending his money to further political ambitions with a demonstration of civic-mindedness. Some say he is fulfilling a pledge by regional oligarchs to Vladimir V. Putin, the prime minister and a former president, to put some of their money into local projects.        

Or he may just want a soccer team. Buying teams and players has itself become a sport among Russia&rsquo;s so-called oligarchs, who mostly got rich in the 1990s by cornering natural resources after the collapse of the Soviet Union.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s just like he&rsquo;s collecting mistresses or diamonds or yachts, just a demonstration the extent of his wealth,&rdquo; said Andrei Piontkovsky, a political commentator in Moscow. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the classic style of the nouveaux riches. There&rsquo;s no soccer industry here. You can&rsquo;t make money by running a team, you can only spend money.&rdquo;        

The best known among these sporting oligarchs is Roman Abramovich, who bought the Chelsea soccer club in 2003. Another, Alisher Usmanov, is a major shareholder in London&rsquo;s Arsenal soccer club.        

Vladimir A. Antonov, a banker, bought England&rsquo;s Portsmouth Football Club this year. Mikhail D. Prokhorov, who is now a presidential candidate, owns the New Jersey Nets.        

Some Dagestanis take pride in the reflected glory of their oligarch.        

&ldquo;All people know about Dagestan is guns and bombs,&rdquo; Mr. Isayev said. &ldquo;Now they will know that there is a soccer player here too. This is definitely the biggest more-or-less good news in recent years.&rdquo;        
