
CAIRO &mdash; Egyptian security forces raided the offices of an Egyptian affiliate of the Al Jazeera news network known for attentive coverage of street protests, eliciting allegations on Sunday of a crackdown on the news media as the military-led transitional government seeks to ensure law and order after allowing an angry mob to invade the Israeli Embassy over the weekend.        

The raid on the television network came as both the Egyptian and Israeli governments began tentative steps to repair the diplomatic breach between the awkward allies after the embassy attack on Friday night.        

The raid also came after a warning last week by Egypt&rsquo;s minister of media, Osama Heikal, that the government would take legal action against stations that &ldquo;endanger the stability and security&rdquo; of the nation, and some analysts said they feared the raid could signal a broader effort to curtail the new freedoms of expression experienced since the uprising that ousted former President Hosni Mubarak this year.        

The network, Al Jazeera Live Egypt, was founded in the aftermath of the uprising and has become known for its attentive, if not sensational, coverage of street protests, including the Israeli Embassy attack on Friday. The raid forced the network to halt its programming for a period before it resumed broadcasting from Al Jazeera&rsquo;s headquarters in Doha, Qatar.        

Officials of the Interior Ministry said they had raided the network because it lacked a license, and that neighbors had complained about noise. Numerous satellite channels have sprung up since the revolution, and Mr. Heikal, the media minister, said in his statement last week that the government would stop issuing new permits because of concerns about broadcasts that endangered stability.        

But Islam Lotfy, a lawyer for the channel, said the channel had applied for a license in March without a response.        

In a press conference that was broadcast on the network a few hours after the raid, Ahmed Zein, the manager of the channel, said officers in plain clothes had entered without showing a warrant or identifying themselves, confiscated equipment and arrested an engineer operating it.        

&ldquo;If broadcasting the truth is considered endangering stability,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;then it is an honor for any media outlet to be endangering stability.&rdquo;        

After the raid, Wahid Abdel Meguid of Al Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies, a prestigious and government-financed research organization, said in a call that was aired on the network that the government&rsquo;s action was &ldquo;bizarre&rdquo; and &ldquo;shameful,&rdquo; suggesting that security officials were &ldquo;acting as if there was no revolution.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This is not an attack on one station,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s an attack on the media as a whole.&rdquo;        

The raid comes as the embassy attack has put pressure on the military council running the country to show that it can control the streets. But it also comes after months of efforts to keep journalists from criticizing the military. The council has warned news organizations to vet their information with the military before publication; summoned journalists and bloggers for questioning about the contents of their writing or broadcasts; and charged a few with the criminal offense of insulting the military.        

State news organizations, meanwhile, reported on Sunday that the government was holding 92 suspects in connection with the embassy attack. The military has said it would file any charges in a special emergency security court, obviating the suspects&rsquo; rights to an open civilian trial.        

Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, the leader of the military council and Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s former defense minister, postponed his scheduled testimony at a closed session of the criminal trial of the former president because of the weekend&rsquo;s developments. The judge reportedly rejected his request to testify only in written answers to questions, and his appearance was rescheduled for Sept. 24.        

Egyptian officials said a delegation from Israel had arrived to discuss possibly reopening the embassy under tighter security.        

In Israel, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu confirmed in comments to his cabinet that Israel was &ldquo;in contact with the Egyptian government regarding the necessary procedures for returning our ambassador so that he and his staff will be properly secured.&rdquo;        

He also offered conciliatory words for his Egyptian counterparts, distinguishing them from the mob that attacked the embassy. &ldquo;I am pleased that there are other forces in Egypt, beginning with the Egyptian government.&rdquo;        

Israel continued to reel from the challenges from all sides set off by the democracy movements sweeping the region. In addition to its ambassador&rsquo;s evacuation from Cairo, Israel&rsquo;s ambassador to Turkey, its once close ally, was expelled more than a week ago because of Israel&rsquo;s refusal to apologize for a raid that killed nine people last year on a Turkish protest ship bound for Gaza.        

This month, Israel could face a diplomatic showdown at the United Nations as well. Palestinians plan to seek membership and recognition of a Palestinian state within the 1967 boundaries &mdash; a move that is strongly opposed by Israel and the United States but supported by more than 100 other countries.        

Israel&rsquo;s defense minister, Ehud Barak, called for a special cabinet meeting to discuss the shifts with Egypt, Turkey and the Palestinians. No date has been set.        
Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from Jerusalem.
