
BEIJING &mdash; At a United Nations conference in Indonesia this summer, an official of the agency that oversees China&rsquo;s weapons industry ticked off the hurdles that any proposal to sell Chinese weapons abroad must clear. Among them: arms sales must not alter another nation&rsquo;s internal security. They must not violate United Nations arms embargoes. And they must win government approval.        

&ldquo;If you want to export a product, you should get permission,&rdquo; said the official, Wang Feng. &ldquo;You want to talk to some other country, you ship to the country, you should get permission.&rdquo;        

That was on June 11, or roughly a month before three of China&rsquo;s biggest state-owned arms companies secretly offered to sell Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s army $200 million in weapons to put down the rebellion. The offer, discovered by a Canadian journalist in documents tossed into a Tripoli trash heap, flouted a United Nations embargo on weapons sales to the Qaddafi government &mdash; an embargo that China itself had voted for in February.        

The government, at Foreign Ministry briefings last week, has said that it gave no permission for the deals to proceed.        

China&rsquo;s leaders have never liked international sanctions, calling them interference in other nations&rsquo; affairs. But the disclosure of the Libyan negotiations underscores a divide many analysts say has long existed between the Defense Ministry and the Foreign Ministry &mdash; which both have a say in approving arms sales.        

Some believe that big state-run weapons companies, with their close ties to the military, easily make end runs around the diplomats in the Foreign Ministry, which negotiates China&rsquo;s position on international sanctions.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s possible, and has been the case in the past, that Chinese arms companies push their own agenda,&rdquo; Mathieu Duchatel, a senior researcher in Beijing with the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, said in an interview. &ldquo;There are informal relationships between the different actors, and the logical decision-making process can be bypassed in certain cases.&rdquo;        

The military alliance may gain an added edge when the diplomats are themselves embattled. Since the rebels mounted their revolt last February, China&rsquo;s policy toward Libya has been up for grabs, with the government apparently torn between economic interest in Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s continued rule and a desire to be on the winning side should his opponents take control.        

During much of this debate, supporters of Colonel Qaddafi seem to have had the upper hand. Alone among major powers, China has yet to recognize the rebels&rsquo; Transitional National Council, which took effective control of Libya after Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s ouster.        

Whether these calculations figured in the arms negotiations is hard to say, in part because the government insists that the arms being negotiated &mdash; antitank missiles, rocket launchers and portable rockets capable of bringing down aircraft, among others &mdash; were never delivered. Technically, at least, Chinese arms vendors are not required to seek permission before talking about deals with foreign customers.        

On the other hand, some of the companies involved in negotiations with Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government have a track record of skirting sanctions, American officials say. The United States has repeatedly cited two of the firms, the China North Industries Corporation and the China National Precision Machinery Import-Export Corporation, for selling missile technology and other equipment to Iran that it says violate international sanctions.        

Chinese officials have argued that the Americans rely on incorrect information or too-sweeping definitions of prohibited weapons components.        

More broadly, China&rsquo;s record on enforcing international sanctions remains weak, many experts say. For example, the latest United Nations report on the enforcement of sanctions against North Korea, issued in May, faults China for failing to intercept suspected shipments of ballistic-missile items on North Korean cargo planes that land there en route to Iran. After vigorous protests by the Chinese, the report identified China only as &ldquo;a neighboring third country.&rdquo;        

Chinese companies were major suppliers in the past decade of small arms and ammunition to Sudan, where they fueled the conflict in Darfur despite a United Nations prohibition. Similar charges have been leveled in wars in Congo and other African nations. Chinese officials say they have no control over arms once they reach their destination.        
Li Bibo contributed research.
