
In a ruling that tugged at South Africa&rsquo;s racial wounds, a judge said Monday that a firebrand youth leader was guilty of hate speech for singing an apartheid-era freedom song that includes lyrics calling on people to shoot white farmers.        

The ruling by Judge Colin Lamont added further censure to the contentious figure of Julius Malema, the 30-year-old leader of the Youth League of the governing African National Congress and a vocal adversary of President Jacob Zuma.        

The ruling represented a significant legal test of the frontier between free speech and hate speech in South Africa, one of Africa&rsquo;s most democratic countries. And in a nation where four out of five citizens are black, it could help Mr. Malema claim the emotional mantle of the struggle against apartheid that is still a font of political legitimacy.        

Mr. Malema is facing an internal party inquiry on other issues that could lead to his suspension from formal politics and thwart his ambitions as a kingmaker in the nation&rsquo;s fractious jostling for position, influence and patronage. A decision on that inquiry could come as early as Tuesday.        

The court ruling on hate speech related to months of hearings into Mr. Malema&rsquo;s frequent singing of a song called &ldquo;Shoot the Boer.&rdquo; Boer is the Afrikaans word for farmer, but some whites believe the song refers to all whites. Mr. Malema had argued that the song was not a literal incitement to murder, but a symbolic rallying cry to dismantle apartheid. The judgment effectively outlawed the disputed refrain.        

&ldquo;I find the words uttered by Malema constitute hate speech,&rdquo; Judge Lamont said, drawing assertions from other Youth League leaders that the ruling criminalized much of the heritage of the A.N.C. as the leading force against apartheid. The finding did not carry a criminal penalty, but Mr. Malema was ordered to pay court costs. It was unclear whether he planned to appeal.        

&ldquo;The words of one person inciting others,&rdquo; Judge Lamont said, according to South African news reports, &ldquo;that&rsquo;s how a genocide can start.&rdquo; He added, &ldquo;No justification exists allowing the words to be sung.        

&ldquo;People must develop new customs and rejoice in a developing society by giving up old practices which are hurtful to members who live in that society with them,&rdquo; Judge Lamont said.        

&ldquo;The enemy has become the friend, the brother. This new approach to each other must be fostered.&rdquo;        

While Mr. Malema was not in court to hear the verdict, about 100 of his followers on the streets outside the court in central Johannesburg broke into the song, directly challenging the ruling.        

Judge Lamont determined that while songs like &ldquo;Shoot the Boer&rdquo; were part of the fight against white minority rule, they constituted hate speech as South Africa seeks to heal its racial past.        

The pro-Malema crowd was smaller than a gathering of young people who fought with the police last month when the A.N.C. opened a formal inquiry to determine whether the youth leader had brought the party into disrepute and sowed division by advocating the overthrow of the government in neighboring Botswana.        

The inquiry is politically charged because Mr. Malema, who helped President Zuma win a power struggle within the party in 2007, is now at odds with him. While Mr. Malema is not generally seen as a direct challenger for the party leadership, the Youth League could disrupt Mr. Zuma&rsquo;s bid next year for a second term as party leader &mdash; a position that, if secured, would automatically make him the favored presidential candidate in elections in 2014.        

The reactions to the ruling by Judge Lamont showed the breadth of the racial gap. The Youth League secretary general, Sindiso Magaqa, said the verdict effectively outlawed commemorations of the struggle that ended apartheid. But Kallie Kriel, the head of an Afrikaans civil right group, said it showed that Mr. Malema&rsquo;s behavior polarized South Africa&rsquo;s racial groups, once separated by law under apartheid.        

According to its charter, the A.N.C. is formally opposed to racial distinctions and seeks a non-racial society. But &ldquo;Shoot the Boer,&rdquo; Mr. Kriel said, showed the power of &ldquo;another A.N.C. where reconciliation is not top of the agenda.&rdquo;        
