
MEXICO CITY &mdash; Otto P&eacute;rez Molina, a conservative former general who promises to crack down on violent gangs and drug cartels, finished first in Guatemala&rsquo;s presidential election on Sunday, but without enough votes to avoid a November runoff.        

With 95 percent of the votes tallied on Monday, Mr. P&eacute;rez Molina, who played major roles both in Guatemala&rsquo;s bloody civil war and in negotiating the 1996 peace accords that ended it, had won 36 percent, short of the 50 percent plus one vote required for outright victory. Manuel Baldiz&oacute;n, a wealthy businessman running as a populist, had 24 percent of the vote and seemed destined for the Nov. 6 runoff. In third place with 16 percent was Eduardo Suger, a 72-year-old academic who built a network of private universities.        

Mr. P&eacute;rez Molina, 60, had been polling stronger before Election Day, and his failure to win outright suggested that concerns among voters about his military past and his &ldquo;iron fist&rdquo; plans for crime fighting may have been greater than polls showed. Or, experts said, Mr. Baldiz&oacute;n&rsquo;s populism and well-financed campaign reached more voters than expected.        

Still, Mr. P&eacute;rez Molina told reporters early Monday that with the 10-person field winnowed to two, he expected to win. &ldquo;We are confident that in the next round,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;we will win again and win by a strong margin.&rdquo;        

The election, the fourth since a 36-year civil war left 200,000 people dead, was less marred by violence than the last election in 2007. Even so, dozens of local and legislative candidates and aides were killed during the campaign, and on Monday, looters ransacked a city hall west of the capital, claiming that the mayor won re-election through fraud. Election spending also reached a record high for the country, experts say, because Mexican drug cartels have moved in and stepped up financing of candidates.        

Voters waiting to cast ballots from the capital, Guatemala City, to the countryside over the weekend said they were motivated mostly by the fear of violent crime, which has become epidemic, with as many or more killings per day than during the war. Those who voted for Mr. P&eacute;rez Molina said they appreciated his strategic experience and his plan to put a better-equipped military on the streets to fight crime.        

&ldquo;There are innocent people dying in the streets, in the neighborhoods, all over the country,&rdquo; said Domingo Cabinal Rodr&iacute;guez, 23, an agronomist and a P&eacute;rez Molina supporter in Cotzal, a mountain town north of Guatemala City. &ldquo;What we most urgently need is security.&rdquo;        

Mr. Baldiz&oacute;n, 41, has also pledged to fight crime and the Mexican cartels, which are particularly strong in the northern border region where Mr. Baldiz&oacute;n has built a network of businesses. His campaign largely emphasized a plan that would require companies to give workers an extra paycheck, which Parliament would not be likely to support in a country long controlled by a powerful corporate sector.        

But he has also said he will expand the Guatemalan National Guard and increase use of the death penalty, even if it means pulling out of regional human rights agreements.        

Experts say the get-tough approach of both candidates highlights how desperate Guatemalans have become in the face of spiraling insecurity. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s like Colombia in 2001 and 2002, when insecurity and crime and violence were the dominant reality of daily life,&rdquo; said Cynthia Arnson, an expert at the Woodrow Wilson Center for International Scholars. &ldquo;People want order.&rdquo;        

Indeed, in a country where state security forces killed tens of thousands of civilians during the war in a scorched-earth campaign aimed at leftist rebels, support for a stronger military represents a stunning reversal of opinion. Mr. P&eacute;rez Molina, whose campaign symbol is an iron fist, said last week that at least 400 Guatemalan communities had sent formal requests for soldiers to the country&rsquo;s Defense Department &mdash; a sign, he said, of the change in view.        

But Guatemala is still a country of nightmarish memories, and many people still struggle with the idea of electing a former general who remains a symbol of the war. Especially in Quich&eacute;, in the mountainous villages where Mr. P&eacute;rez Molina served during the 1980s, when some of the war&rsquo;s worst atrocities were committed, there is a palpable fear of a return to violence.        

Human rights advocates wonder if soldiers will once again kill with impunity and whether dubious accusations will lead to killings outside the law. They note that while the military is considered less corrupt than the police or the justice system, this could easily change, given the money available from drug cartels.        

Meanwhile residents like Mauricio Vaquez, from a relatively safe village near Cotzal, said that they were more concerned about poverty and failing infrastructure than crime. Mr. Vaquez said that sending more men with guns to Quich&eacute; and other mostly indigenous areas that suffered greatly during the war would create only more danger, not peace.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve already seen the work the generals do,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;A lot of people say they know the mountains. They know because they pursued us here, and that&rsquo;s why we don&rsquo;t want them.&rdquo;        
Nadia Sussman contributed reporting from Cotzal, Guatemala.
