
BAGHDAD (AP) &mdash; Gunmen forced their way Monday onto a bus of Shiite pilgrims traveling through the remote desert of western Iraq on a trip to a holy shrine in Syria and killed all 22 men on board, security officials said.        

The bodies were discovered late Monday night, hours after the gang of gunmen stopped the bus and ordered all the women and children to get off, according to a security official who interviewed a survivor.        

The gunmen then drove the bus a few miles off the main highway in Anbar Province between Baghdad and the border with Jordan. The pilgrims were ordered off the bus and shot one by one, the security officials said.        

&ldquo;The terrorists stopped the bus at gunpoint and killed 22 men,&rdquo; said Maj. Gen. Abdul-Hadi Rizayig, the provincial police chief.        

The highway is protected by the Iraqi Army, he said.        

Shiite pilgrims have been a frequent target for Sunni insurgents who are trying to revive the sectarian violence that brought Iraq to the brink of civil war just a few years ago.        

The attack on Monday came less than four months before the remaining United States troops, who surged into Iraq in large numbers in 2007 to stem the sectarian violence, are scheduled to leave the country.        

In Anbar, a province with a heavily Sunni Muslim population, insurgents have launched many attacks while posing as soldiers or security guards. And on Monday, one of the women who was forced off the bus told officials that four gunmen dressed in military uniforms had stopped the bus at a fake checkpoint.        

An Iraqi Army patrol found the women, weeping and wailing, by the side of the highway. The Iraqi soldiers then found the deserted bus and loaded the women and children back on, and they headed back to Karbala, where the pilgrimage had begun. None could be reached late Monday.        

Two Iraqi security officials and a political leader from Karbala, a city in southern Iraq, confirmed details of the shooting. All three spoke on condition of anonymity, because they were not authorized to talk publicly.        

The pilgrims were on a trip to the Sayyida Zainab shrine in Damascus, Syria. Officials gave conflicting accounts about whether they were headed to Syria or returning from there.        

Although overall violence has dropped significantly across Iraq, deadly shootings and bombings still occur nearly every day.        
