
TEHRAN (AP) &mdash; Iranian regulators have frozen the assets of a businessman accused of masterminding a $2.6 billion bank fraud that is being described as the biggest financial scam in the country&rsquo;s history, state media reported Monday.        

The investigation could also affect power struggles between Iran&rsquo;s president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, and the nation&rsquo;s ruling clerics. The suspect, who was identified by Kayhan, a hard-line newspaper, as Amir-Mansour Aria, a financier, has been linked to the so-called deviant current of Ahmadinejad allies who are facing arrest.        

Officials say the suspected fraud involved the use of forged documents to obtain credit at one of Iran&rsquo;s top financial institutions, Bank Saderat, to purchase assets that included state-owned companies like the Khuzestan Steel Company, a major steel producer.        

An economic analyst based in Tehran, Saeed Leilaz, said in an interview that the scheme supposedly involved &ldquo;privatization using government money.&rdquo;        

The case &ldquo;indicates a wide corruption within a wide network,&rdquo; Mr. Leilaz said.        

After the first details of the inquiry became public last week, Mostafa Pour Mohammadi, the head of a judicial investigations unit, called it &ldquo;the most unprecedented financial corruption case in the history&rdquo; of Iran.        

Some bank employees were involved in the fraud, the intelligence minister, Heidar Moslehi, told state television on Monday. He pledged to recover the money, which the authorities estimated to be at least $2.6 billion.        

Media reports said that the fraud was suspected to have begun in 2007, but that the activity increased significantly over the last few months. Last week, Mohammad Jahromi, the chief executive of Bank Saderat, revealed that the bank had uncovered improprieties early last month and that it had informed security and judicial authorities.        

Mr. Aria&rsquo;s business empire includes more than 35 companies, including a mineral water company, a soccer team and meat imports from Brazil. Calls to his office for comment were not returned on Monday.        

Kayhan, which often reflects the views of Iran&rsquo;s ruling clerics, reported that Mr. Aria had ties to Mr. Ahmadinejad&rsquo;s top ally, Esfandiar Rahim Mashaei. Conservatives have accused Mr. Mashaei and others of trying to challenge the authority of Iran&rsquo;s theocracy. Dozens of Mr. Ahmadinejad&rsquo;s allies have been arrested in crackdowns that have effectively blocked the political future for Mr. Mashaei, who was seen as a possible successor to Mr. Ahmadinejad in 2013.        
