
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; The word went out at 9 a.m.        

The pipeline had burst &mdash; again &mdash; and gasoline was splashing freely down by the river.        

The whole slum seemed to spring into action, with men, women and children grabbing buckets, oil tins, battered yellow jerrycans &mdash; anything to carry the leaking fuel. Even minibuses raced in from miles away, looking for free gas, a small godsend in a place where most people are jobless and live in rusty metal shacks that rent for $25 a month.        

But then the wind shifted, witnesses said on Monday, and embers from the garbage fires that routinely burn by the river wafted toward the area where the fuel was gushing out. There was no time to escape. The fuel exploded, sending a giant fireball shooting up over the slum, engulfing scores of people and scattering bodies that were left in various poses of anguish, burned to the bone.        

&ldquo;All I can say is pole sana,&rdquo; said Kalonzo Musyoka, Kenya&rsquo;s vice president, using the Kiswahili words reserved for condolences. &ldquo;These people died like goats.&rdquo;        

Kenyan officials estimated that more than 100 people may have died in the fire on Monday morning. This is not the first time scores of poor Kenyans have died in a terrible blaze while scooping up spilled fuel. In 2009, at least 113 people were burned to death after a huge crowd descended on an overturned gasoline tanker, which then blew up. Several other spills have exploded into infernos, and a few weeks ago the Kenyan police were criticized for firing into the air and wounding a woman in an attempt to drive people away from a fuel spill.        

It has already been a difficult week for the police. On Sunday, a boatload of Somali gunmen snatched a British tourist from a fancy $1,300-a-night resort just south of the border with Somalia. The gunmen killed the woman&rsquo;s husband before racing away with her, prompting the Kenyan police to deploy search planes, helicopters and small boats to scour the area. But on Monday there was no word on where the woman might be, and most officials suspected that she had been taken deep into Somalia, kidnapped either by the Shabab, an Islamist militant group, or by gangsters looking for ransom.        

While that case was a bit of an aberration, residents of the Sinai slum, where the fire broke out, said fuel spills happened all the time.        

&ldquo;I can remember four times,&rdquo; said Zackiyo Mwangi, a vendor of pirated CDs. &ldquo;People started saying this morning, &lsquo;There&rsquo;s a spill, in the usual place &mdash; let&rsquo;s get over there.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Yeah, I know,&rdquo; Mr. Mwangi added. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s dangerous, but that&rsquo;s how life is here.&rdquo;        

Sinai is a warren of iron-sheeted shacks and muddy footpaths tucked behind Nairobi&rsquo;s industrial area, not far from Jomo Kenyatta International Airport. A major pipeline, owned by the Kenyan government, carries gasoline, diesel and jet fuel from the port of Mombasa across the entire span of Kenya, slicing through this tightly packed slum.        

In 2008, the state-owned pipeline company tried to evict residents, saying it was illegal &mdash; and very dangerous &mdash; to live right above a high-pressure pipeline, but the people refused.        

The blast tore apart kiosks and homes and left a preschool blackened and smoking on Monday afternoon. It was unclear how many, if any, of the children had been killed.        

&ldquo;Maybe the teacher got them all out,&rdquo; Grace Waithira, who lives nearby, said hopefully. But her tears seemed to suggest otherwise.        

Red Cross volunteers pulled zippers over bodies in white plastic bags, scribbling in blue felt-tip marker &ldquo;male, adult,&rdquo; &ldquo;male, child&rdquo; or other simple indicators on the plastic.        

A heavy stench of garbage, gasoline and charred flesh stung the air. While the burning garbage may have lighted this fire, poverty seemed to be the real fuse.        

&ldquo;This just shows you how these people will do anything to generate a coin,&rdquo; said Johnson Muthama, a member of Parliament. &ldquo;Just look at them.&rdquo; He gestured toward a crowd of thousands of onlookers, mostly young men in grubby clothes, staring gape-mouthed at all the bodies on the ground. &ldquo;They are ready to risk their lives for anything.&rdquo;        
