
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Welcomed by cheering crowds, the leader of Libya&rsquo;s transitional government issued a passionate call for national reconciliation on Monday in the heart of Tripoli. In doing so, he took possession of the spot where Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi had often harangued the country and where security forces shot protesters six months ago and set off the rebellion that drove him from power.        

The speech by Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, the leader of the Transitional National Council, was the first time that the de facto government had addressed Libyans from Martyrs&rsquo; Square, which has been named in honor of the people who died in the revolution.        

Women held babies dressed in the red, black and green of the revolution, and militia members stood below a stage full of council members who were dressed mainly in civilian clothes, demonstrating the effort to move the country toward normalcy.        

The festive atmosphere reflected the council leadership&rsquo;s sense of security on a day when forces loyal to Colonel Qaddafi carried out their first significant attack in rebel-held territory, killing 17 guards at an oil refinery on the Mediterranean coast. Mr. Abdel-Jalil seemed to choose his words in an effort to convince loyalists that they could safely surrender.        

&ldquo;We are Muslims, people of forgiveness,&rdquo; he said, urging Libyans not to seek revenge on those who had harmed them under Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s rule, and to remind them that the families of former government figures &ldquo;are not responsible for crimes&rdquo; their husbands and fathers committed.        

Mr. Abdel-Jalil said many in Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces helped the revolution, through sabotage or collaboration with rebels or by aiming away from people they were ordered to shoot.        

&ldquo;Let the law take the lead,&rdquo; he said, before urging people in the remaining Qaddafi strongholds of Bani Walid, Surt and Sabha to rise up and join the revolution. &ldquo;All of us Libyans are waiting.&rdquo;        

Mr. Abdel-Jalil also called on Libyans to support a democratic system that honors Islam and respects the rule of law. &ldquo;We will not accept any extremist ideology, on the right or the left,&rdquo; Mr. Abdel-Jalil said. &ldquo;We are a Muslim people, for a moderate Islam, and will stay on this road.&rdquo;        

Early on Tuesday, however, Amnesty International released a report contending that the anti-Qaddafi forces had committed unlawful killings and torture during the long rebellion. The report said that the pro-Qaddafi forces had committed many more serious violations, but that supporters of the opposition &ldquo;have also committed human rights abuses, in some cases amounting to war crimes, albeit on a smaller scale.&rdquo;        

The council issued a statement acknowledging that while the vast majority of the abuses alleged in the report were committed by the Qaddafi regime, there were "a small number of incidents" committed by its opponents. The council condemned "any abuses perpetrated by either side" and said it was "firmly committed to upholding human rights and the rule of law, both international and local &mdash; the violation of rights no longer has a place in Libya."        

The report said that after the rebel forces took control of eastern Libya, angry supporters of the rebellion had &ldquo;shot, hanged and otherwise killed through lynching&rdquo; dozens of Qaddafi soldiers and suspected mercenaries.        

On Monday, Mr. Abdel-Jalil made his call for unity and moderation as tensions simmered between his government, led by Western-educated liberals, and some of the Islamist factions among the anti-Qaddafi fighters. Disparate groups are vying for positions in the interim government, which is also seeking to integrate former rebel fighters, many of whom were unemployed before the revolution, into the security forces.        

Mr. Abdel-Jalil took pains to credit everyone who had helped the revolution: the NATO alliance whose airstrikes turned the tide of battle, rebels like a young man who had lost a leg in the fighting and joined the officials on the stage, and women, who he said had played a critical role in the revolution and would be given important positions.        

&ldquo;Women will be ambassadors,&rdquo; he said to cheers from the front of the crowd, where women and girls waved flags. &ldquo;Women will be ministers.&rdquo;        

Mr. Abdel-Jalil and other speakers praised the fighters who were from outside the capital, whose ranks include some who have complained that the groups dominating the council are not those that won the most gains on the battlefield. In a nod to those fighters, the speakers called out the cities one by one. Misurata, which held off a siege by Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces, was called &ldquo;the Stalingrad of Libya&rdquo; by one speaker.        

Addressing two major complaints about Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s rule, Mr. Abdel-Jalil assured the crowd that unemployment benefits would reliably be paid and that the country&rsquo;s wealth would be safeguarded from corruption.        

Council officials also clarified what had been a confusing set of accounts about an attack by pro-Qaddafi forces on the Ras Lanuf oil refinery on the country&rsquo;s eastern Mediterranean coast.        

Abdulrahman Busin, a military spokesman, said the refinery was attacked from several miles away with antiaircraft weapons, and 17 former rebel fighters who were guarding it were killed.        

Mr. Busin denied earlier reports that a large force had captured part of the industrial area around the refinery and killed prisoners. Fighting continued in the loyalist stronghold of Bani Walid, where anti-Qaddafi fighters said on Sunday that they had taken control of the town&rsquo;s northern half. Outside Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s hometown, Surt, fighters said Monday that loyalists had fired Grad rockets at them as they tried to push closer to the city, and that they had to pull back.        
Bryan Denton contributed reporting from outside Surt, Libya; Rick Gladstone from New York; and Michael Wines from Beijing.
