
LONDON &mdash; Iran&rsquo;s president said Tuesday that two Americans arrested two years ago while hiking the Iran-Iraq frontier and imprisoned on espionage charges would be freed within two days as a humanitarian gesture. The move seemed timed to portray him more favorably before he attends the United Nations General Assembly meeting next week.        

The remarks by the president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, in a television interview with NBC&rsquo;s &ldquo;Today&rdquo; show from Tehran, came a month after the two Americans, Shane M. Bauer and Joshua F. Fattal, both 29, were sentenced to eight years imprisonment on convictions for spying and trespassing, which they have denied.        

The sentence was considered unusually harsh and seen as an increasingly tough public relations problem for Mr. Ahmadinejad abroad, even when considering the longstanding estrangement in American-Iranian relations.        

It was unclear whether Mr. Ahmadinejad&rsquo;s gesture would create an opening for an improvement in those relations. But it was welcomed by the families of the imprisoned Americans.        

&ldquo;Shane and Josh&rsquo;s freedom means more to us than anything,&rdquo; read a statement from the families, &ldquo;and it&rsquo;s a huge relief to read that they are going to be released.&nbsp; We&rsquo;re grateful to everyone who has supported us and looking forward to our reunion with Shane and Josh. We hope to say more when they are finally back in our arms.&rdquo;        

A Web site devoted to their cause, FreetheHikers.org, festooned its homepage with the headline: &ldquo;Iran Says Shane and Josh to be Released by Thursday!&rdquo;        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton was more cautious in her reaction, but said she was encouraged.        

&ldquo;We obviously hope that we will see a positive outcome from what appears to be a decision by the government,&rdquo; she said in Washington, without referring specifically to Mr. Ahmadinejad.        

Asked in the &ldquo;Today&rdquo; interview with Ann Curry about the case against the Americans, Mr. Ahmadinejad said: &ldquo;I think these two persons will be freed in a couple of days.&rdquo;        

He also repeated complaints about what he said were the unjust imprisonments of Iranians in the United States, and said that Mr. Bauer and Mr. Fattal were well cared for in Iran&rsquo;s penal system. &ldquo;&rdquo;It&rsquo;s like staying in a hotel,&rdquo; he said.        

The Iranian authorities have never publicly provided evidence to support their contention that the hikers were American spies, and a wide range of outside voices, including Secretary General Ban Ki-moon of the United Nations and Amnesty International, had called for their unconditional release.        

The Iranians have in the past filed similar cases against American citizens, including Roxana Saberi, a journalist who was also sentenced in 2009 to eight years on espionage charges she denied &mdash; only to be released with great fanfare as a humanitarian gesture.        

Mr. Bauer, Mr. Fattal and a third American hiker, Sarah E. Shourd, were arrested near northern Iraq&rsquo;s border with Iran in July 2009 by Iranian border guards, who contended they had intentionally trespassed.        

Ms. Shourd was released on $500,000 bail in September 2010 &mdash; also just before the annual General Assembly &mdash; and returned to the United States.        

Mr. Bauer, Mr. Fattal and Ms. Shourd, all graduates of the University of California, Berkeley, were in the Middle East for studying or traveling at the time of their arrest. They say they made an innocent mistake in wandering over the unmarked border, crossing when a soldier of unknown nationality waved to them to approach. They were only then told they had crossed into Iran and were arrested, Ms. Shourd, who is Mr. Bauer&rsquo;s fianc&eacute;e, has said.        

Despite Mr. Ahmadinejad&rsquo;s suggestion that Mr. Bauer and Mr. Fattal would be released without conditions, there was confusion about whether they, too, would be required to post what the Iranian judiciary called bail &mdash; in effect, a ransom payment for their freedom.        

A lawyer for the two men, Masoud Shafiei, was quoted by Iran&rsquo;s Fars news agency as saying the families of the two men had been informed of their bail terms and &ldquo;Bauer and Fattal can leave Iran similar to Sarah Shourd.&rdquo;        

Mr. Shafiei said the Swiss Embassy in Tehran, which looks after American interests, had also been informed.        

Iran&rsquo;s detention of the Americans has aggravated what was already a tense relationship which has been fraught since the break in diplomatic ties following the 1979 Islamic Revolution.        

The two countries are also at odds over Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program and its hostility toward Israel.        

The reported plan to free the two men came just a week after Iran made its first counterproposal in two years to ease the confrontation with the West over its nuclear program.        

Fereydoon Abbasi, the head of Iran&rsquo;s atomic energy agency, offered to allow international inspectors &ldquo;full supervision&rdquo; of the country&rsquo;s nuclear activities for the next five years in return for the lifting of international sanctions.        

Iran says its nuclear program is for peaceful purposes, but Western powers suspect it is designed to build atomic weapons. The Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman, Ramin Mehmanparast, said Tuesday that Iran was ready for further talks &ldquo;with respect to cooperation on common ground&rdquo; and said &ldquo;misunderstanding&rdquo; about its nuclear program could be cleared up through &ldquo;positive, constructive&rdquo; contacts, Press TV, a state-financed satellite broadcaster in Iran, said.        
Alan Cowell reported from London, and Rick Gladstone from New York. Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Washington.
