
BAGHDAD &mdash; Just a few hours after the bodies of 22 executed Shiite pilgrims were found in western Anbar Province, Sunni leaders there erupted in anger on Tuesday at Iraq&rsquo;s Shiite-led government, exposing yet another fault line in the country&rsquo;s sectarian tensions.        

The local leaders, concerned about a rising tide of violence in Anbar, which is predominantly Sunni, said the security forces sent into the province by the government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki over the past year had been ignoring insurgent groups and had done little to protect the local population.        

Mr. Maliki sent the Iraqi Army into the province because of his concerns about corruption in the local police force. But local leaders contend that Mr. Maliki used that as an excuse to exert greater control over the province&rsquo;s Sunnis and ensure that Anbar remains unstable.        

&ldquo;The provincial council has demanded the army do searches with airplanes to see where the terrorists groups from other provinces are hiding in the Anbar desert, and they are not doing it,&rdquo; said Sadoun Obeid al-Shalan, the deputy chairman of Anbar&rsquo;s provincial council.        

Mr. Shalan said that provincial leaders had requested that officials in Baghdad, the capital, send members of the Iraqi Army who were from Anbar to protect them, but that the officials had refused to do so.        

An adviser to Mr. Maliki dismissed those claims, saying that the first matter Mr. Maliki had discussed with his cabinet on Tuesday was how to improve security in Anbar. &ldquo;He gave directions to fill the gaps along the highway, even though it&rsquo;s a long highway,&rdquo; said the adviser, Ali al-Moussawi, referring to the highway between Baghdad and the border with Jordan where a bus carrying the Shiite pilgrims was attacked on Monday. &ldquo;They also discussed the possibility of not allowing travelers to pass on these roads at night.&rdquo;        

The bodies of the 22 men were discovered late Monday night, hours after they were killed. The pilgrims, many of whom were from southern Iraq, had been traveling through the desert to a holy site in Damascus, Syria.        

The attack came just a week after insurgents ambushed a minivan on a highway in Anbar, killing nine people, including eight members of the Iraqi Army.        

Anbar, which is Iraq&rsquo;s largest province, much of it desert, has been one of the country&rsquo;s most violent regions since the United States invaded in 2003. Over 1,000 American troops have died there, many of them in an offensive against Sunni insurgents in the city of Falluja in 2004.        

The spokesman for the United States military in Iraq, Maj. Gen Jeffrey S. Buchanan, said the military did not know which group was responsible for the killings of the pilgrims, although the attack appeared similar to recent ones for which Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia had claimed responsibility.        

General Buchanan said that over the past year, Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia had tried to undermine the provincial government and Iraqi security forces in Anbar to increase tensions between Sunnis and Shiites. He said that there had been about 10 attacks a week in the province, about the same level as last year.        

The Iraqi Army had &ldquo;some fairly consistent success against&rdquo; Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia and other insurgent groups, he said.        

Over the next week or two, Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, which killed more than 80 people in a string of attacks on Aug. 15, is likely to stage another large-scale attack, General Buchanan said. &ldquo;The attack cycles about a year ago had been about just two weeks apart,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Since then they have lengthened to four to six weeks apart between series of attacks.&rdquo;        

Salim Mutar al-Essawi, a member of the Anbar provincial council, contended that the Maliki government was dominated by people with close ties to Iran, a Shiite-dominated country, which &ldquo;does not want to see stability in our province.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The level of power that Sunnis have in the government is linked to the stability of this province and the other Sunni provinces,&rdquo; he said.        
Reporting was contributed by Omar al-Jawoshy, Zaid Thaker and Yasir Ghazi from Baghdad, and an employee of The New York Times from Anbar Province.
