
MOSCOW &mdash; The announcement on Tuesday by the Russian space agency that it will delay the launching of the next crew to the International Space Station is a concern for NASA, which is relying solely on the Russians for astronaut transportation.        

The end of the space shuttle program after the last flight in July was meant to usher in a new era where NASA could move on to more ambitious destinations and nimbler, cheaper private companies would take over the job of ferrying people and supplies to the orbiting research station. But a series of recent rocket malfunctions &mdash; including one on Aug. 24 by a Russian ship that was taking supplies to the space station &mdash; has made this approach look tenuous.        

&ldquo;It would be better if the space station were not reliant on any one nation,&rdquo; said Scott Pace, director of the space policy institute at George Washington University.        

American companies have contracts with NASA to carry cargo to the space station and hope eventually to win contracts to serve as space taxis for humans. But their success is hardly assured. The Orbital Sciences Corporation of Vienna, Va., one of two companies that are to start taking cargo to the space station next year, suffered a setback in June when an engine caught fire during a ground test.        

The other company, the Space Exploration Technologies Corporation of Hawthorne, Calif. &mdash; or SpaceX &mdash; has come under criticism because it did not disclose until last week a brief overheating of the engines during an otherwise highly successful test flight last December. SpaceX aims to take its first load of cargo to the space station in December.        

Blue Origin, a space company started by Jeffrey P. Bezos, the chief executive of Amazon.com, suffered a major failure during a flight test last month of a vehicle it is designing to carry tourists to the edge of space. The crash was unrelated to its NASA-financed project but raised questions about the secretive company.        

But it was the crash of the Russian cargo ship that has had the most immediate consequences, because that rocket is similar in design to the one the Russians will use in November to carry astronauts, including one American. An investigation traced the failure to a manufacturing defect on a fuel pipe that caused the third-stage engine to shut down. The finding created concerns about quality control in the Russian rocket factories.        

On Tuesday, the Russian space agency postponed the next manned launching to Nov. 12.        

The space station has a crew of six, but three will return this week on one of the two Soyuz capsules docked there. The capsules are certified to last six months in orbit. The other three crew members must leave in the remaining capsule by Nov. 19, leaving little leeway for further delays if the space station is to remain occupied. Astronauts have lived on the space station continuously for more than a decade.        

Mission control on the ground can operate an empty station, but could be helpless if a malfunction sends the $100 billion station tumbling out of control and putting at risk practically the entire human spaceflight program of the United States, Russia and the other participating nations.        

Russian space officials said they would launch two unmanned Soyuz rockets &mdash; one launching satellites and the other carrying cargo to the space station &mdash; before sending up people again.        

For NASA, there is no short-term solution, and space experts and policy makers hold clashing views on what the agency&rsquo;s long-term approach should be.        

As for the American contractors, they are nowhere near ready to launch people into space and probably will not be until 2015 at the earliest. And in Washington, the White House and Congress continue to argue.        

The Obama administration proposed $850 million for the next fiscal year to further finance commercial development of astronaut-carrying &ldquo;space taxis&rdquo; &mdash; what NASA calls its commercial crew program &mdash; while Congress has put a higher priority on a large NASA-designed rocket for astronaut missions beyond low-Earth orbit. A budget bill passed by the House provided only $312 million for commercial crew efforts.        

Meanwhile, commercial crew advocates say the Russian travails show that Congress should follow the White House&rsquo;s blueprint. &ldquo;If the space station goes splash, it&rsquo;s $100 billion down the drain,&rdquo; said John Gedmark, executive director of the Commercial Spaceflight Federation, a trade group. &ldquo;This is why it is so important that the U.S. providers get up and flying as soon as possible.&rdquo;        

NASA also appears to be broadening its rocket choices. It announced on Tuesday an agreement with Alliant Techsystems Inc. of Minneapolis to help with its proposed Liberty rocket. Alliant built the solid rocket boosters for the space shuttles and was working on a longer version for the first stage of Ares I.        

The Liberty closely resembles the Ares I with an almost identical first stage, but would use a European-built second stage to speed development. NASA would not pay Alliant, but about two dozen NASA employees would work full time on the project.        
Andrew E. Kramer reported from Moscow, and Kenneth Chang from New York.
