
ABOARD THE MANGYONGBONG, off North Korea &mdash; It was billed as a cruise ship, but the creaking, nearly-40-year-old vessel that set sail from the remote North Korean town of Rajin had more of the trappings of a tramp steamer. With its cramped cabins, cut-rate cuisine and foul, water-deprived bathrooms, it was not about to compete anytime soon with Cunard or Carnival in the leisure industry.        

Then again, it does not have to. As North Korea&rsquo;s latest venture into the tourism business, it need not concern itself with rivals. The trick, as its operators conceded, will be to attract enough vacationers.        

Desperate for foreign currency, officials in secretive North Korea are trying to lure tourists to holiday cruises along the length of the impoverished country&rsquo;s east coast. Earlier this month, a trial run by the rusty Mangyongbong was completed in 43 trying hours at sea. More than 200 people were packed into dim and musty cabins, sometimes eight to a room with floor mattresses. Chinese tourists and businesspeople shared quarters with North Korean officials and foreign journalists.        

The inaugural cruise presumably had support at the highest levels in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital. The organizer, Taepung International Investment Group, falls under the National Defense Commission, which answers directly to the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-il.        

&ldquo;I love peace and the Korean Peninsula,&rdquo; said Park Chol-su, president of Taepung, as he sat on the deck of the Mangyongbong. &ldquo;Our company symbolizes peace. We can even hire Americans.&rdquo;        

The North Korean government may be one of the world&rsquo;s most paranoid and hermetic, but it sees tourism playing an increasingly important role in its economy. Tourism is exempt from the economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations to pressure Mr. Kim to abandon his nuclear weapons program, and it has been growing in recent years as foreigners strain to get a glimpse of this country.        

It is difficult to get reliable statistics on tourist numbers, but one well-connected person in the industry estimated that at least 24,000 foreign tourists visited last year, more than 80 percent of them Chinese.        

There have even been two recent motorcade tours in which Chinese have driven their own cars into North Korea.        

Critics say money from tourism helps prop up a repressive regime. But advocates of engagement contend that tourism helps open the country to outside influences, and that the revenue could help ordinary Koreans get through the current hardship.        

&ldquo;Tourism was a major factor that allowed Cuba to weather the end of the Soviet trading system after the cold war,&rdquo; said John Delury, a historian at Yonsei University in Seoul who observes relations between the two Koreas and China. &ldquo;Of course, North Korea can&rsquo;t rival tropical Cuba as a tourist destination, but Pyongyang&rsquo;s embrace of bringing in foreign visitors is a positive sign of willingness to integrate more fully with the outside world.&rdquo;        

For Westerners, the annual staging of mass performances in Pyongyang, the Arirang Festival, has traditionally been the biggest draw, while Chinese have tended to make short trips across the border. But North Korean officials are clearly trying to appeal to higher-end travelers with the new cruise program. Mr. Park said he hoped to bring Europeans on the next voyage, possibly in October. He also said he intended to get a bigger, swankier boat.        

The trial run began on Aug. 29, when Mr. Park led scores of foreigners across the border from northeast China to Rajin, the port town that North Korea has designated a free economic and trade zone. Some of the visitors had paid about $470 for the five-day trip, which included several days on land. Others were traveling free of charge because they were friends of Mr. Park, who is a Chinese citizen. Many of the Chinese ran tour agencies, and Mr. Park and North Korean officials were trying to encourage them to promote North Korea tourism.        

Bilingual government guides had been assigned to the tour buses. An affable 25-year-old, Mun Ho-yong, spouted off some facts in English about his country: &ldquo;In 1950, there was a war, the Korean War, started by the United States.&rdquo; Now, he said, Korea had entered the phase of &ldquo;universal socialist construction.&rdquo;        
Edy Yin contributed research.
