
In the latest twist to a political standoff that has riveted South Africa, President Jacob Zuma seemed on Tuesday to offer an olive branch to a firebrand youth leader under investigation for dividing the governing party and sowing discord in its ranks.        

Mr. Zuma&rsquo;s remarks emerged a day after, in a ruling that tugged at South Africa&rsquo;s racial wounds, a judge said that the youth leader, Julius Malema, was guilty of hate speech for singing an apartheid-era freedom song that includes lyrics calling on people to shoot white farmers.        

The ruling by Judge Colin Lamont added further notoriety to the contentious figure of Mr. Malema, 30, the leader of the Youth League of the governing African National Congress and a vocal adversary of Mr. Zuma.        

But, in an interview in the online Business Report, Mr. Zuma said the party should not aim to remove Mr. Malema. &ldquo;No, I don&rsquo;t think that should be the objective,&rdquo; Mr. Zuma said. &ldquo;I think the objective is how do you help Malema? Because Malema has a lot of elements that are good in him.&rdquo;        

Mr. Zuma made clear, however, that Mr. Malema would be expected to modify his behavior. &ldquo;You cannot allow him to do the wrong things,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;In other words, the job of the A.N.C. is to help Malema, to mold him into a dynamic, good leader. That&rsquo;s what we need to do. It is only if you can&rsquo;t do it that the question becomes: what do we do with him?&rdquo;        

There was no immediate indication of how Mr. Malema would respond to Mr. Zuma&rsquo;s comments, which seemed to hold out a prospect of rehabilitation in return for a commitment to tone down his public remarks, ranging from calls for nationalization of banks and mines to taunts directed at continued privilege within the white minority.        

Mr. Malema is facing an internal party inquiry on other issues that could lead to his suspension from formal politics and thwart his ambitions as a kingmaker.        
