
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Heavily armed insurgents wearing suicide vests struck Tuesday at two of the most prominent symbols of the American diplomatic and military presence in Kabul, the United States Embassy and the nearby NATO headquarters, demonstrating the Taliban&rsquo;s ability to infiltrate even the most heavily fortified districts of the capital.        

As the insurgents fired rocket-propelled grenades, Westerners sought shelter &mdash; one rocket penetrated the embassy compound &mdash; and Afghan government workers fled their offices, emptying the city center. NATO and Afghan troops responded with barrages of bullets. At least 7 people were killed and 19 wounded by the insurgents.        

The Taliban siege ended Wednesday morning after 19 hours with nine insurgents killed, three of them on Tuesday and the rest early Wednesday, said the Kabul Provincial police chief, Gen. Mohammed Ayoub Salangi.        

At least five of the attackers had taken positions in a 14-story building under construction with clear sight lines to the targets.        

As the gunfire pounded, loudspeakers at nearby embassies kept repeating: &ldquo;This is not a drill, this is not a drill. If you are in a secure location, do not move.&rdquo;        

Security forces moved floor to floor, occasionally taking fire, as they fought to gain complete control of the building. Traffic was barred from the center of the city and military helicopters whirred overhead early Wednesday.        

Though staved off after about five hours, the attack was the most direct on the American Embassy since it opened here 10 years ago, and was freighted with intended symbolism. It was one of several recent attacks in Kabul that demonstrated the Taliban&rsquo;s ability to terrify the population, dominate the media and overshadow the West&rsquo;s assertions that the Afghan government and security forces would soon be able to handle the insurgency.        

The insurgents have made such guerrilla-style attacks the centerpiece of their new strategy after a year in which the addition of 30,000 more American forces to the war set back the Taliban&rsquo;s capacity for frontal attacks and their ability to control entire districts in the south.        

Spectacular though not significant militarily, the attacks nonetheless serve to weaken trust in the government and show that the Taliban can still outmaneuver, even if for only a few hours, both the Afghan forces and their Western counterparts.        

With the Obama administration facing mounting budget problems and having fixed a timetable to withdraw most forces by 2014, the assault also appeared to signal Taliban resolve to battle Western forces to the hour of their exit. A Western official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the attack made the talk of a peace deal with the Taliban seem &ldquo;absurd.&rdquo;        

The official said: &ldquo;This doesn&rsquo;t show reconciliation; it does show determination. If the Taliban can do this with five guys perched in a building and they can alternate it with these vehicle-borne I.E.D.&rsquo;s&rdquo; &mdash; car bombs &mdash; &ldquo;which they have been doing more of, well then this won&rsquo;t be the last time.&rdquo; I.E.D. stands for improvised explosive device.        

The assault was all the more dismaying because it suggested that the insurgents had the support of many people along the way who had allowed the heavily armed men to enter the city and then let them pass unhindered through the rings of security and checkpoints closer to the capital&rsquo;s center.        

Although large areas of rural Afghanistan have long been thought to be heavily infiltrated by the Taliban, Kabul is widely viewed as relatively safe because of the international presence and large numbers of Afghan security and intelligence forces there. Tuesday&rsquo;s attack, which began around 1:15 p.m., was but the latest to chip away at that tenuous sense of security. In August, militants killed eight people at a British cultural center. In June, nine suicide bombers attacked the Intercontinental Hotel.        

&ldquo;The nature and scale of today&rsquo;s attack clearly proves that the terrorists received assistance and guidance from some security officials within the government who are their sympathizers,&rdquo; said Mohammed Naim Hamidzai Lalai, chairman of Parliament&rsquo;s Internal Security Committee. &ldquo;Otherwise it would be impossible for the planners and masterminds of the attack to stage such a sophisticated and complex attack, in this extremely well-guarded location without the complicity from insiders.&rdquo;        
Sangar Rahimi, Waheed Abdul Wafa and Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting.
