
MOSCOW &mdash; In a Russian political campaigning season known for monochrome and monotony, a spectacle of sorts unfolded Wednesday when the businessman Mikhail D. Prokhorov announced a scramble to stop what he called a Kremlin-orchestrated takeover of his party.        

The assertion met with a good deal of skepticism in Moscow, since his party is already generally pro-Kremlin, while he is considered beholden to the government for the success of his business ventures.        

Mr. Prokhorov, the Russian oligarch who bought the New Jersey Nets basketball team last year, becoming the only foreign owner of a National Basketball Association franchise, said he had to expel from the party a number of members who had been conspiring with a political adviser to Russia&rsquo;s president.        

&ldquo;There is no schism in the party,&rdquo; Mr. Prokhorov said Wednesday evening at a hastily convened news conference. &ldquo;There is an attempt by certain presidential administration workers to seize the party.&rdquo;        

Mr. Prokhorov said the adviser, Radi Khabirov, the deputy chief of the presidential office of domestic policy, had encouraged the members of Mr. Prokhorov&rsquo;s Right Cause party to try to maneuver him out of the leadership at a party convention that opens here Thursday.        

There was no immediate comment from President Dmitri A. Medvedev or his aides on the accusation. Efforts to reach Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s spokeswoman on Wednesday were unsuccessful. While hardly unusual in its particulars &mdash; Mr. Prokhorov&rsquo;s accusation was the type routinely leveled by dissidents and opposition figures paranoid about infiltration &mdash; it was peculiar coming from a powerful businessman.        

Since Mr. Prokhorov assumed the leadership of Right Cause in May, with the Kremlin&rsquo;s blessing, some members of the party had indeed been venting frustration about changes in the institution&rsquo;s structure. Mr. Prokhorov had dismissed the heads of several regional branches.        

During the day on Wednesday, many of Russia&rsquo;s major political news outlets reported that Mr. Prokhorov would resign. Then he gathered reporters in his office to relate a tale of skulduggery.        

The rebellious faction in the party, he said, took control of the committee on credentialing ahead of the convention. As delegates arrived from regional party offices, 21 were denied credentials, and replaced with Kremlin loyalists.        

&ldquo;It was a raiders&rsquo; attack, just like a raid on a business in the 1990s,&rdquo; Mr. Prokhorov said, before signing a paper that he said expelled disloyal members of the party, and then demonstratively holding it before cameras.        

&ldquo;You are all waiting for me to step down,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Keep waiting.&rdquo;        

His accounts seemed to counter one of the signal objections to his candidacy: that people tend to see him and his party as a simulation of competition and pluralism rather than the real thing. Mr. Prokhorov has acknowledged that he consulted with the government before deciding to lead the party.        

Reviving the Right Cause party appeared to be a key project to show the existence of a marketplace of ideas in the coming parliamentary elections. And the appointment of Mr. Prokhorov, whose extensive wealth gives him a high profile, formed its centerpiece.        

&ldquo;Too many rumors went around that Prokhorov is a Kremlin project,&rdquo; Konstantin Remchukov, the editor of the newspaper Nezavisimaya Gazeta and a former member of Parliament, said in an interview.        

&ldquo;But now he will be in conflict with the Kremlin,&rdquo; Mr. Remchukov said. &ldquo;It is about improving his legitimacy.&rdquo;        

To stir up interest, Right Cause issued a news release on Tuesday explaining that he is, in fact, independent from the Kremlin.        

&ldquo;The Kremlin is not in a position to control Prokhorov or his close associates working on the new project of the party,&rdquo; the release said.        

This summer, the party accused regional leaders of tearing down posters.        

After the accusations were made public on Wednesday, Mr. Remchukov said, &ldquo;Everybody will say, &lsquo;The Kremlin attacked and he didn&rsquo;t surrender. Prokhorov is a real muzhik,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; the Russian word for a tough guy.        

&ldquo;When people ask, are you a Kremlin project? He will say, &lsquo;Didn&rsquo;t you see that big fight we had?&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        
Olga Slobodchikova contributed reporting.
