
AMMAN, Jordan &mdash; Efforts to organize a million-person march on the Israeli Embassy in Jordan&rsquo;s capital concluded on Thursday with about 200 pro-Palestinian protesters cordoned off by nearly as many Jordanian police and security officers in a vacant lot about a mile away from the diplomatic mission.        

Despite the low turnout, the protest attested to the ripple effect of the political tumult in the Middle East. It also exposed some of the deep divisions within the Arab world and among the Palestinians themselves.        

Fears of possible violence, especially after the ransacking of the Israeli Embassy in Cairo last week, led the Israeli ambassador here in Jordan&rsquo;s capital and most of the embassy&rsquo;s staff members to leave for Israel a day ahead of the pro-Palestinian rally as a precautionary measure. An Israeli Foreign Ministry spokesman said he expected them to be back at work on Sunday.        

The turnout was clearly a disappointment to many of the participants, who demanded the closing of the embassy, the expulsion of the ambassador and the annulment of the 1994 Israeli-Jordanian peace treaty as part of the wave of political ferment in the region.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a shame for Jordan,&rdquo; said Samer Abu Gosh, a dentist who, like many Jordanians, is of Palestinian descent. &ldquo;I expected at least 10,000.&rdquo;&nbsp;        

Referring to the Israeli Embassy staff&rsquo;s departure, he said, &ldquo;The ambassador has run away for nothing.&rdquo;        

Protesters said the site of their rally, a vacant lot next to the Kaluti mosque in a residential neighborhood, was the scene of almost weekly anti-Israel activities under the auspices of a group calling itself the Anti-Zionist and Anti-Discrimination Society.        

But this particular protest gained more attention and traction after organizers called for a million marchers on Facebook, apparently inspired by the attack on the embassy in Cairo and Turkey&rsquo;s recent expulsion of the Israeli ambassador and downgrading of relations with Israel.        

&ldquo;The Egyptians cannot be more pro-Palestinian than we are,&rdquo; said Rami Ayyash, 23, a Jordanian of Palestinian descent from the Baqa&rsquo;a refugee camp north of Amman.        

The revolution in Egypt that ousted President Hosni Mubarak, a trusted Israeli ally, and the ensuing feeling of popular empowerment have released long-held anti-Israel sentiment out into the open in Egypt and Jordan, the two Arab neighbors that have made peace with Israel.        

The mostly young protesters at the core of Thursday&rsquo;s demonstration called the Israeli ambassador a &ldquo;pig&rdquo; and burned at least two homemade Israeli flags.        

But the Palestinians are also split on fundamental issues. The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, has said that he intends to pursue a vote at the United Nations&nbsp;next week for the purpose of gaining recognition for a Palestinian state in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem, areas occupied by Israel in the 1967 war.        

The dominant call at the Amman rally, however, was for the liberation of all of what the protesters called Palestine, meaning the pre-1948 British Mandate territory stretching from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea, and a rejection of the Israeli state.        

&ldquo;We disagree with him on this issue,&rdquo; said Allah Ersheid, 35, the owner of a clothing store in Amman whose father came from Jenin in the West Bank, referring to Mr. Abbas.        

&ldquo;We will not accept what Abbas is claiming,&rdquo; added Mr. Ayyash from the refugee camp, describing the Palestinian president as having settled for &ldquo;a fifth of the Palestinian land, a third of the people and a quarter of the authority.&rdquo;        

This is a time of rising tension between Jordanians of Palestinian origin and the original inhabitants of the area known as East Bankers. Some East Bankers were upset by official diplomatic cables recently released by WikiLeaks that they said showed meddling by an American diplomat in this delicate issue. A group of retired Jordanian generals protested outside the American Embassy in Amman on Wednesday.        

In an illustration of the tensions, across the road from Thursday&rsquo;s anti-Israel rally, patriotic music blared from the house of an East Banker family who had placed loudspeakers on the front porch. The songs often drowned out the chants of the protesters.        

&ldquo;They are not real Jordanians,&rdquo; the head of the family, Jaafar Abu Hashish, said of the demonstrators who were mostly of Palestinian descent. &ldquo;They are not against Israel, they are against Jordan,&rdquo; he said.        
Ranya Kadri contributed reporting.
