
LONDON &mdash; A closely contested election in Denmark resulted in victory on Thursday for a center-left coalition led by the Social Democratic Party, ending a 10-year run in power for a center-right coalition that adopted some of Europe&rsquo;s toughest immigration controls.        

The results, based on broadcasters&rsquo; tallies of more than 90 percent of the vote, set the country on course to having its first female prime minister, Helle Thorning-Schmidt, whose party led an alliance known as the red bloc. She claimed victory about three hours after the polls closed. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve written history today,&rdquo; Ms. Thorning-Schmidt said.        

Prime Minister Lars Loekke Rasmussen of the Liberal Party conceded the election late Thursday, news reports said.        

For Denmark, a nation of 5.5 million people, the election turned on the issue that has also divided many other Western nations struggling with low growth, large government deficits and historic levels of national debt: what mix of government spending and tax policies to adopt in order to restore economic health and avoid slipping further toward a crisis like Greece&rsquo;s.        

The Social Democrats&rsquo; campaign was based on Ms. Thorning-Schmidt&rsquo;s promises to raise taxes on Denmark&rsquo;s banks and its wealthiest citizens to pay for better schools and hospitals, and to finance a $4 billion expansion of what is already one of Europe&rsquo;s most generous welfare systems. Her most headline-catching nod to austerity came with her proposal to add 12 minutes to the average Dane&rsquo;s working day, and she also acknowledged&nbsp;the need to take action on the deficit, which&nbsp;is set to rise to 4.6 percent of gross domestic product in 2012, well above the European average.        

The departing center-right bloc, led by Mr. Loekke Rasmussen, pointed to Europe&rsquo;s deepening financial crisis and said Denmark should keep tight control of its public finances, avoiding &ldquo;uncontrolled debt,&rdquo; and not adopt tax increases that would stifle its weak economic recovery, with a projected growth rate this year of 1.25 percent. Denmark is Scandinavia&rsquo;s worst-performing economy, with a growth rate less than half of Norway&rsquo;s and less than one-third of Sweden&rsquo;s.        

Ms. Thorning-Schmidt built an early lead in the polls, which narrowed sharply in the last days of the campaign, and on election night her coalition appeared to have a sliver of a parliamentary majority. At midnight in Copenhagen, the election count indicated that the red bloc had 89 seats in the 179-seat Parliament and was likely to secure another 3, with Mr. Loekke Rasmussen&rsquo;s blue bloc winning 86 seats and likely to win one more.        

One feature of the decade-long rule of the center-right parties that seemed unlikely to change significantly was the tight new restraints on immigration, which have most heavily affected Denmark&rsquo;s population of about 200,000 Muslims, many of them asylum seekers. With Muslims now accounting for nearly 4 percent of the population, according to the United States State Department, and Islam now the largest non-Christian denomination in the country, opinion polls have shown strong support for the controls, which Ms. Thorning-Schmidt said any government she led would maintain.        

Although they regained power, the Social Democrats scored slightly less well than they did in the previous election, in 2007, winning 44 seats, one down from their 2007 tally.        

The anti-immigration Danish People&rsquo;s Party, which formed the third-largest bloc in the previous Parliament, won 22 seats, down 3 seats from 2007. It will become an opposition party, and Pia Kjaersgaard, the party&rsquo;s leader, said it would oppose any relaxation of immigration controls. The party pushed for Denmark&rsquo;s withdrawal from the so-called Schengen group of countries that established a &rsquo;&rsquo;borderless&rsquo;&rsquo; Europe, but the country did not leave the group.        
