
TUNIS &mdash; Tunisia&rsquo;s interim government on Thursday purged almost all the cabinet ministers left over from the government of the ousted dictator Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, bowing to two weeks of mounting street protests against the cabinet&rsquo;s continued dominance by the old governing party and resolving an impasse that had threatened to bog down the new government.        

Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi, Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s former right-hand man, announced the changes in a televised address, but he himself did not resign. He reiterated a pledge to guide the country to free and fair elections within six months and then retire from government.        

&ldquo;This is a temporary government with a clear mission &mdash; to allow a transition to democracy,&rdquo; Mr. Ghannouchi said.        

From the initial reaction in the streets of Tunis, the capital, protesters welcomed the change, even though Mr. Ghannouchi held on to his position. Many protesters had said they felt their revolution was incomplete while so many familiar faces still ran important ministries like defense, interior and foreign affairs. The prime minister&rsquo;s announcement appeared to end a prolonged standoff between the interim government and demonstrators who have besieged his office.        

Hundreds of protesters from the impoverished southern regions of the country arrived in Tunis last weekend and set up camp in a square of the old city flanked by the prime minister&rsquo;s headquarters and other government offices. They had vowed not to leave until the government stepped down, and when Mr. Ghannouchi announced the resignations a cheer went up from the crowd.        

In recent days, the protests have grown newly tense as the people sleeping outside the prime minister&rsquo;s office grew exhausted and rumors of an impending shake-up moved through the crowd. On Wednesday, the police resorted to tear gas to control the unruly crowd and soldiers fired shots in the air. Thousands of people marched in the rain through Bourguiba Boulevard in the center of the city on Thursday to demand again that the government be broken up, and the protests were expected to escalate when crowds emerge from prayers on Friday.        

The official state news agency reported that the national trade union, which had supported the protests, had agreed to back the new government. But that could not be independently confirmed.        

Among other changes, the minister of youth and sports in the previous interim government, Slim Amamou, stepped down. Mr. Amamou, who is a blogger, had entertained political observers with a running commentary on the social networking Web site Twitter about his new role, including news updates from within cabinet meetings.        

The interim government&rsquo;s apparent capitulation may bring peace to Tunis, but some people, including some representatives of the political opposition, have said they worry it could also encourage additional unrest by suggesting weakness and instability.        

The government must now find a credible way to draft a new constitution or another credible electoral plan without relying on the existing Parliament, which remains dominated by the former president&rsquo;s party. Opposition leaders have discussed the formation of some form of outside supervisory council to oversee the process.        

Meanwhile, leaders of previously banned political parties, including Communists and Islamists, were gearing up to re-enter the fray. There were reports on Thursday that Rachid Ghannouchi, the founder of the Tunisian Islamist party and a theorist known for studying Islam and democracy, was returning to the country. He is not related to the prime minister.        
Brahmi Fakhredine contributed reporting.
