
CAIRO &mdash; An Egyptian criminal court sentenced the steel tycoon and former political power broker Ahmed Ezz to 10 years in prison and fined him the equivalent of about $11 million for corruption on Thursday, satisfying one of the most visceral demands of the revolution that toppled President Hosni Mubarak.        

To many, Mr. Ezz personified more than anyone else the political and economic corruption under Mr. Mubarak that enriched the politically connected few, leaving most Egyptians to sink deeper into poverty.        

The court also sentenced two less notorious Mubarak-era figures. The former minister of commerce, Rachid Mohamed Rachid, once considered a force for reform and clean government, was sentenced in absentia to 15 years in prison and a $230 million fine for illegally helping Mr. Ezz obtain permits for his steel empire &mdash; a more serious sentence perhaps reflecting the prominent public role he was convicted of abusing.        

It was the third sentence in absentia issued against Mr. Rachid, for a total of 35 years in prison. He left the country before Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s fall but has said he did nothing wrong. The state-owned newspaper Al Ahram reported last week that the Ministry of Interior had located Mr. Rachid in Qatar and was seeking his extradition.        

Amr Assal, a former head of Egypt&rsquo;s Industrial Development Authority, was sentenced to 10 years and an $11 million fine for conspiring with Mr. Ezz.        

Reuters reported that shares of Mr. Ezz&rsquo;s conglomerate, Ezz Steel, plunged nearly 9 percent in the Egyptian stock market on Thursday, dragging the broader market down 2.7 percent.        

Among the wealthiest figures in Egypt at the apex of his power, Mr. Ezz parlayed his political connections and close friendship with Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s son Gamal into an effective monopoly of the Egyptian steel market. He held a leading role in Parliament and the former ruling party. He was famous for his brash and domineering style, tailored Italian suits, multiple wives, and the way he pointed his index finger in a gesture of command. As soon as protests against Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s government broke out in January, his corporate headquarters were sacked along with the headquarters of the former ruling National Democratic Party.        

Even before the government fell, it jettisoned Mr. Ezz as it struggled to placate the mounting protests in the street, freezing his assets and barring him from travel. The Egyptian public watched, astonished, as Mr. Ezz, fearing for the first time the public&rsquo;s revulsion at his lavish lifestyle and self-dealing, appeared in a humble sweatsuit in an interview on the pan-Arab news network Al Aribiya to plead his innocence.        

Mr. Ezz, whose trial began in February, was sentenced as Egypt&rsquo;s attention was turned to the epic criminal case against Mr. Mubarak. Unlike Mr. Mubarak, neither Mr. Ezz nor Mr. Rachid was ever close to the powerful Egyptian military, which is now running the country as a transitional government. Both men were associated with privatization and other market reforms, while the military is a major player in the state-run sector of the Egyptian economy.        

As a result, analysts say, the transitional government&rsquo;s willingness to prosecute them vigorously may say more about its desire to appease the public&rsquo;s demand for retribution against the former leadership than it does about the more delicate question of the military&rsquo;s stance toward Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s trial.        

Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, the leader of the governing military council and Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s former defense minister, is expected to testify at a closed session of the trial on Sept. 24, when he will be asked to shed light on Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s role in the crackdown on protesters that left more than 800 dead in the final days of his rule.        
