
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Daraya, a town on the outskirts of Damascus famous for its carpentry and fertile fields, has emerged as an example that illustrates the dichotomy of the Syrian uprising: a revolt that seems too resilient to fail and too vulnerable to endure.        

The revolt against President Bashar al-Assad turned six months old on Thursday, and in that time protesters and security forces have learned techniques to cope with each other.        

The stalemate that has ensued is too kind a word to describe a toll that has left 2,600 dead, by the United Nations&rsquo; count. But a standoff of sorts has emerged. In Daraya, as in other towns across the country, the government has proved its ability to infiltrate protesters&rsquo; cells. Demonstrators, meanwhile, have persisted despite the arrests and overwhelming force.        

&ldquo;Daraya security is flabbergasted,&rdquo; wrote Mohja Kahf, a Syrian activist in a post on her Twitter account after last Friday&rsquo;s protests there.        

&ldquo;More than two dozen field activists and protest organizers were in detention, and the town protested as usual,&rdquo; said Bsher Jawdat Said, an activist near Daraya. &ldquo;It was as if nothing had happened,&rdquo; Mr. Said added.        

The questions now are, How long can this uneasy stalemate persist, and when the tide does shift, where will it go?        

Over the past several weeks, activists said, security forces in Daraya arrested more than two dozen people involved in planning and documenting the uprising, which began in mid-March in the poor southern town of Dara&rsquo;a.        

The last two arrested, Ghayath Mattar and Yahya Sharbaji, were detained last week, in a trap that involved luring them from a safe house where they were hiding. By activists&rsquo; accounts, they were tortured. Four days later, Mr. Mattar was dead, and footage showed he had suffered from burns, lashes and bullet wounds. The fate of Mr. Sharbaji remains unknown.        

In a statement this week, Amnesty International said Mr. Sharbaji was &ldquo;at particular risk.&rdquo;        

Mr. Sharbaji has been an activist for more than 10 years in a country where politics often lead their practitioners to jail. In 2003, Mr. Sharbaji, just 24, led a group of people in protests against the American-led war on Iraq and also led a call for a boycott of American products, activists said. He was also involved in a campaign that year to clean the streets of Daraya, his hometown, where his family owns shops that manufacture and sell furniture.        

He was arrested after that and spent the next four years in a prison cell, his friends said. When he was released, his commitment to change was more pronounced, they said, describing him as a person of few words.        

Mr. Sharbaji is believed to have been transferred to Military Hospital 601 in Mazzeh, in Damascus, for treatment after being tortured, relatives and friends said. But when a group of 15 people, including his 80-year-old mentor, Jawdat Said, a Muslim scholar who advocates political change through nonviolence, tried to see if he was in the hospital, guards denied he was there and prohibited them from entering.        

&ldquo;The life of a Syrian activist is becoming more and more dangerous,&rdquo; said Iyad Sharbaji, a political activist who is a friend of Mr. Sharbaji, though no relation. &ldquo;They face the prospect of death, torture, humiliation every time they venture on the streets.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;So do their family members,&rdquo; he added.        

Mr. Mattar, 26, was renowned in Daraya for practicing Mr. Said&rsquo;s methods. He urged colleagues to face the security forces by presenting them with a rose and, in the words of one friend, &ldquo;a bottle of cold water.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Ghayath was embarrassing the regime with his high morals and principles,&rdquo; said Abu Omar, a 35-year-old relative in the town. &ldquo;The regime likes the radicals to justify the military crackdown, but with Ghayath, the regime knew it would be the loser.&rdquo;        

The government told Mr. Mattar&rsquo;s family that he had been shot by &ldquo;armed gangs,&rdquo; a phrase that has become a euphemism that the government uses to describe its opposition.        
(Page 2 of 2)
As the uprising persists and the numbers of deaths and arrests mount &mdash; with tens of thousands detained, diplomats say &mdash; a new trend has emerged among activists, Iyad Sharbaji and others said. Many of them have started writing wills should they be killed or arrested or disappear. It is not clear if Yahya Sharbaji left one, but his friend Mr. Mattar, who was arrested with him, did.        

&ldquo;I announce to you the news of my martyrdom,&rdquo; Mr. Mattar said in his will, read on a new online radio broadcast called One Plus One, which is run by activists. &ldquo;And I want you to know that now I gained happiness and freedom. Don&rsquo;t think they triumphed over me with the bullet they shot me with. No, I won and my case won every time I went to the street.&rdquo;        

Seven ambassadors attended Mr. Mattar&rsquo;s funeral this week, including the American ambassador, Robert S. Ford. When the diplomats left, security forces raided the tent where the wake was held and destroyed it, witnesses said.        

In the earliest days of the uprising, security forces often released detainees after a brief period, though beatings and torture were rife. Often they were forced to sign a pledge not to protest again. In recent weeks, activists said, detainees have disappeared behind bars in secret jails, and security forces rarely admit holding them.        

Despite the arrests of virtually every activist leader in the town, Daraya has continued to buzz with demonstrations. Though the protesters lack the huge numbers of past months &mdash; tens of thousands turned out in some towns this summer &mdash; they have persisted despite the violence. Short and small, the protests are known in Syria as &ldquo;tayyara,&rdquo; or flying, and their very frequency suggests that the government may be unable to blunt them.        

&ldquo;The Syrian people are creative enough to find ways to overcome the repression and keep protesting,&rdquo; said Hanan, a woman who was among the activists looking for Mr. Sharbaji.        

No one seems to know exactly where the uprising is headed after all these months. But there seems to be a common belief among observers and political activists that if the protests and the crackdown continue, the stalemate in places like Daraya will probably give way to more civil strife and sectarian tension. Despite the peaceful means espoused by Mr. Sharbaji and Mr. Mattar, the prospect of violence seems to lie ahead, many fear.        

&ldquo;The future depends on the situation on the ground,&rdquo; said Louay Hussein, a prominent political activist based in Damascus, who has held talks with government officials. &ldquo;The more oppressive the regime becomes, the greater the chances of violence.&rdquo;        
