
SENNA, Yemen &mdash; In this stone village perched in the mountains surrounding the capital, Sana, people make do. The state-owned company that normally doles out cooking gas rarely provides these days. Even when it does, the price is prohibitive. Days go by with only a couple of hours of electricity.        

Asked how her family survived, Miriam al-Mata, 25, one of 10 children, was unfazed and pointed out a colorful stained-glass window, common in this region, to an aluminum oven. It burns the piles of wood scattered about the small yard. &ldquo;We use ancient methods to cook,&rdquo; she said, sitting in a small living room with thin cushions spread on the floor.        

For months, Yemen has seemed to teeter on the brink since President Ali Abdullah Saleh refused to hand over power after hundreds of thousands of protesters gathered around the country to call for his ouster as part of the Arab Spring. By now Yemen&rsquo;s deterioration would seem to have outpaced its political paralysis, and in any other country it might have. But Yemenis have learned more or less to fend for themselves for generations, and people here adapt.        

Antigovernment protesters still hunker down on the streets in sit-ins. Military units &mdash; divided between Saleh loyalists and opponents &mdash; keep their artillery on the mountaintops surrounding Sana, pointed at each another. Meanwhile, Mr. Saleh is recuperating in Saudi Arabia from a bomb attack in June on the presidential palace, and no one is quite sure who is running the nation.        

But in much of Yemen, even before the crisis, there was little electricity. Standards of living are so low that in times of hardship, few luxuries can be stripped from people. Already used to poverty, tribal warfare and a weak state, Yemenis do not depend on the government and instead create their own social order. Long ago they learned to cope. Theirs is a story of resilience.        

&ldquo;Yemenis live in any situation,&rdquo; a brother, Ali al-Mata, 33, explained. &ldquo;I think Yemenis have been used to war for a long time.&rdquo;        

In recent months, Yemenis wait for hours, sometimes days, to fill up their cars with gasoline. Though some deadly fighting has broken out in the gas lines, the violence has been relatively scant given the percentage of the population that is armed. The inconveniences are more or less taken in stride.        

In the capital, residents sit in endless traffic jams caused by military checkpoints, a lack of traffic police officers and, not least, the persistent protests. It is endured; there is little else to do.        

When the electricity fails, Mr. Mata shrugged, &ldquo;We use candles.&rdquo;        

Still, the current crisis has meant that Yemenis have had to bite down and bear life&rsquo;s hardships even more than before. The patriarch of the Mata family, also named Ali, said that Yemen&rsquo;s current crisis was the worst he&rsquo;d seen in all his 60 years, including during the civil war in 1994, because the economic hardship then was not as severe.        

&ldquo;It is the biggest crisis ever &mdash; it made prices go up so much!&rdquo; Mr. Mata said as he tended to goats in small field of qat trees just outside the family&rsquo;s red, three-story stone house. Gray stubble dotted his face, and his skin was leathery from the years of tending his land. &ldquo;We sit here,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We just go with it.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mata has 10 children. Two others died at birth. Two sons are soldiers in the army. One is a schoolteacher in the village. The rest sell the family&rsquo;s produce &mdash; qat, almonds and apricots &mdash; outside the walls of Sana&rsquo;s central walled old city. For them, as is common in Yemen, money is shared familywide. It is a tradition that provides an especially needed coping mechanism now.        

The younger Mr. Mata, who has a high school education, says he cannot find work. He used be involved in real estate in an area of Sana where wealthy families were building new houses. That collapsed years ago. Then he tried to find a job in tourism.        

&ldquo;I searched a lot,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I did not find a job.&rdquo; So he helps his family however he can. But mostly he just passes the day with friends in the village, he said.        

His father was convinced that war would be the only solution to the current political impasse. &ldquo;It is not going to go away by political solution,&rdquo; he said. The village has already had a taste of it.        

After the bomb attack on the presidential palace in June, Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s loyalists in the army rained mortars down from a base on the cliff above Senna, aiming at the residence of Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s main political rival, Hamid al-Ahmar, who lives nearby. Two mortar shells fell on the village, though no one was injured.        

&ldquo;Everyone in my house ran down to the ground floor and hid there,&rdquo; the younger Mr. Mata said. &ldquo;We were afraid that the Ahmars, firing back up at the base, were going to hit our village.&rdquo; He looked out onto Sana from a gravel hill.        

&ldquo;You can see all Sana from here,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And also see all the war in Sana.&rdquo; As he spoke, sporadic gunfire echoed in the distance, perhaps from a wedding, as he was convinced, or from random fighting, of which there is plenty these days.        

Though unwelcome, the prospect of war is also treated as another part of life here. At the house, his sister described the day when artillery fire whizzed over her village as &ldquo;terrifying.&rdquo;        

But she says the threat of war does not make her live in constant fear. Rather, she dismissed the notion in a typically Yemeni way. &ldquo;Stop it,&rdquo; she said teasingly. &ldquo;We are used to it. It&rsquo;s now something normal.&rdquo;        
