
MOSCOW &mdash; Mikhail D. Prokhorov, the Russian billionaire who this week denounced the entire political system here as a sham, said in an interview on Friday that he had fallen victim to infighting in the Kremlin.        

Mr. Prokhorov, a banking and mining magnate who last year bought the New Jersey Nets basketball team, spoke up after he was ousted as the leader of a new political party, which he said was a puppet organization controlled by the Kremlin. But in the interview he dismissed the notion that he was now fighting with the government of Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin &mdash; a development that could have ominous consequences.        

Far from falling out with the ruling elite, Mr. Prokhorov said, he had clashed with one of two behind-the-scenes groups that are coalescing into warring camps. One, he said, advocates reforms intended to diversify the economy and wean it from oil dependence while opening the political system to competition. The other is committed to the status quo.        

&ldquo;In Russia, all fights are on the inside,&rdquo; Mr. Prokhorov said over tea in the executive suite of his business conglomerate, displaying his usual, uncanny calm.        

He described his three-month leadership of the Right Cause party as an effort to consolidate the reformers under one banner, including those in government now.        

&ldquo;The battle is becoming more acute because we need programs which people should vote on, and in a sense it is important to maintain calmness, constructiveness and positivism,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The person who takes the burden of leadership at this stage will become the guide of a new movement. Our basic leaders have many advisers who are representatives of one wing or the other, and the battle goes on.&rdquo;        

While few here expect Mr. Prokhorov to suffer the same fate as Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, who ended up in jail after challenging the Kremlin&rsquo;s political control, his standing as a public figure has never seemed quite so wobbly.        

The state-controlled television station NTV broadcast an expos&eacute; on Friday linking a member of Right Cause to organized crime, and government news outlets simply ignored Mr. Prokhorov&rsquo;s plea to fire the official he blamed for his ouster. But Mr. Prokhorov said he still had supporters on the inside &mdash; where he said the real &ldquo;battle&rdquo; is being waged.        

Several advisers and aides to the president and prime minister called to congratulate him on a speech he gave Thursday, he said, though he declined to name them so as not to be provocative. &ldquo;They told me &lsquo;good boy,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; he said.        

&ldquo;I am a participant in this battle, so that the innovative wing wins,&rdquo; he said.        

In the speech on Thursday, he had called the Right Cause party a &ldquo;puppet&rdquo; of the Kremlin. Politics in Russia, he said, are orchestrated by a &ldquo;puppet master&rdquo; in the president&rsquo;s administration, Vladislav Surkov, who is a long-serving political adviser to Mr. Putin and President Dmitri A. Medvedev.        

Mr. Prokhorov said he had been &ldquo;a little na&iuml;ve&rdquo; when he agreed to lead Right Cause. He agreed to do so after a meeting last spring with Mr. Medvedev, he said, and believed he had carte blanche to campaign as he saw fit.        

&ldquo;It never came into my head that some staffers would impose some limits,&rdquo; he said.        

But within the first month, he said, he received telephone calls from the office of Mr. Surkov. At first, he said, these were &ldquo;friendly contacts&rdquo; with suggestions that he accept certain people into the party and exclude others. Later, he said, they became insistent.        

&ldquo;You cannot look at the administration and the government as a monolith,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There are lots of people with different ideas, and they are becoming more polarized as the situation in Russia and the world is changing.&rdquo;        

He said that the two leaders themselves &ldquo;think alike and are on the same team,&rdquo; but that their followers jostle for influence. &ldquo;We hear about the left wing of United Russia, and the right wing of United Russia,&rdquo; he said, referring to the party led by Mr. Putin. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a real stormy discussion.&rdquo;        

He said he hoped for a meeting with either Mr. Putin or Mr. Medvedev within 10 days, and would then decide whether to form a new political party to replace Right Cause. As of Friday, neither Mr. Putin nor Mr. Medvedev had agreed to a meeting.        
