
KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia &mdash; Prime Minister Najib Razak of Malaysia has promised to abolish two contentious security laws that allow for detention without trial and to relax a law governing the media in what analysts say is an attempt to revive his public support before elections that could be called by early next year.        

Mr. Najib announced on Thursday that he would repeal the laws, the Internal Security Act, which allows indefinite detention, and the Emergency Ordinance. Human rights groups say the laws have been used to silence critics of the government.        

He also said that he would propose changes to rules for the media so publications would no longer have to renew their printing licenses annually, and that the government would review laws relating to freedom of assembly.        

The two security laws would be replaced with new legislation, Mr. Najib said. &ldquo;The new law will provide for a substantially reduced period of detention by the police compared to what we have now,&rdquo; he said. Important details of the legislation have not been released, including how long people might be detained without trial under the new laws.        

Analysts said that although the announcement might boost short-term support for Mr. Najib, they expected voters to soon demand more details and assurances that the old laws were not simply being repackaged.        

Nazri Aziz, a government minister who overseas legal matters, said Friday that legislation would be introduced in Parliament next year because time was needed to work out the details, according to Agence France-Presse.        

A government statement described the proposed changes as the &ldquo;biggest shake-up of the Malaysian system since independence from Britain in 1957.&rdquo;        

Mr. Najib said in a televised address that the proposed changes underlined his &ldquo;commitment to making Malaysia a modern, progressive democracy.&rdquo;        

When he came to power in 2009, Mr. Najib promised a series of reforms, but he has been criticized for being slow to act.        

Public support for Mr. Najib has been falling, and his government was widely condemned for its handling of a protest in July calling for free and fair elections, at which the police used tear gas and water cannons to disperse protesters.        

Ong Kian Ming, a political science lecturer at UCSI University in Kuala Lumpur, said that initial responses to the proposed changes in the security laws, &ldquo;seem to be overwhelmingly positive, even from people and organizations who may be seen as being antigovernment.&rdquo;        

Ibrahim Suffian, director of the Merdeka Center, an independent polling firm based in Kuala Lumpur, said the proposals were giving people &ldquo;a sense of hope and a very positive feeling, especially among people who are not ideologically aligned with the government or the opposition.&rdquo;        

But he said some people remained cautious about the laws that would replace the Internal Security Act and the Emergency Ordinance, saying that they wanted to see proof that the old laws were &ldquo;really gone.&rdquo;        

Opposition members said the proposed changes did not go far enough because they would still result in detentions.        

The vice president of the opposition People&rsquo;s Justice Party, who goes by N. Surendran, called the moves &ldquo;election gimmicks.&rdquo; He said that the proposed changes to the media law were a &ldquo;hollow reform&rdquo; because the government would still be able to cancel a publication&rsquo;s license.        

Almost 4,500 people were detained under the Internal Security Act between 2000 and 2010, and 37 people are now being held under the law, introduced in 1960.        

Mr. Najib said that the law that would replace the Internal Security Act would guarantee the rights of those detained and that no one would be detained solely because of political affiliation.        
