
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; South Korea&rsquo;s top government spy agency said on Friday that it had arrested a North Korean defector on suspicion of plotting an attack on a fellow defector who is a vocal critic of the North.        

The suspect was identified only by his surname, Ahn, and his target as Park Sang-hak, who leads the Seoul-based activist group Fighters for Free North Korea.        

Mr. Park, a flamboyant leader of anti-North Korean demonstrations, has burned North Korean flags and beat effigies of the North&rsquo;s leader, Kim Jong-il. He has said he often receives anonymous death threats.        

Mr. Park&rsquo;s group regularly drops balloons over North Korea that carry thousands of leaflets, DVDs and American dollar bills. Leaflets sent to the North on Sept. 9, the anniversary of the founding of the North Korean government, urged North Korean soldiers to &ldquo;rise up against the dictatorship like the rebels in Libya.&rdquo;        

Mr. Park told reporters that after several years of silence, Mr. Ahn approached him in early September proposing to arrange a meeting with a Japanese man willing to support Mr. Park&rsquo;s anti-North Korea campaign. Mr. Park said that spy agents warned him and intercepted Mr. Ahn at a subway station where they were supposed to meet. South Korean news reports quoted anonymous government intelligence sources as saying that Mr. Ahn was carrying poisoned needles when he was arrested.        

A spokesman at the National Intelligence Service confirmed Mr. Ahn&rsquo;s arrest but offered no details.        

Mr. Ahn, a former member of a North Korean special operations military unit, defected to South Korea in the late 1990s, the Yonhap news service reported.        

The National Intelligence Service was investigating whether he might have been operating under instructions from North Korea. If so, the next question would be whether he might have been doing so from the beginning, or could have been recruited &mdash; or coerced &mdash; more recently.        

More than 20,000 North Koreans have fled to the South since a famine killed numerous people in the North in the 1990s. Many of them have turned spiteful against North Korea and organized themselves to denounce Mr. Kim.        

At the same time, North Korean spy agents have infiltrated South Korea by boat, submarine or by crawling through the mine-infested border between the two Koreas. Now, the South Korean authorities fear that a bustling traffic between China and South Korea and the stream of North Korean defectors may be providing a new avenue for North Korean spies.        

Last year, two North Korean men were arrested on charges of posing as defectors and entering South Korea on a secret mission to assassinate Hwang Jang-yop, a high-ranking North Korean party secretary who, after his defection to Seoul in 1997, vehemently criticized Mr. Kim. Mr. Hwang died last October, apparently after suffering a heart attack during his morning bath.        

In 1997, Lee Han-young, a nephew of a former wife of Mr. Kim, was shot and killed in Seoul. South Korean officials suspected that a North Korean agent killed Mr. Lee, who had become a bitter critic of the North&rsquo;s government after defecting to Seoul in 1982.        
