
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Syria&rsquo;s uprising has become more violent in the country&rsquo;s most restive regions, in what may signal the start of a protracted armed struggle after six months of largely peaceful protests in the face of a ferocious government crackdown, diplomats, activists and officials say.        

Reports have mounted of clashes in Homs; in the outskirts of the capital, Damascus; in the southern Houran region; and at the border near Turkey. Officials and diplomats have spoken of at least three ambushes of military vehicles &mdash; two buses and a jeep &mdash; in Homs, in which at least five soldiers were killed. Activists have reported other clashes between soldiers and deserters in several regions of Syria.        

Though the degree of violence remains unclear, the changing dynamics underline what has become a reality of Syria&rsquo;s tense stalemate: The longer President Bashar al-Assad remains in power, the more violent the country will become, even if no one knows what will follow him if he is ousted from power. Propelled by frustration, the opposition&rsquo;s resorting to arms would probably serve the interests of the government, adding validity to its otherwise specious contention that it faces an armed insurgency financed from abroad and driven by the most militant Islamists.        

&ldquo;It is quite simply a trap that the protesters will fall in,&rdquo; said Peter Harling, an analyst for the International Crisis Group who travels to Syria often.        

As on past Fridays, the country witnessed a spasm of violence, as security forces sought to crush protests that, by many accounts, have lost some momentum in recent weeks. At least 44 people were killed, and military strikes, with tanks and armored vehicles, continued around Hama and in northwest Syria, a rugged region near the Turkish border. The newly dead added to one of the region&rsquo;s grimmest tolls: more than 2,600 killed by government forces, according to a United Nations count, and possibly tens of thousands arrested since the uprising began.        

Reporting on Syria is notoriously difficult, with the government preventing most journalists from entering. But in the past few weeks, activists say armed clashes have also occurred twice in Harasta, near Damascus, between soldiers and deserters. An American administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said armed insurgents were still operating in Idlib, in the northwest, and diplomats believe sporadic clashes have also erupted in Dara&rsquo;a, the southern town where the uprising began; Deir al-Zour, an eastern region knit by extended clans; Rastan, between Homs and Hama; and the outskirts of Damascus, which remain some of Syria&rsquo;s most restive locales. Residents of Homs, in particular, are believed to be arming.        

Estimates of the number of protesters who have taken up weapons are anecdotal. Indeed, despite what appears to be government exaggerations, attacks have occurred since the uprising began, especially in the poor, drought-stricken southern steppe. But the American official said that the armed dimension of the uprising had grown noticeably in recent days.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re already seeing the beginning of it, and the longer it goes on, the worse it&rsquo;s going to be,&rdquo; the official, in Washington, said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a very concerning development.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I wouldn&rsquo;t go so far as to say now is the turning point, but I feel like we&rsquo;re seeing the beginning of it,&rdquo; the official added.        

The violence seems to be most pronounced in Homs, where activists say protesters are best organized. The city, relatively favored by the government in recent years, has a majority Sunni population, with a minority of Alawites, a heterodox Muslim sect from which Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government draws much of its leadership. There are persistent reports of gun battles there, and of killings that seem to be sectarian in nature.        

&ldquo;All we know, and it&rsquo;s very clear, is that it&rsquo;s intense there and it&rsquo;s two-sided,&rdquo; the American official said of Homs. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want Homs to become the scenario for the rest of Syria. If it did, everything could really descend into a chaotic situation.&rdquo;        

Activists have reported defections since the start of the uprising, though the military and security forces have remained largely cohesive. The official put the number of defections at 10,000 &mdash; &ldquo;around that&rdquo; &mdash; and said a couple of hundred of them had coalesced into two groups, apparently rival, called the Free Syrian Army and the Free Officers Movement.        

Since they erupted in mid-March, the protests have demonstrated a remarkable resilience, despite the bouts of repression, among the most ferocious in the region. But these days there
  is a sense of desperation, as moments that seem decisive come and go, and what seem to be limits of peaceful protests become clear to some.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;Protesters are telling authorities that they have the patience of Job,&rdquo; said one activist in Damascus, Iyad Sharbaji. &ldquo;They have faith and believe that, if the protests stop, there will be revenge and killings that no one will survive from.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;That is why people are insisting to continue until the end,&rdquo; he added.        

But a leading opposition figure, Louay Hussein, made clear how he would choose if faced with the prospect of civil war or an agreement with the government.        

&ldquo;If we had to choose between the worst of two evils, then we will choose reconciliation with the president,&rdquo; Mr. Hussein said. &ldquo;We will reconcile and forgive if that is what we need to do to protect the country from civil wars and division.&rdquo;        

The turn to violence may be coming after what activists, diplomats and analysts believe is a newly intensified crackdown, as security forces better concentrate on activist leaders. In the town of Daraya, near Damascus, the entire leadership of the protest movement &mdash; at least 20 people &mdash; were arrested, and one of them was killed. In Duma, another restive town near the capital, five checkpoints were set up along the road on Friday, and intelligence agents posted at each carried lists of activists they were trying to detain.        

Mr. Sharbaji, the activist in Damascus, recounted that an activist carrying a banner was arrested, then 16 more were picked up: the person who bought the fabric, the person who scrawled the slogan, and some of their relatives and their friends.        

The American official described the tactic as &ldquo;arresting them, detaining them and, in some cases, killing them.&rdquo;        

Mr. Harling suggested that the government&rsquo;s strategy was aimed at making it too perilous to protest.        

&ldquo;Quite simply, the regime is raising the costs of peaceful demonstrations to force protesters either to quit, in which case it wins, or to resort to weapons, in which case it could corroborate its narrative of a seditious insurgency and probably win also,&rdquo; he said.        
