
WASHINGTON &mdash; Iran has invited Russia, China and several European Union members to visit its nuclear facilities this month, but pointedly snubbed the United States, European diplomats said on Monday.        

Tehran confirmed on Tuesday that it had offered the invitation to  show what Ramin Mehmanparast, an Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman,  called transparency and &ldquo;Tehran&rsquo;s goodwill&rdquo; on its nuclear program.        

The invitation &mdash; which seemed calculated to divide the alliance of  nations opposed to Iran&rsquo;s nuclear ambitions before the next round of  negotiations over the program &mdash; was swiftly dismissed by the United  States.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a clever ploy, but it&rsquo;s not a substitute for Iran&rsquo;s  responsibilities to the I.A.E.A.,&rdquo; said the State Department spokesman,  Philip J. Crowley, referring to the International Atomic Energy Agency, which has been locked in an increasingly tense standoff with the Iranian government over its enrichment of uranium.        

&ldquo;It won&rsquo;t draw international attention away from the issues regarding Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program,&rdquo; Mr. Crowley added, noting that its enrichment activities violated six United Nations Security Council resolutions.        

The European diplomats said the invitation was not likely to be  accepted, if at all, until after the next round of negotiations,  expected to be held in Istanbul at the end of this month.        

&ldquo;This is something that in principle could be interesting, but not  before the next round of talks,&rdquo; said one diplomat, speaking on  condition of anonymity to discuss the confidential deliberations. &ldquo;This  seems like Iranian tactics: they would like to put up a smokescreen and  link things that can&rsquo;t be linked.&rdquo;        

Reuters quoted Mr. Mehmanparast, the Iranian spokesman, as saying the  invitation was for a visit on Jan. 15-16 &mdash; before the scheduled  negotiations in Istanbul between Iran and world powers including the  United States.        

The Iranian letter was sent to Russia, China, members of the European  Union, and other countries. The United States would normally be  included in such a group, as it negotiates with Iran, along with the  other permanent members of the Security Council &mdash; Britain, France, Russia and China &mdash; as well as Germany.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s no invitation in our in-box,&rdquo; Mr. Crowley said.        

The United States has assembled a coalition to impose sanctions on Iran, unilaterally and through the United Nations.  But Russia and especially China still maintain commercial ties with  Iran, and they have voiced reluctance about further tightening the  economic vise on Tehran.        

The Associated Press, citing an unidentified diplomat, said Iran was  offering access to sites at Natanz and Bushehr, as well as meetings with  two top officials involved in the program: Ali Salehi, the acting  foreign minister who oversees it, and Saeed Jalili, the chief nuclear  negotiator.        

That would appear to rule out a visit to the enrichment facility near  the holy city of Qum, the existence of which was disclosed by the Obama  administration in late 2009 and has come to symbolize Iran&rsquo;s murky  intentions.        

Natanz, another site for uranium enrichment, has also long concerned  international inspectors. But the Bushehr nuclear plant, which is being  built with Russian technology, is viewed as less of a threat since it  operates under safeguards. Iran insists its entire program is for  civilian power generation.        

Last month, Iran held two days of largely unproductive nuclear talks with the United States and other countries in Geneva.  The atmosphere was frosty, said diplomats who took part, and there was  no separate meeting between the American and Iranian representatives.        

The Geneva meeting was organized by Catherine Ashton,  the European Union&rsquo;s high representative for foreign affairs and  security policy. But this invitation was sent to European  representatives at the atomic energy agency&rsquo;s headquarters in Vienna &mdash;  including Hungary, which just took over the presidency of the European Union &mdash; rather than to Ms. Ashton, a diplomat said.        

Normally, he said, when Iran does something like this they  immediately publicize it. The Associated Press said this letter was  dated Dec. 27.        

.        
Stephen Castle contributed reporting from Brussels, and Steven Erlanger from Paris.
