
DUBLIN &mdash; Even as it remains preoccupied with its struggling economy, Ireland is in the midst of a profound transformation, as rapid as it is revolutionary: it is recalibrating its relationship to the Roman Catholic Church, an institution that has permeated almost every aspect of life here for generations.        

This is still a country where abortion is against the law, where divorce became legal only in 1995, where the church runs more than 90 percent of the primary schools and where 87 percent of the population identifies itself as Catholic. But the awe, respect and fear the Vatican once commanded have given way to something new &mdash; rage, disgust and defiance &mdash; after a long series of horrific revelations about decades of abuse of children entrusted to the church&rsquo;s care by a reverential populace.        

While similar disclosures have tarnished the Vatican&rsquo;s image in other countries, perhaps nowhere have they shaken a whole society so thoroughly or so intensely as in Ireland. And so when the normally mild-mannered prime minister, Enda Kenny, unexpectedly took the floor in Parliament this summer to criticize the church, he was giving voice not just to his own pent-up feelings, but to those of a nation.        

His remarks were a ringing declaration of the supremacy of state over church, in words of outrage and indignation that had never before been used publicly by an Irish leader.        

&ldquo;For the first time in Ireland, a report into child sexual abuse exposed an attempt by the Holy See to frustrate an inquiry into a sovereign, democratic republic as little as three years ago, not three decades ago,&rdquo; Mr. Kenny said, referring to the Cloyne Report, which detailed abuse and cover-ups by church officials in southern Ireland through 2009.        

Reiterating the report&rsquo;s claim that the church had encouraged bishops to ignore child-protection guidelines the bishops themselves had adopted, the prime minister attacked &ldquo;the dysfunction, the disconnection, the elitism&rdquo; that he said &ldquo;dominate the culture of the Vatican.&rdquo;        

He continued: &ldquo;The rape and torture of children were downplayed, or &lsquo;managed,&rsquo; to uphold instead the primacy of the institution &mdash; its power, its standing and its reputation.&rdquo; Instead of listening with humility to the heartbreaking evidence of &ldquo;humiliation and betrayal,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;the Vatican&rsquo;s response was to parse and analyze it with the gimlet eye of a canon lawyer.&rdquo;        

The effect of his speech was instant and electric.        

&ldquo;It was a seminal moment,&rdquo; said Patsy McGarry, the religious affairs correspondent for The Irish Times. &ldquo;No Irish prime minister has ever talked to the Catholic Church before in this fashion. The obsequiousness of the Irish state toward the Vatican is gone. The deference is gone.&rdquo;        

While both sides are talking in more emollient terms now, there is no question that Mr. Kenny&rsquo;s declaration deeply angered the Vatican. It immediately withdrew its ambassador from Dublin, ostensibly to help fashion the Vatican&rsquo;s formal response. (The ambassador has since been reassigned to the Czech Republic.)        

The position of Irish ambassador to the Vatican is currently vacant, too, and there is talk here of merging it with the ambassadorship to Italy. While government officials say the question is part of a general re-examination of the diplomatic budget, such a move would be seen as a pointed snub to the Holy See, a sovereign state to which countries generally dedicate separate embassies.        

Meanwhile, in what has developed into a tit-for-tat war of words, the church&rsquo;s latest formal communication with Dublin &mdash; 24 pages of densely argued prose &mdash; took issue with both the Cloyne Report and Mr. Kenny&rsquo;s remarks, saying that a crucial document had been &ldquo;misrepresented&rdquo; by the inquiry and calling &ldquo;unsubstantiated&rdquo; Mr. Kenny&rsquo;s assertion that the Vatican had tried to &ldquo;frustrate an inquiry&rdquo; into the abuse scandal.        

Sympathizers with the church&rsquo;s position say the Vatican made valid and nuanced points. And they say Mr. Kenny went too far. &ldquo;Personally, I think it was excessive,&rdquo; David Quinn, founder of the Iona Institute, a right-leaning religious advocacy group, said of the prime minister&rsquo;s speech.        

In an interview, Mr. Quinn said that the relationship between the Vatican and the Irish government was &ldquo;at a very low ebb.&rdquo; The state of affairs had not been helped by the fact that newspapers in China, he said, had written editorials using Mr. Kenny&rsquo;s remarks as an argument for &ldquo;why the church should be under government control.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kenny, who took office in March after the long-dominant Fianna Fail party imploded over the financial crisis, has been accused of opportunism by some critics. But his position as a practicing Catholic from a conservative area helped give moral weight to his speech. And his government&rsquo;s feisty new tone has been met with widespread approval in a place that feels doubly betrayed: first by the abuse itself, and second by what many see as a cover-up by the church, compounded by the often opaque, legalistic language with which it defends itself.        
Douglas Dalby contributed reporting.
