
GAZA &mdash; As West Bank Palestinian leaders head to the United Nations to seek membership for a state of Palestine, their rivals in Gaza, the Hamas faction, are watching nervously, complaining of not having been consulted and warning against any recognition of Israel or yielding of a refugee right of return.        

Ismail Haniya, the Hamas prime minister, said Sunday that his movement would not stand in the way of President Mahmoud Abbas, head of the Fatah party. &ldquo;We support establishing a Palestinian state on any part of Palestinian land without giving up an inch of Palestine or recognizing Israel,&rdquo; he told the members of the Palestinian Legislative Council here.        

On Saturday, the branch of Hamas based in the Syrian capital, Damascus, issued a statement objecting to the United Nations move, expected later this week, because it was &ldquo;unilateral,&rdquo; meaning that Hamas had not been included in the decision.        

The application, it said, was an extension of Fatah&rsquo;s &ldquo;path of compromise and insisting on dialogue while distancing itself from resistance and holding strong cards. We affirm our deep conviction that resistance is the main path that must be pursued together with political and public struggle.&rdquo;        

The Damascus group, led by Khaled Meshal, said that it favored a Palestinian state on the territorial lines as they stood before the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, with East Jerusalem as its capital and on the condition that all refugees be permitted to return to their homes in what is today Israel, all settlements be dismantled and no recognition be granted to &ldquo;the Zionist entity.&rdquo;        

The Hamas charter calls for eliminating Israel, but the Islamist movement&rsquo;s public statements have been vague on whether that remains its ultimate goal. Generally, its leaders speak of full Palestinian sovereignty in the 1967 lines and a 20-year truce without granting Israel recognition.        

The movement&rsquo;s stand on the United Nations effort has produced some confused discussion here in Gaza, in particular on the question of why Hamas finds itself on the same side as Israel and the United States and on the opposite side of nearly everyone else. Mr. Haniya said Sunday that Hamas&rsquo;s position was based on the desire to protect Palestinian rights, while Israel and the United States objected to Palestinian membership for the opposite reason: to take rights away.        

In Jerusalem, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel told his cabinet that the Palestinian membership drive would fail. He said he was convinced that between the American veto and the help of other unspecified governments, the Palestinian effort at the United Nations Security Council would go nowhere. He was also dismissive of another option, an approach to the General Assembly, where the Palestinians would be almost guaranteed a majority in favor of upgrading their status to that of a nonmember observer state.        

Mr. Netanyahu described the General Assembly as a forum &ldquo;in which almost any decision can be passed. It is possible to decide there that the sun rises in the west and sets in the east, and this would pass there,&rdquo; he said, adding, &ldquo;But it has neither the same weight nor the same importance.&rdquo;        

In Gaza, Hamas has been holding workshops and seminars, mostly attended by its supporters, to develop arguments against the United Nations effort. At one such event held last week at the Palestinian Engineers Syndicate, Mushier al-Masri warned that accepting a Palestinian state on the 1967 lines puts the Palestinian cause in danger because it yields the rest to Israel. &ldquo;This includes an implicit concession of nearly 80 percent of the land of Palestine,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Masri also said that, under current discussions, Palestinian refugees would be denied the right of return to their original homes and villages inside what is today Israel, instead forced to find homes in Gaza or the West Bank.        

Hamas has banned any public support of Mr. Abbas&rsquo;s United Nations drive, according to a Fatah official in Gaza, Abdullah Abu Samhadana.        

On Sunday, Ahmed Yousef, who until a few months ago was political adviser to Mr. Haniya and a well-known voice for Hamas to the West, objected to the ban. This &ldquo;comes at a time when the world, especially Turkey and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation&rdquo; stand with Mr. Abbas, Mr. Yousef told Voice of Palestine radio. &ldquo;This also amounts to repression of freedom of expression.&rdquo;        
Fares Akram reported from Gaza, and Ethan Bronner from Jerusalem. Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from Jerusalem, and Ranya Kadri from Amman, Jordan.
