
MOSCOW &mdash; A pro-Russian party has gained the most votes in a snap parliamentary election in Latvia, with economic worries and anger over perceived government malfeasance trumping the anti-Russian sentiments that have kept such parties at bay since the small Baltic country gained independence from the Soviet Union 20 years ago.        

Latvia&rsquo;s Central Elections Commission announced Sunday that the pro-Russian party, Harmony Center, got more than 28 percent of the vote in Saturday&rsquo;s elections, a significant improvement over previous contests.        

Harmony Center&rsquo;s opponents could still block its entry into the government by uniting in coalition, analysts said, and began talks on Sunday in an apparent effort to do so. Even so, the party&rsquo;s rise to prominence is remarkable given Latvia&rsquo;s history.        

The Soviet Union absorbed Latvia, along with its neighbors Lithuania and Estonia, in 1940. After independence in 1991, Latvia sought to shield itself from Russia through integration with the West, joining the European Union and NATO.        

Previous governments have sought to disenfranchise the Russian-speaking minority that makes up almost 30 percent of Latvia&rsquo;s 2.2 million people. Laws have been passed making it difficult for Russian speakers, even those born in Latvia, to attain citizenship and to vote.        

But continued worries about Latvia&rsquo;s economy, and, perhaps more importantly, anger with a government that many say is beholden to wealthy businessmen, have pushed many Latvians to seek alternatives, even if it means moving closer to Russia and its rich, oil-fueled economy.        

A former Latvian president, Valdis Zatlers, forced Saturday&rsquo;s elections by taking the rare step of dissolving Parliament this summer when lawmakers refused to grant prosecutors permission to investigate possible corruption by a businessman who is a member of Parliament.        

Mr. Zatlers, whose newly formed Reform Party came in second in the vote, has accused a cadre of so-called oligarchs of wielding undue influence.        

Harmony Center, which had been the underdog until recent years, has also denounced the authority of the oligarchs and has curried favor with pledges of increased social welfare spending. But it must contend with lingering suspicions over its pro-Russian stance. Particularly contentious have been its close ties to United Russia, Russia&rsquo;s dominant political party, led by Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin.        

Harmony Center has sought to ease misgivings by presenting itself as transcending ethnic divisions while playing up the benefits of cooperation with Russia.        

&ldquo;We must end the escalation of disputes between Russians and Latvians,&rdquo; Janis Urbanovics, the head of Harmony Center&rsquo;s faction in Parliament, said last week in an interview with a Latvian newspaper. &ldquo;We need to understand that we have good neighbors with whom we need to develop mutually beneficial relations.&rdquo;        
