
WASHINGTON &mdash; The Obama administration has decided not to sell F-16 fighter jets to Taiwan but instead to help it refurbish its existing fleet, prompting criticism in Congress that the United States is buckling to pressure from China.        

The decision, which could be announced as early as this week and was shared with Congressional staff members on Friday, is a consolation prize for Taiwan, which wanted to buy 66 F-16&rsquo;s to replace jets it bought in 1992 during the administration of President George H. W. Bush.        

The administration&rsquo;s calculation, people briefed on the decision said, is that upgrading the old jets would allow Taiwan to defend itself but would avoid opening a major rift with China, which regards Taiwan as a breakaway province and opposes any arms sales to the country.        

That reasoning does not satisfy Taiwan&rsquo;s supporters in Congress. &ldquo;If the reports are true,&rdquo; Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, said in a written statement on Friday, &ldquo;today&rsquo;s capitulation to Communist China by the Obama administration marks a sad day in American foreign policy, and it represents a slap in the face to a strong ally and longtime friend.&rdquo;        

Mr. Cornyn and Senator Robert Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey, introduced legislation last week requiring the United States to sell Taiwan the F-16&rsquo;s under a 1979 law that requires Washington to provide the island with arms sufficient to defend itself.        

Production of the F-16 generates hundreds of jobs in Texas, where the jets are assembled, and in New Jersey. Mr. Cornyn noted that the sale would provide jobs for &ldquo;an American workforce that desperately needs them.&rdquo;        

Administration officials, while not confirming the decision, said that upgrading Taiwan&rsquo;s fleet of 145 F-16&rsquo;s makes sense because the work would be faster and cheaper than building new planes.        

The package would be worth $5.85 billion, a senior administration official said, bringing total arms sales to Taiwan during the Obama administration to $12.25 billion, more than double the amount sold during former President George W. Bush&rsquo;s first term.        

In January 2010, the Obama administration agreed to sell Patriot missiles, Black Hawk helicopters and communications equipment worth $6.4 billion to Taiwan. But it deferred the politically fraught decision on the F-16&rsquo;s, as had the Bush administration.        

&ldquo;The notion that is being bandied about that this a capitulation to China, given the unprecedented magnitude of sales in the first two and a half years of the administration, and that F-16&rsquo;s were never authorized by the Bush administration, suggests that these attacks are partisan rather than security-based,&rdquo; said Jeffrey A. Bader, a visiting scholar at the Brookings Institution.        

Until April, Mr. Bader was the administration&rsquo;s chief China policy maker on the National Security Council and was involved in deliberations over arms sales to Taiwan.        

The administration, having recently patched up a rift in military relations with China, is trying to avoid another blowup. China, analysts said, would almost certainly express displeasure with the refurbishment of the jets and perhaps even briefly suspend military contacts with the United States. But it probably would not regard the deal as a major affront, they said.        

China has made significant military advances in recent years, tilting the strategic balance in the Taiwan Strait in Beijing&rsquo;s favor and making Taiwan eager to upgrade its aging air force. But officials say that Pentagon&rsquo;s defense analysts have concluded that the new F-16&rsquo;s are not critical to the island&rsquo;s self-defense.        

Adding to the delicacy of the situation, Taiwan is holding a presidential election in January in which the incumbent, Ma Ying-jeou, is facing a challenger from the Democratic Progressive Party. The United States, while being careful not to take sides, is clearly comfortable with Mr. Ma&rsquo;s emphasis on stable relations with China. The Democratic Progressive Party is cooler to the idea.        
