
CASABLANCA, Morocco (AP) &mdash;At least 3,000 people marched through the streets of Casablanca, Morocco&rsquo;s largest city, on Sunday, chanting slogans against government corruption, as the country&rsquo;s pro-democracy movement attempted to regain momentum that was lost over the summer.        

Like many other Arab nations, Morocco was swept by mass protests starting in February, but in recent months the protests have petered out and at one point stopped altogether.        

King Mohammed VI, the head of state, remains popular with much of the country, and appears to have co-opted much of the dissatisfaction by promising reforms. The Constitution has been amended to give more powers to the prime minister and Parliament.        

But activists say the amendments changed little and complain that final authority still rests with the king and his court. So the pro-democracy group called the February 20 Movement restarted its protests last week.        

The crowd it mustered to march on Sunday through downtown Casablanca was about half the size of those seen earlier in the summer. The march featured activists wearing masks portraying three of the king&rsquo;s top counselors, riding backwards on donkeys.        

&ldquo;Head of the army, it&rsquo;s too much &mdash; head of the religion, it&rsquo;s too much,&rdquo; chanted the crowd, referring to some of the many powers the king keeps under the newly amended Constitution.        

Another 2,000 people demonstrated in the port city of Tangier, and the crowds there went as far as chanting for the fall of the government &mdash; a common slogan in other Arab countries, but rarely heard in Morocco.        

Morocco will hold parliamentary elections on Nov. 25. In the past, political parties in the country have been weak and easily manipulated by the royal court, the Parliament has had little power and the prime minister was selected by the king. Under the new constitutional reforms, the party with the largest number of seats in Parliament will form the new government and name the prime minister.        
