
NEW DELHI &mdash; Rescue workers in India scrambled on Monday to reach villages in remote Himalayan regions that were hit Sunday night by a strong earthquake.        

At least 53 people were reported to have died, with 40 of them in India, 6 in Nepal and 7 in Tibet. Dozens more were injured, and tens of thousands of homes and businesses were destroyed or damaged. Even so, officials said, the sparseness of the population in the remote mountain region kept the death toll relatively low for such a powerful earthquake, with a magnitude of 6.8.        

Most of the deaths occurred in Sikkim, the Himalayan Indian state nearest to the quake&rsquo;s epicenter. Mudslides blocked the winding road connecting the state to the rest of India in more than 21 places, and dense clouds hampered helicopter aid flights for much of the day.&nbsp;By Monday afternoon, the highway leading to the state capital, Gangtok, was reopened.        

A. C. Negi, a senior police official in Gangtok, said that the northern part of the state bore the brunt of the quake.        

&ldquo;We also cannot assess the damage because many areas are inaccessible,&rdquo; Mr. Negi said. &ldquo;We are trying our best.&rdquo;&nbsp;        

Seven people were trapped in a bus caught in a landslide, but rescue workers were not yet able to reach them, he said on Monday.&nbsp;        

Sikkim was a remote and ancient Buddhist kingdom that initially remained independent after the partition of British colonial India in 1947, but it was eventually absorbed into the Indian republic, becoming a state in 1975. Nestled in the jagged peaks of the Himalayas and bordered by Bhutan, Nepal and Tibet, it is one the most thinly populated parts of India.        

India&rsquo;s home secretary, R. K. Singh, told reporters that two medical teams had been dropped into Sikkim from helicopters surveying the damage, and that 10 workers were found dead at a hydroelectric power plant on the Teesta River.        

In Nepal, three people died in the capital, Katmandu, and three deaths were reported elsewhere in the country. Laxmi Prasad Bastola, an official at the National Emergency Operation Center, said that reports of damage in remote parts of the Himalayan nation were still trickling in, and that several people had grave injuries.&nbsp;        

&ldquo;This toll can go up, as there are 24 seriously injured people,&rdquo; he said.&nbsp;        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting from New Delhi, and Kiran Chapagain from Katmandu, Nepal.
