
DUBLIN &mdash; Declaring himself a &ldquo;peacemaker who can be trusted,&rdquo; a former commander in the Irish Republican Army began a campaign on Monday to become Ireland&rsquo;s next head of state.        

The former commander, Martin McGuinness, who is currently the deputy first minister in the Northern Ireland Assembly, was jailed in the 1970s in the Republic of Ireland for possession of bomb-making equipment and ammunition. He was the I.R.A. commander in the city of Londonderry and was reputedly the leader of the overall organization in Northern Ireland for many years.        

Mr. McGuinness, 61, is contemptuous of what he calls a &ldquo;media fixation&rdquo; on his I.R.A. years. Despite abundant knowledge of his past, he said at a news conference here on Sunday, voters &ldquo;have come out in their droves to vote for me, knowing that I am absolutely dedicated and committed to a new way forward and I live in the here and now.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think I would have been invited to the Oval Office on three occasions to meet with three American presidents, or to Johannesburg to meet with Nelson Mandela, or to Brussels to meet with the president of the European Union, and indeed many other countries throughout the world, if people thought that my credentials in relation to the search for peace were in any way in doubt.&rdquo;        

After his election as a British member of Parliament for Mid-Ulster in 1997 and subsequently in his role as the second most powerful politician in Northern Ireland, Mr. McGuinness surprised many political commentators by forging a cordial relationship in the power-sharing government with Ian Paisley, the leader of the Democratic Unionists, who favor continued ties to Britain, and with Mr. Paisley&rsquo;s successor, Peter Robinson.        

Mr. McGuinness is considered one of the main architects of the 1998 Good Friday agreement, which led to the I.R.A.&rsquo;s disarmament in 2005 after almost 40 years of bloodshed.        

He joins a field of five declared candidates for the ballot on Oct. 27. Although the Sinn Fein party, of which Mr. McGuinness is deputy leader, consistently receives only 10 percent or so of the vote in the Republic, its election machine is formidable, and he will receive its full backing.        

Mr. McGuinness is renowned as a genial, charismatic figure and is an experienced campaigner. His Northern Ireland birthplace will be no barrier; the incumbent, Mary McAleese, is from Belfast, and people born in Northern Ireland may hold citizenship in both Ireland and the United Kingdom.        

Although the role of president is largely ceremonial, it does nominally include control of the Irish armed forces. It is also the first point of contact for foreign dignitaries, and so plays an important role in how the country is perceived abroad.        
