
Judicial authorities in Iran have arrested six people, accusing them of working covertly for the British Broadcasting Corporation&rsquo;s Persian-language service and supplying it with content, including films, that depict the country in a negative way, the state-run press in Iran reported on Monday.        

The BBC denied that the six Iranian defendants &mdash; five men and a woman &mdash; were employees, describing them instead as independent filmmakers whose work had been screened abroad. The BBC said it had bought the broadcast rights to their work.        

&ldquo;No one works for the Persian service inside the country &mdash; either formally or informally,&rdquo; the BBC said on its Web site.        

The arrests were reported a day after the BBC&rsquo;s Persian-language service, which is officially banned in Iran but is said to be highly popular, broadcast a documentary on Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran&rsquo;s supreme leader. The BBC said its signal was disrupted during the broadcast.        

Accounts in Iran&rsquo;s media said the six were arrested Saturday. &ldquo;The members of this covert cell of BBC Farsi were paid tens of thousands of dollars for each of their programs,&rdquo; Iranian television said.        

The BBC said that the Khamenei documentary was an in-house production and that &ldquo;none of the six filmmakers had been involved with it.&rdquo; Neither the Iranian authorities nor the BBC identified the defendants by name.        

Relations between the BBC and Iran&rsquo;s government have been estranged since June 2009, when President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad won re-election by what critics called a suspiciously lopsided vote, provoking violent demonstrations that escalated into Iran&rsquo;s worst political crisis since the 1979 Islamic Revolution. The Iranian authorities accused the BBC of helping to provoke the crisis through what they called its biased and baseless reporting.        

Iranians are prohibited from working for any nongovernment radio and television networks that broadcast in Persian. Iranians are also prohibited from watching foreign channels accessible via rooftop satellite dishes, which are illegal because they are deemed to be a corrupting influence. But the dishes are still a common sight.        
