
MOSCOW &mdash; Yuri M. Luzhkov, the former mayor of Moscow who was once one of Russia&rsquo;s most powerful politicians, dismissed his country&rsquo;s political system as a charade in an interview published on Monday, comparing Russia to an outsize Byzantium beholden to the whims of the Kremlin.        

In his first extensive remarks in nearly a year, Mr. Luzhkov, who was ousted as mayor a year ago,  told the Interfax news agency that the Kremlin had neutered all political activity in the country. He criticized what he described as a corrupt business climate, and expressed fears that his billionaire wife could be prosecuted if she returned to Russia from Western Europe, where she lives.        

&ldquo;Our country is now going through dark times,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We see a lack of political activity and the complete domination of the government over all institutions, including political ones.&rdquo;        

Mr. Luzhkov said that all of Russia&rsquo;s mainstream political parties were puppets, and that only the Communist Party had tried to resist Kremlin interference, unsuccessfully. He singled out United Russia, the party led by Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin, for special scorn.        

&ldquo;The United Russia faction in the Parliament, which has a supermajority, has turned into a servant of the Kremlin and the government,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It has not worked on one piece of legislation independently.&rdquo;        

His remarks were the latest salvo by a former political insider against Russia&rsquo;s leaders, coming near the start of an election season that will determine the country&rsquo;s next president.        

Last week, Mikhail D. Prokhorov, a Russian billionaire, said that a Kremlin &ldquo;puppet master&rdquo; was in control of Russia&rsquo;s party system after he found himself forced out of the leadership of Right Cause, a supposedly reform-minded new party that turned out, he said, to be under Kremlin control.        

Rarely has Russia&rsquo;s leadership faced so much public criticism from people who were once so invested in the status quo.        

Mr. Luzhkov, who was mayor of Moscow and a powerful political insider for 18 years, was dismissed last year after appearing to question the competence of President Dmitri A. Medvedev. He was one of the first prominent figures to wade publicly into a debate that apparently has been raging behind the scenes over whether Mr. Medvedev should run for a second term next year or make way for Mr. Putin to return to the presidency.        

In the interview published on Monday, Mr. Luzhkov said that political leaders had been delaying that decision as long as possible because the suspense was the only motivation government officials had to fulfill their duties.        

&ldquo;In our country, Byzantium has been revived in a kind of hypertrophied form,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;If the decision of who was running for president was announced earlier, people would stop working.&rdquo;        

Mr. Luzhkov, who said he had been teaching at a Moscow university since he left office, indicated that he might return to politics but did not speak of specific plans. Business, he said, was unappetizing.        

&ldquo;Today it is not possible to conduct business in Moscow,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There have been many cases of corporate raiding, greenmail, unjustified meddling by the government in business. It is no accident that capital, like people, are fleeing from Russia.&rdquo;        

One of those who have fled is Yelena Baturina, Mr. Luzhkov&rsquo;s wife. Ms. Baturina, a real estate developer, became Russia&rsquo;s richest woman during her husband&rsquo;s tenure as mayor. Now, facing possible criminal charges over some of her business dealings, she lives in Western Europe.        

&ldquo;Yelena will return to Russia when she is certain that she will be guaranteed the right to visit her children studying in England,&rdquo; Mr. Luzhkov said. &ldquo;Today, the government, in persecuting our family, can give no such guarantee.&rdquo;        
