
MOSCOW &mdash; The navigator on a passenger airliner that crashed in June because it missed the runway was drunk, Russian aviation authorities have found, and the navigator&rsquo;s condition and other errors by the crew and on the ground were to blame for the accident that killed 47 people.        

The navigator was in a state of &ldquo;light alcoholic intoxication&rdquo; as he guided the jetliner on its approach to a provincial airport in Petrozavodsk, the Interstate Aviation Committee said Monday in a report, which ruled out any mechanical failure as a factor.        

The accident near Finland was the first of two major air disasters in Russia this summer. The second, earlier this month, killed a hockey team and several prominent former National Hockey League players and coaches.        

In the first crash, the airliner, a Tupolev 134, was descending into a thick fog when it clipped a tree and broke up on a road near the runway. The engines, flaps and instruments worked normally until the impact, the report said.        

Investigators found that a combination of human errors caused the crash, including mistakes by the navigator. The man&rsquo;s intoxication caused him not only to misguide the plane, but also to become &ldquo;hyperactive&rdquo; and give instructions to the captain, actions that were &ldquo;one of the factors&rdquo; in the crash, the report said. State television reported that the navigator had consumed a glass of vodka before takeoff. Russian aviation authorities often attribute the blame for crashes to crew error rather than mechanical failures on the country&rsquo;s aging fleet of passenger jets. But the two issues are related because the conditions of the aircraft makes them difficult to fly and increases the frequency of accidents.        

Most versions of the Tupolev 134, for example, require a crew of four. Lacking modern avionics, the plane has a glass nose cone under the flight deck, giving the navigator a view of the ground to guide the pilot.        

The crash prompted President Dmitri A. Medvedev to say that Tupolev jetliners should be grounded even before a new Russian plane, the Superjet, becomes widely available to replace them. The report on the crash may intensify concerns about pilot training and Russia&rsquo;s poor safety culture.        

On the day of the accident, the report said, the meteorological service provided incorrect information about visibility. The captain then violated a flight rule by descending below a certain altitude without being able to see the ground or runway lights. The report said he also erred by allowing the navigator to make decisions that are not normally delegated to this member of the four-person crew. It did not give specifics.        
