
WASHINGTON &mdash; When President Obama sits down with Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey on Tuesday at the United Nations, he will mark another chapter in what is perhaps the most intense relationship that he has cultivated with a foreign leader.        

Like many such relationships, it has had its ups and downs. At a meeting in Toronto last year, after Turkey voted no to sanctions against Iran over its nuclear program, the two men had a combative two-hour exchange.        

On Tuesday, administration officials said, Mr. Obama plans to lean hard on Mr. Erdogan to close Turkey&rsquo;s bitter rift with Israel. In particular, the White House is worried about Turkey&rsquo;s threat to use its warships to escort Turkish relief ships bound for Gaza &mdash; a situation that the United States fears could easily escalate into a deadly confrontation.        

Yet Mr. Obama and Mr. Erdogan have often ended up on the same page &mdash; about the political transformations in Egypt and Libya and, after prodding by Mr. Obama, in their judgment that President Bashar al-Assad of Syria ought to face international pressure after refusing to ease his crackdown on protesters.        

Last week, Turkey signed an agreement with the United States to build an American missile-defense radar station on Turkish territory. American officials characterized it as the most significant strategic advance in American-Turkish relations in two decades and attributed it in large part to the trust that had developed between Mr. Obama and Mr. Erdogan.        

&ldquo;The president likes him, thinks he is a man of principle, and also a man of action,&rdquo; the White House national security adviser, Thomas E. Donilon, said in an interview.        

Mr. Erdogan, an ambitious, quick-tempered leader once jailed for reading a poem at a political rally, looms large in Mr. Obama&rsquo;s calculations on issues like the Arab upheaval and the Middle East peace process.        

This year alone, he and Mr. Obama have spoken by phone nine times; only Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain has talked to the president as frequently.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s an investment that has yet to pay off, but we&rsquo;re still early in the game,&rdquo; said Robert Danin, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. &ldquo;Trying to pull Turkey toward the West is a good investment, in light of Europe&rsquo;s failure to do so.&rdquo;        

Still, Mr. Danin said, &ldquo;Erdogan&rsquo;s actions, and particularly his rhetoric, are causing a lot of anxiety.&rdquo;        

In 2009, Turkey was the first Muslim country that Mr. Obama visited as president. At the time, he spoke of how Turkey could be emblematic of a new relationship between the United States and the Muslim world.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m trying to make a statement about the importance of Turkey,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said at a news conference at the time. The two countries, he said, could &ldquo;build a model partnership.&rdquo;        

Given Turkey&rsquo;s growing sense of its own importance, Mr. Erdogan might have been difficult to ignore in any event. The Turkish foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, has described a new order in the rapidly transforming Middle East in which Turkey could form a powerful alliance with Egypt.        

But Mr. Erdogan has flexed Turkey&rsquo;s muscles in ways that have flummoxed the United States. When the Obama administration was trying to rally international support for United Nations sanctions against Iran last year, Turkey teamed up with Brazil in a separate diplomatic effort to break an impasse with Tehran over its nuclear program.        

The United States spurned the effort, and Turkey and Brazil angrily voted against the sanctions in the Security Council. That left the United States with a less-than-unanimous vote and led to Mr. Obama&rsquo;s bruising encounter with Mr. Erdogan in Canada.        

In August, Mr. Erdogan made another diplomatic overture to a neighbor, Syria, which was cracking down on protesters at a time when the United States was marshaling support for an international response. Mr. Erdogan, officials said, pleaded with Mr. Obama for a few days to see if he could persuade Mr. Assad to relent.        

Mr. Obama resisted, citing intelligence reports that Mr. Assad was intensifying his crackdown, officials said. Mr. Erdogan, stung by that news, agreed to go along with the international pressure, and Turkey is now weighing its own sanctions.        

Repairing the rift between Turkey and Israel will not be easy, American officials said. The deadly Israeli raid on a Turkish flotilla bound for Gaza last year left deep wounds.        

On Monday in New York, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton pleaded with Mr. Davutoglu to &ldquo;keep the door open&rdquo; to Israel, according to a senior administration official. But it was not clear that Mrs. Clinton made any headway.        

&ldquo;This is either the result of a mishandling of the situation or a Turkish decision driven by ideology and strategy,&rdquo; Mr. Danin said. &ldquo;We have to test which it is.&rdquo;        
