
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; The Taliban claimed responsibility for a suicide car bombing on Monday whose target was a senior police investigator in the southern port city of Karachi.        

The police official &mdash; Chaudhry Aslam, a senior superintendent in Karachi &mdash; was not injured, nor was his family. But six police guards outside his house were killed, along with two civilians, a woman and a child.        

Mr. Aslam has been at the forefront of several successful operations against Taliban insurgents and other criminals in Karachi, Pakistan&rsquo;s largest city, which has a history of sectarian and political violence.        

The suicide bomber rammed his explosives-laden vehicle into the main gate of Mr. Aslam&rsquo;s residence in the Defense Housing Authority area, an affluent neighborhood of the city, at about 7:25 a.m.        

The explosion shook the neighborhood, destroyed most of Mr. Aslam&rsquo;s home and heavily damaged more than a dozen other houses.        

Speaking to television reporters after the attack, Mr. Aslam appeared unruffled and said that terrorists would not intimidate him. He said he had received threats but had not believed that attackers would go after his children.        

&ldquo;I did not know that these terrorists were such cowards that they would attack sleeping children,&rdquo; local television news networks quoted Mr. Aslam as saying. &ldquo;I will not spare them,&rdquo; he said, referring to the militants.        

In claiming responsibility for the bombing, the Taliban said that Mr. Aslam had arrested and killed many of their fighters.        

&ldquo;We will attack other police officials as well who are taking action against our people,&rdquo; a Taliban spokesman, Ehsanullah Ehsan, was quoted as saying by Reuters.        

Television images showed a crater six feet deep at the site of the bombing, with charred and mangled several vehicles on the roadside.        

&ldquo;My daughter was preparing to go to school when all of a sudden the explosion occurred, &rdquo; Mohammad Imran, one of Mr. Aslam&rsquo;s neighbors, told Reuters. &ldquo;My daughter started crying, and I ran out of house to see what has happened. I saw a cloud of smoke rising in the sky. Our children are traumatized. Our families are disturbed. There is no security.&rdquo;        

The assault was similar to one this month in the southwestern city of Quetta, where two suicide bombers attacked the house of a deputy inspector general of Frontier Corps, a paramilitary force that is led by army officers.        

&ldquo;On one hand, the attack is aimed at demoralizing the security forces, but the attack also shows that Taliban are getting desperate,&rdquo; said Omar R. Quraishi, the opinion page editor of The Express Tribune, an English-language daily in Karachi.        

&ldquo;It also underlines the vulnerability of our cities and state of security in the country,&rdquo; Mr. Quraishi said. &ldquo;The fact that a suicide bomber managed to drive an explosives-laden vehicle unchecked to the residence of a high-profile police officer also signified an intelligence failure.&rdquo;        
