
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; An American official shot and killed two men on a motorcycle who apparently threatened to rob him at gunpoint while he was driving his car in the city of Lahore on Thursday, according to senior police officials there.        

The official, Raymond Davis, who was posted to the United States Consulate in Lahore, called the consulate for help during the episode, and a four-wheel-drive vehicle that tried to come to his rescue hit and killed a third man, said the senior superintendent of police, Faisal Rana.        

Later, Lahore police officials filed murder charges against Mr. Davis on Thursday night in the deaths of the two men on the motorcycle. The police indicated that they were no longer convinced that there had been an attempted robbery.        

The deaths of three Pakistanis in a case involving an armed American official at midday in a busy metropolitan area could heighten anti-American sentiment, which already runs high in Pakistan. Many here distrust and disapprove of the United States&rsquo; support of the fight against Taliban militants in the country.        

Whether American employees at the three American consular offices in Pakistan, as well as at the embassy in Islamabad, should be allowed to carry weapons erupted as an issue in the Pakistani press more than a year ago.        

In a brief statement, the consulate in Lahore said Mr. Davis was an employee, but did not specify his position. Pakistani police officers described Mr. Davis as a &ldquo;security official.&rdquo;        

The question of why Mr. Davis was armed while driving by himself in a major city is likely to be raised by Pakistani officials, and by the press.        

A brother of one of the dead Pakistanis said in a brief television interview that his family would demand that Mr. Davis be &ldquo;hanged.&rdquo; But Mr. Rana, the police official, said it was unlikely that Mr. Davis would be charged with murder.        

The police said one of the men died instantly after being shot by Mr. Davis. The second man who was shot died in the hospital, they said, as did the man who was hit by the vehicle.        

Lahore residents said roadside robberies by armed men on motorcycles seeking mobile phones and other valuables from drivers are relatively common.        
Waqar Gillani contributed reporting from Lahore, Pakistan.
