
The prime minister of Zimbabwe, one of southern Africa&rsquo;s poorest and most politically anxious countries, expressed hope on Tuesday that elections for a new government could be held next year, bringing an end to an awkward and rancorous power-sharing partnership between him and his rival, the country&rsquo;s legendarily autocratic president, Robert Mugabe.        

In an interview with the editorial board of The New York Times, the prime minister, Morgan Tsvangirai, said his relationship with Mr. Mugabe had evolved since 2008, when Mr. Tsvangirai was forced to abandon a presidential runoff with him after a campaign of violence and intimidation by Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s supporters who feared Mr. Tsvangirai might win. Under a truce brokered by South Africa, both men embarked on a collaboration that has been fraught with tension and occasional blowups but has remained basically intact.        

&ldquo;The tone has changed,&rdquo; Mr. Tsvangirai said. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve gone from enemies to opponents.&rdquo;        

Mr. Tsvangirai, who flew with Mr. Mugabe to New York for the United Nations General Assembly, said the two had regularly scheduled meetings every Monday in Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s office. There is &ldquo;no defined agenda,&rdquo; he said.        

Nonetheless, it is clear that Mr. Tsvangirai and his political party, the Movement for Democratic Change, have remained on guard for the possibility that Mr. Mugabe and his party, ZANU-PF, might subvert the partnership. A number of Mr. Tsvangirai&rsquo;s supporters have been arrested and harassed by the police and criminal justice system in Zimbabwe, which remain under Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s control.        

This year, a high-ranking army commander said he would ensure that Mr. Mugabe remained president, and he called Mr. Tsvangirai a &ldquo;national security threat&rdquo; who took orders from foreigners, suggesting the army&rsquo;s intention to interfere in elections.        

Mr. Tsvangirai noted that the commander, Brig. Gen. Douglas Nyikayaramba, had been censured for the remarks, which he described as the view of an individual. He also said that others in the armed forces, as well as in other branches of government under Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s control, had come to realize that Zimbabwe could not go back to the days of one-party rule and intolerance for opposing points of view.        

He also said that some important barometers of Zimbabwe&rsquo;s quality of life had improved significantly under the power-sharing relationship, pointing to closed hospitals that had reopened, textbooks provided to grammar schools and improved sanitation. In Harare, the capital, clean water is available to many people who once had no access to it, he said.        

At the same time, Mr. Tsvangirai acknowledged that Zimbabwe remained impoverished and hobbled by a lack of foreign investment, an antiquated infrastructure and a traumatic decline in agricultural production. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve gone from bread basket to basket case,&rdquo; he said.        

He expressed confidence that the Southern African Development Community, the regional alliance that has monitored the power-sharing arrangement in Zimbabwe, would keep pressure on ZANU-PF and insist that when new elections are held, they are monitored by outside observers.        

&ldquo;Everyone knows that unless there is agreement, the future of the country is in question,&rdquo; he said.        

The ideal outcome of an election &mdash; which Mr. Tsvangirai said could happen in the third quarter of 2012 &mdash; would be &ldquo;we win, and there is a smooth transfer of power, hallelujah.&rdquo; But as a veteran of Zimbabwe&rsquo;s brutal politics, he acknowledged other possible outcomes, saying, &ldquo;You always have to budget for a negative.&rdquo;        
