
UNITED NATIONS &mdash; President Obama on Tuesday extended to Libya&rsquo;s transitional leader a diplomatic honor never offered his predecessor, meeting formally with Mustafa Abdel-Jalil at the United Nations and heralding the victory of Libyan rebels who brought an end to the 42-year reign of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

It was not quite a victory lap, but it came pretty close. Mr. Obama credited his new doctrine with helping to topple the man whom Ronald Reagan once famously called the &ldquo;mad dog of the Middle East.&rdquo; And he held Libya up as &ldquo;a lesson in what the international community can achieve when we stand together as one.&rdquo;        

While he cautioned that &ldquo;we cannot and should not intervene every time there&rsquo;s an injustice in the world,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said that the international community&rsquo;s action in Libya meant that after four decades, Libyan people &ldquo;can walk the streets, free from a tyrant.&rdquo;        

Mr. Obama announced that the United States was officially reopening its embassy in Tripoli, which was closed in the early days of the conflict. The American ambassador there will be returning, he said. An advance military team has been in the Libyan capital for the past week to prepare for the reopening.        

For Mr. Obama, Libya represents a much-needed foreign policy victory in the middle of trying times at home. He initially committed to the American military involvement in Libya only grudgingly, after being pressed by Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and other members of his administration, and sought to sketch out a limited American role. But even so, the toppling of Colonel Qaddafi allows Mr. Obama to point to Libya as an example of how the United States can balance assistance to the democratic movements across the region against domestic opposition to foreign interventions, particularly during tight economic times.        

The trouble for Mr. Obama, though, is that even as he was publicly proclaiming his backing at the United Nations for a new Libyan state, American officials were working furiously behind the scenes to make sure the United Nations did not bestow a similar recognition on a Palestinian state. The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, has vowed to pursue statehood before the Security Council this week; American officials say the United States will veto that request, should it gain the broader Council&rsquo;s approval. Mr. Obama will meet with Mr. Abbas on Wednesday, a senior administration official said.        

Mr. Obama is scheduled to speak before the General Assembly on Wednesday morning, where he will have to address the Palestinian issue. It is a high-wire act for him, and officials privately acknowledge that the president risks appearing hypocritical.        

&ldquo;Today the world is saying, in one unmistakable voice, &lsquo;We will stand with you as you seize this moment of promise; as you reach for the freedom, the dignity and the opportunity you deserve,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; he said Tuesday. But he was talking about Libyans, not Palestinians.        

American officials say that Palestinian statehood at the United Nations will jeopardize the peace process; Israel is adamantly opposed to United Nations recognition of a Palestinian state.        

Mr. Obama also met on Tuesday with the Turkish prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and the two were expected to discuss the Palestinian issue, as well as Turkey&rsquo;s increasingly frayed relations with Israel, made worse by maneuverings over the Gaza blockade, which Turkey opposes.        

The overcrowded meeting at the United Nations on Libya evolved into a two-hour outpouring of support from world leaders, including from countries like China and South Africa who were among the last to abandon the Qaddafi government. President Jacob Zuma of South Africa made the only veiled criticism by saying that the revenge attacks against sub-Saharan Africans should be stopped.        

Mr. Abdel-Jalil, the head of the provisional Libyan government, the Transitional National Council, called it a &ldquo;happy moment&rdquo; that all Libyans had anticipated.        

&ldquo;This historical moment of raising the Libyan flag at the United Nations represents the will of the Libyan freedom fighters and the first martyrs, who, as they were dying, urged their friends and colleagues to continue and not to surrender,&rdquo; he said.        

In contrast to the Qaddafi years, he said Libya would become a responsible member of the international community that respected the tenets of the United Nations charter. His talks with Mr. Obama and other leaders centered on regional peace and security, reconciliation and democratic transformation, he said.        

Asked about Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s renewed call to arms, in an audio recording released on Tuesday, he said there was nothing the former leader could do to threaten what the country&rsquo;s &ldquo;revolutionaries&rdquo; have achieved.        

&ldquo;I have some worries about sabotage operations which the Qaddafi brigades might conduct,&rdquo; he said. Mr. Abdel-Jalil, a former justice minister in the Qaddafi government, said his country needed more support from the United Nations, especially in carrying out a reconciliation plan and in organizing elections.        

The Security Council last Friday authorized a short-term United Nations mission for Libya designed to address those two issues, among others.        
