
Two American hikers imprisoned on espionage charges in Iran were released Wednesday after days of conflicting signals, ending diplomatic skirmishing that complicated the United States&rsquo; already fraught relationship with Tehran for more than two years.        

The men, Shane M. Bauer and Joshua F. Fattal, both 29, were released from the notorious Evin Prison at dusk and whisked by diplomatic convoy to a plane that took them to Oman, where they raced down the stairs of the aircraft to hug waiting family members.        

The men&rsquo;s odyssey through Iran&rsquo;s judicial system began when, they have said, they wandered over the border from Iraq by mistake with a friend, but their case was quickly entangled with Iran&rsquo;s foreign and domestic politics. In the latest chapter, the Americans&rsquo; fate became part of what analysts called a power struggle between President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and the conservative establishment he has angered.        

Mr. Ahmadinejad promised last week that the men would be freed as a humanitarian gesture &ldquo;in a couple of days.&rdquo; The announcement appeared calibrated to garner favorable attention for the Iranian leader before he flew to New York to attend this week&rsquo;s United Nations General Assembly meeting.        

But soon after his announcement, Iran&rsquo;s judiciary &mdash; which answers to the country&rsquo;s supreme leader &mdash; denied that the men would be freed imminently, saying it had exclusive authority to order their release and striking a very public blow to the president&rsquo;s standing.        

Analysts said they believed that Mr. Ahmadinejad&rsquo;s conservative critics were willing to allow the release Wednesday because they wanted Iran to project a magnanimous image as it takes to the world stage and because they had accomplished their goal: delivering a message to the president that he is not fully in charge.        

&ldquo;In the end, they were not going to undermine completely the president of the country, but they made their point,&rdquo; said Vali Nasr, a professor at Tufts University and an expert in Iranian affairs.        

&ldquo;Ahmadinejad got what he wanted &mdash; these guys were released before his speech,&rdquo; at the United Nations, he said. &ldquo;But the judiciary got what they wanted as well.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ahmadinejad, who was handpicked by the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has run afoul of his patron and the country&rsquo;s establishment by challenging the authority of the clergy and trying to amass more power for himself.        

Before the Americans&rsquo; arrival in Oman, their families said in a prepared statement that &ldquo;the joy and relief we feel at Shane and Josh&rsquo;s long-awaited freedom knows no bounds&rdquo; and that they would now &ldquo;catch up on two lost years and make a new beginning, for them and for all of us.&rdquo;        

President Obama welcomed the news and thanked the leaders of Oman and Iraq, who helped to negotiate the hikers&rsquo; release, as well as the Swiss government, whose embassy in Tehran looks after American interests there.        

&ldquo;All Americans join their families and friends in celebrating their long-awaited return home,&rdquo; he said. Mr. Obama did not mention the Iranian government in his statement.        

Masoud Shafiei, a lawyer for the two men, told The Associated Press that the men &mdash; who had been given a harsh eight-year sentence this year &mdash; were fined $500,000 each before they were freed, and an Iranian news agency, ISNA, said Mr. Shafiei reported that Oman paid the money. The two Americans have denied the charges against them, as have United States officials.        

Mr. Bauer, Mr. Fattal and a third American hiker, Sarah E. Shourd, who is Mr. Bauer&rsquo;s fianc&eacute;e, were arrested near northern Iraq&rsquo;s border with Iran in July 2009 by Iranian border guards, who contended they had intentionally trespassed.        

Ms. Shourd was released on $500,000 bail in September 2010 in circumstances that were the mirror of the release Wednesday. Iranian officials first announced they would release her after direct intervention from Mr. Ahmadinejad. The judiciary then canceled the release, finally letting her go just before the annual General Assembly meeting. Ms. Shourd was among those waiting in Oman on Wednesday for the arrival of the two Americans.        

Though the spying case against all three hikers remains open, they were not expected to return to Iran.        

The Iranian authorities have never publicly provided evidence to support their contention that the hikers were American spies, and a wide range of outside voices, including the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, and the human rights group Amnesty International, had called for their unconditional release.        

Ms. Shourd has said that she, Mr. Bauer and Mr. Fattal made an innocent mistake in wandering over the unmarked border, crossing when a border guard of unknown nationality waved to them to approach. They were only then told they had crossed into Iran and were arrested, Ms. Shourd has said. The three are graduates of the University of California, Berkeley.        

Iran&rsquo;s detention of the Americans had aggravated relations with the United States, which is at odds with Iran over issues including its nuclear program and its hostility toward Israel. Iran says its nuclear program is for peaceful purposes but Western powers suspect it is designed to build atomic weapons.        

&ldquo;Iran&rsquo;s attempt to gain from this exercise ultimately proved futile,&rdquo; said Karim Sadjadpour of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and often a sharp critic of the Iranian leadership. He added that the two-year episode &ldquo;further tarnished their international image.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ahmadinejad had often hinted that he hoped to win the release of Iranians imprisoned in the United States in exchange for the Americans. On Wednesday, a State Department spokesman, Noel C. Clay, declined to comment on whether the administration had any plans to address those Iranian concerns.        

A group of American activists and clergy who had engaged in months of quiet diplomacy to try to free the Americans said Iranian officials again mentioned their request for the release of about 50 Iranians last week, when they summoned the delegation to Tehran. Mr. Nasr, meanwhile, said it was too soon to judge the outcome of the release. He said it could be an olive branch meant to thaw relations with the United States &mdash; or it may have been timed simply to interject Iran into a Western news cycle dominated by a Palestinian bid for statehood at the United Nations.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know what the game plan is here,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know what they&rsquo;re trying to get.&rdquo;        
J. David Goodman reported from New York, and Alan Cowell from London. Scott Shane contributed reporting from Washington, and Artin Afkhami from Boston.
