
Thousands of protesters on Thursday took to the streets of Yemen, one of the Middle East&rsquo;s most impoverished countries, and secular and Islamist Egyptian opposition leaders vowed to join large protests expected Friday as calls for change rang across the Arab world.        

The Yemeni protests were another moment of tumult in a region whose aging order of American-backed governments appears to be staggering. In a span of just weeks, Tunisia&rsquo;s government has fallen, Egypt&rsquo;s appears shaken and countries like Jordan and Yemen are bracing against demands of movements with divergent goals but similar means.        

Protests led by young people entered a third day in Egypt, where Mohamed ElBaradei, the Nobel laureate who has become an outspoken opponent of President Hosni Mubarak, returned in hopes of galvanizing the campaign. The Muslim Brotherhood, long Egypt&rsquo;s largest organized opposition, ended days of official inaction and said it would join the Friday protests, declaring &ldquo;a day of rage for the Egyptian nation.&rdquo;        

Dr.  ElBaradei called on Mr. Mubarak to step down. &ldquo;He has served the country for 30 years, and it is about time for him to retire,&rdquo; he told Reuters. &ldquo;Tomorrow is going to be, I think, a major demonstration all over Egypt and I will be there with them.&rdquo;        

Though a relative calm settled on Cairo, smoke rose over the city of Suez, as sometimes violent protests continued there.        

In Yemen, organizers vowed to continue protests on Friday and for weeks to come until the 32-year-old American-backed government of Ali Abdullah Saleh either fell or consented to reforms.        

At least visually, the scenes broadcast across the region from Yemen were reminiscent of the events in Egypt and the month of protests that brought down the government in Tunisia. But as they climaxed by midday, they appeared to be carefully organized and mostly peaceful, save for some arrests. Pink &mdash; be it in the form of headbands, sashes or banners &mdash; was the dominant color; organizers described it as the symbol of the day&rsquo;s protests.        

&ldquo;To Jidda, oh Ali!&rdquo; some shouted, in reference to the city in Saudi Arabia where Tunisia&rsquo;s president fled this month. &ldquo;The people&rsquo;s demand is the fall of the government!&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We are telling them either he delivers real political reforms or we&rsquo;re going to deliver him out of power,&rdquo; said Shawki al-Qadi, an opposition lawmaker and organizer of the Yemeni protests. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s closed all the doors of hope. The only glimmer is in the streets.&rdquo;        

Unlike in Egypt, the peaceful protests in Yemen were not led by young people, but by the traditional opposition, largely Islamists. And the opposition remained divided over whether to topple the Saleh government or simply push for reforms.        

But the potential for strife in the country is difficult to overstate. Yemen is troubled by a rebellion in the north and a struggle for secession in the once independent, Marxist south. In recent years, an affiliate of Al Qaeda has turned parts of the country, a rugged, often lawless region on the southwestern corner of the Arabian Peninsula, into a refuge beyond the state&rsquo;s reach. Added to the mix is a remarkably high proportion of armed citizens, some of whom treat Kalashnikovs as a fashion accessory.        

&ldquo;I fear Yemen is going to be ripped apart,&rdquo; said Mohammed Naji Allaw, coordinator of the National Organization for Defending Rights and Freedom, which was one of the protests&rsquo; organizers. &ldquo;The situation in Yemen is a lot more dangerous than in any other Arab country. It would be foolish for the regime to ignore our demands.&rdquo;        

He said a phrase often heard these days was that Yemen faced &ldquo;sawmala&rdquo; &mdash; the Somalization of a country that witnessed a civil war in the mid-1990s.        

A portion of Mr. Allaw&rsquo;s worries sprang from the inability of the opposition to forge a unified message. Some are calling for secession for the south, he said, while others are looking to oust the president. Yet the mainstream, he said, simply wanted Mr. Saleh to agree not to run for another term after 2013 and to guarantee that his son would not succeed him.        

&ldquo;The opposition is afraid of what would happen if the regime falls,&rdquo; said Khaled Alanesi, who also works with the human rights group in Sana, the capital. &ldquo;Afraid of the militant groups, Al Qaeda, the tribes and all the arms here.&rdquo;        
Anthony Shadid and Nada Bakri reported from Beirut, Lebanon, and Kareem Fahim from Cairo. Liam Stack contributed reporting from Cairo.
