
UNITED NATIONS &mdash; President Obama declared his opposition to the Palestinian Authority&rsquo;s bid for statehood through the Security Council on Wednesday, throwing the weight of the United States directly in the path of the Arab democracy movement even as he hailed what he called the democratic aspirations that have taken hold throughout the Middle East and North Africa.        

&ldquo;Peace will not come through statements and resolutions at the U.N.,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said, in an address before world leaders at the General Assembly. &ldquo;If it were that easy, it would have been accomplished by now.&rdquo;        

Instead, Mr. Obama said, the international community should keep pushing Israelis and Palestinians toward talks on the four intractable issues that have vexed peace negotiations since 1979: borders of a Palestinian state, security for Israel, the status of Palestinian refugees and the fate of Jerusalem, which both sides claim for their capital.        

For Mr. Obama, the challenge in crafting the much-anticipated General Assembly speech was how to address the incongruities of the administration&rsquo;s position: the president who committed to making peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians a priority from Day One, now unable to get peace negotiations going after two and a half years; the president who opened the door to Palestinian state membership at the United Nations last year, now threatening to veto that membership; the president determined to get on the right side of Arab history but ending up, in the views of many Arabs, on the wrong side of it on the Palestinian issue.        

The Arab Spring quandary, in particular, has been troublesome for Mr. Obama. White House officials say that he has long been keenly aware that he, like no other American president, stood as a potential beacon to the Arab street as the ultimate symbol of the hopes and rewards of democracy. But since he is the president of the United States, he has had to put American interests first.        

So Mr. Obama&rsquo;s 35-minute address appeared, at times, an effort to balance support for democratic movements against support for Israel, America&rsquo;s foremost ally. From the start, everything he said seemed directed to the theme of what he called &ldquo;peace in an imperfect world.&rdquo;        

Mr. Obama called this year &ldquo;a time of transformation.&rdquo; This year, he said, &ldquo;more individuals are claiming their universal right to live in freedom and dignity.&rdquo;        

He congratulated the democratic movements in Ivory Coast, Tunisia and South Sudan. He congratulated the Egyptians and Libyans who toppled their autocrats. He sided with the protesters in Syria.        

But, he said, Palestinians must make peace with Israel before gaining statehood themselves. Israelis and Palestinians, he said, have grievances and the United Nations must be an arbiter.        

&ldquo;This body, founded, as it was, out of the ashes of war and genocide; dedicated, as it is, to the dignity of every person, must recognize the reality that is lived by both the Palestinians and the Israelis,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We will only succeed in that effort if we can encourage the parties to sit down together, to listen to each other and to understand each other&rsquo;s hopes and fears. That is the project to which America is committed, and that is what the United Nations should be focused on in the weeks and months to come.&rdquo;        

Several times as Mr. Obama spoke, the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, in the audience, put his forehead in his hand. But Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel called the speech a &ldquo;badge of honor.&rdquo;        

Three times under Mr. Obama&rsquo;s tenure, the General Assembly meeting has put the complexities of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict into stark relief.        

In 2009, on Mr. Obama&rsquo;s first visit as president, he abandoned his call for a freeze of settlements in the West Bank, meeting immovable resistance from Israel. The pivot was viewed as major setback in American efforts toward resumed peace talks.        

Then last year, Mr. Obama delivered an impassioned call for Palestinian statehood within the next year, to be recognized, he said, in the United Nations.        

Mr. Obama tried to acknowledge the shift, recalling his pledge and his belief that then, as now, &ldquo;the Palestinian people deserve a state of their own.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;But what I also said,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;is that genuine peace can only be realized between Israelis and Palestinians themselves.&rdquo;        
Neil MacFarquhar contributed reporting.
