
BAGHDAD &mdash; In a classroom in Sadr City, the bustling neighborhood of the Shiite poor, dozens of men in white shirts and black pants received the most basic of Islamic religious instruction: how to wash before praying.        

&ldquo;After you wash your left hand, you must be sure to avoid any water drops on the right hand,&rdquo; declared the instructor.        

The men, once members of the Mahdi Army, the militia of the radical Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr, fought the Americans in the first years of the occupation and say they will again if Mr. Sadr gives the order. But for now they have come to wage a different battle in the ranks of the Mumahidoon, the successor to the Mahdi Army that, besides offering its members lessons in the Koran, organizes soccer teams, provides circumcision for the babies of poor families, picks up trash after religious pilgrimages and teaches computer literacy.        

On the eve of what is likely to be a nearly complete withdrawal of United States forces from Iraq, one of the great questions is what Mr. Sadr is going to do. The Mumahidoon is one possible direction.        

Created after Mr. Sadr disbanded the Mahdi Army in 2008, it is a lesser-known spoke of an Islamist movement that, like Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza and in the West Bank, has used political, military and social arms &mdash; with financial support from Iran &mdash; to galvanize a Shiite underclass and stake out a prominent role in public life.        

But Mr. Sadr also seems to be trying out several other roles, including street provocateur and vocal resister of American influence. The direction he decides on will determine in great part the immediate future of the country as the American military role diminishes.        

Mr. Sadr was perhaps the most mercurial public figure to emerge in the wake of America&rsquo;s war, and his influence has evolved over several iterations: from street fighter to exiled religious figure to political kingmaker in a triumphant return after last year&rsquo;s parliamentary elections.        

&ldquo;There is a general belief that Sadr is trying to figure out what his next move is and where his organization fits in the future of Iraq,&rdquo; said Col. Douglas Crissman, an American Army commander who closely follows Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s activities in the Shiite-dominated south and has noticed fewer recent anti-American messages emanating from local Sadrist offices.        

Most believe Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s overarching goal is to create a state-within-a-state like Hezbollah until he can take power in Iraq.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s definitely the desire to be the Iraqi version and model the movement on some of the same things Hezbollah has done in Lebanon,&rdquo; said Marisa Cochrane Sullivan, deputy director at the Institute for the Study of War in Washington.        

Sadrist leaders acknowledge the comparison to Hezbollah, but emphasize their movement&rsquo;s local roots.        

&ldquo;There are similarities because we are Shia and we resist,&rdquo; said Munhaned al-Gharawi, a top Sadrist official in Baghdad. But &ldquo;we always say that Hezbollah is different. Moktada al-Sadr is an Iraqi man who takes his fatwa from his father, and everyone knows that.&rdquo; (Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s father was Grand Ayatollah Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr, a top Shiite religious leader who was assassinated by Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s henchmen in 1999.)        

The activities of the Mumahidoon in the capital were recently suspended after a property dispute among rival factions resulted in the burning of houses in Baghdad. This episode, combined with several recent contradictory communiqu&eacute;s from Mr. Sadr, suggests a considerable degree of internal strife. But no one doubts the potential influence of the group, not to speak of Mr. Sadr himself.        

As unpredictable as he may be, Mr. Sadr wields significant power through the governorship of the southern Maysan Province and his political bloc in Parliament, which is a foundation of the ruling coalition. Less than a year ago, Mr. Sadr helped establish the current government when he decided to back a second term for Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki. That support helped end more than eight months of stalemate after last year&rsquo;s parliamentary elections, and gave the Sadrists control of some important ministries.        

Mr. Sadr&rsquo;s vocal opposition to the presence of American troops and his threats of violence if they stay beyond this year have kept that issue unsettled with just over three months until all United States forces are mandated to leave. But he has delivered a mixed message.        
Duraid Adnan and Michael S. Schmidt contributed reporting.
