
BEIJING &mdash; Confirmation of a $5.8 billion package of weapon sales by the United States to Taiwan drew an angry reaction from China on Thursday, with newspaper editorials accusing the Obama administration of betrayal and the Foreign Affairs Ministry warning of serious harm to relations.        

The American ambassador and military attach&eacute; were summoned late Wednesday night for what the state news media described as a &ldquo;strong protest.&rdquo; Xinhua, the official wire service, called the decision a &ldquo;despicable breach of faith in international relations.&rdquo;        

But news of the deal, confirmed by White House officials on Wednesday, appears to have set in motion a familiar slate of responses by Beijing, which has long considered arms sales to the self-governing island an affront to its sovereignty and a slight to its dignity.        

&ldquo;This is a kind of ritual, and all the players know their roles,&rdquo; said Yawei Liu, director of the China Program at the Carter Center in Atlanta. &ldquo;There is a script they follow and then hope things cool down so they can return to business as usual.&rdquo;        

Diplomats and analysts say the Chinese government recognizes the deal could have been worse. After all, Taiwan had asked for a new batch of five dozen F-16&rsquo;s. What it got instead was $5.3 billion worth of upgrades to improve the capabilities of an aging fleet bought in 1992.        

The arrangement also includes advanced radar systems, guided bombs and continued training in the United States for Taiwan&rsquo;s pilots. Administration officials point out that the original F-16 request, first made in 2007, was simply deferred and could be reconsidered later.        

Although official reaction to the deal has yet to play out fully, experts said that early indications suggested that Chinese leaders were carefully calibrating a response that would register displeasure with the White House, assuage the anger of China&rsquo;s people but leave relations between the world&rsquo;s two largest economies largely unruffled.        

&ldquo;The sale will have a negative impact on Chinese public opinion toward the U.S., but in the end it probably won&rsquo;t affect the overall bilateral relationship, especially when it comes to trade and business,&rdquo; said Shi Yinhong, director of the Center for American Studies at Renmin University in Beijing.        

As in Washington, where President Obama is facing a run for re-election next year and accusations of having &ldquo;capitulated to Communist China&rdquo; &mdash; as Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, said this week &mdash; these are delicate times in Beijing. Party leaders are engaged in the politically fraught dance of succession, and they are eager to avoid any self-imposed crises, especially as Vice President Xi Jinping, who is widely expected to become president and Communist Party chief, prepares to visit the United States.        

&ldquo;At a time like this, no one wants to get saddled with a major diplomatic failure that might end up reflecting badly on China,&rdquo; said Clayton Dube, associate director of the U.S.-China Institute at the University of Southern California.        

Beijing also recognizes that the deal stands to benefit Taiwan&rsquo;s president, Ma Ying-jeou, whose tenure has been marked by steadily warming relations with the Chinese mainland. Although China considers Taiwan a breakaway province it lost to civil war more than six decades ago, the governing Communist Party is eager to see Mr. Ma re-elected in the hopes that his policies might one day bring about reunification.        

Even if China&rsquo;s rapidly modernizing military still holds an edge over that of Taiwan, the latest arms deal, like those before it, is a serious irritant to Chinese leaders, who must balance the politics of diplomacy with Taiwan and the United States against the sentiment of its domestic audience, especially military personnel and a vocal contingent of young nationalists who make their views known on the Internet.        

On Thursday, the online version of the People&rsquo;s Daily newspaper, the party&rsquo;s main mouthpiece, ran a series of articles and commentaries that gave voice to the indignation felt by many Chinese.        

In one piece, Maj. Gen. Luo Yuan, deputy secretary general of the Military Science Society, said that China should retaliate with more than just words.        

&ldquo;America is cheating and making a fool out of the Chinese people, and China should learn from Russia and take revenge,&rdquo; he said, referring to a standoff with the United States in Europe in 2008 that led the Russians to move some short-range missiles closer to Western Europe.        

Most experts, however, said the government was likely to ignore such suggestions. In 2010, they pointed out, the Obama administration announced an even larger package of arms to Taiwan worth $6.4 billion. That deal, which included Black Hawk helicopters, missiles and mine-hunting ships, prompted threats of economic retaliation to American companies that manufactured the arms and aircraft.        

In the end, however, the damage was largely contained to a suspension of military exchanges that lasted nearly a year.        

Still, in Beijing&rsquo;s view, even if the most recent package could have been more formidable, the continuing weapon sales to Taiwan feel like a poke in the eye.        

&ldquo;We realize the Obama administration cannot stop arms sales completely, and we&rsquo;ve noticed that the U.S. side showed restraint this time, but from the Chinese perspective, whether you&rsquo;re stabbed once or stabbed twice does not make a big difference,&rdquo; said Da Wei, deputy director of the Institute of American Studies at the China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations.        
Li Bibo and Mia Li contributed research.
