
LONDON &mdash; The British government will compensate relatives of victims of the 1972 Northern Ireland shootings by British troops that became known as &ldquo;Bloody Sunday,&rdquo; the Defense Ministry said on Thursday.        

&ldquo;We acknowledge the pain felt by these families for nearly 40 years, and that members of the armed forces acted wrongly,&rdquo; a spokeswoman for the ministry said. &ldquo;For that, the government is deeply sorry. We are in contact with the families&rsquo; solicitors and where there is a legal liability to pay compensation, we will do so.&rdquo;        

The announcement confirmed that the government was prepared to resolve claims by relatives of the 14 people who were killed by soldiers in a British parachute regiment as they marched in Londonderry on Jan. 30, 1972. Thirteen others were wounded on a day that became a bitter emblem of injustice over three decades of sectarian strife in Northern Ireland in a conflict that claimed more than 3,600 lives and spilled across Britain.        

The agreement to make payouts came after the law firm that is representing most of the families wrote a letter to the British prime minister, David Cameron, in January, according to a statement Thursday from the firm, Madden and Finucane.        

One family immediately announced its intention to refuse any restitution. Linda and Kate Nash told reporters that there were no circumstances under which they would &ldquo;ever accept money&rdquo; for the loss of their brother William, 19. The idea of taking money from the Defense Ministry, they said, was &ldquo;repulsive.&rdquo;        

Investigations in the immediate aftermath of the shootings had exonerated the soldiers, amid unfounded accusations that the troops had been attacked by Irish republican terrorists, and early payouts to families had come without admissions of blame. But Mr. Cameron offered an extraordinary apology in June 2010, saying that an investigation &mdash; one of the longest and most expensive public inquiries in Britain&rsquo;s history &mdash; concluded that the Bloody Sunday shootings were &ldquo;both unjustified and unjustifiable.&rdquo;        

Mr. Cameron, citing the report, said that British troops had fired without warning on unarmed demonstrators.        

&ldquo;On behalf of our country, I am deeply sorry,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said in a speech before Parliament at the time. &ldquo;What happened should never, ever have happened.&rdquo;        

Lord Saville, a senior British judge, led the inquiry, which was conducted from 1998 to 2004. It cost about $283 million.        

The investigation was ordered by Tony Blair when he was prime minister as part of the maneuvering that led to a Northern Ireland peace agreement in 1998.        

The Defense Ministry spokeswoman said that specific details of the new deal were not yet decided. &ldquo;It is the opening of a dialogue,&rdquo; she said.        
Richard Berry contributed reporting from Paris. 
