
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; In his first public appearance since rushing back to Afghanistan after the assassination of the country&rsquo;s leading peace broker, a solemn President Hamid Karzai said Thursday that the Taliban had gained access to their target by wooing senior leaders with an audio CD suggesting that peace was within reach.        

Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s statement and an account from a former Taliban member who helped bring the bomber to the peace broker, Burhanuddin Rabbani, the former Afghan president who led the country&rsquo;s High Peace Council, painted a picture of a dark and complex plot that unfolded over four months to enable the assassin to move in on his target.        

The recording was part of what appears to be a meticulously orchestrated ruse planned by the Taliban to place an assassin in a room with Mr. Rabbani. His death on Tuesday struck a body blow to the peace process and saddled Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s government with yet another crisis.        

Mr. Karzai said the suicide bomber who killed Mr. Rabbani had given Afghan officials a CD in which a Taliban official lauded Mr. Rabbani as a &ldquo;dear&rdquo; and &ldquo;respected&rdquo; teacher.        

&ldquo;We mistook it as a peace message,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai said. &ldquo;That was only deception.&rdquo;        

Mr. Karzai spoke in the majestic sun-dappled garden of the presidential palace as Afghanistan&rsquo;s national intelligence service took Rahmatullah Wahidyar, the member of the High Peace Council who introduced the bomber to Mr. Rabbani, to a news conference in central Kabul.        

Mr. Wahidyar&rsquo;s account largely dovetailed with Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s, indicating that he, too, had been duped, and it raised many questions about why the High Peace Council members were so ready to trust Taliban members they did not know.        

Mr. Wahidyar, a middle-aged former Taliban official with a long black beard, was himself wounded in the attack. Wearing traditional loose-fitting pants and a tunic, he entered the room with help from intelligence officials, hunched over as if in pain. The blast disabled his arm, he said, and left him deaf in one ear. He occasionally cocked his head forward as reporters asked questions.        

His account made clear that the senior High Peace Council members for the past four or five months were utterly committed to making contact with senior Taliban members in an effort to find a way to reach a peace agreement.        

With that goal, they made contact with a man named Abdul Sattar, whom Mr. Wahidyar described as &ldquo;an honest man among the Taliban.&rdquo; Mr. Wahidyar, Mr. Rabbani and Mohammad Massoom Stanekzai, who leads the peace council&rsquo;s secretariat, invited Mr. Sattar to Kabul and then asked him to contact the Quetta Shura, the Taliban leadership council in Pakistan. Mr. Sattar later returned with Hamidullah Akhund, a man trusted by the Taliban, Mr. Wahidyar said.        

Mr. Akhund, whom Mr. Wahidyar also referred to as Akhundzada, came to Kabul twice and met both Mr. Rabbani and Mr. Stanekzai. Mr. Akhund took an audio message from Mr. Rabbani to the Quetta Shura and established a close relationship with Mr. Wahidyar, according to his account.        

Referring to Mr. Akhund, Mr. Wahidyar said: &ldquo;During four months we had continuous contacts with these people through Hamidullah. My number was given through secretariat of peace council, and I also got his number, and we were in contact and he was reporting to us what he did and whom he spoke with.&rdquo;        

Then a week ago, Mr. Akhund called and said the Quetta Shura was ready for talks with the Afghan government. At the time, Mr. Rabbani was traveling in Iran and the Arab gulf states in part to arrange for the establishment of an office for the Taliban in Qatar as a way of furthering the peace talks, Mr. Wahidyar said. Mr. Akhund said that he was not able to bring the message personally to Mr. Rabbani but that a trusted person would do so and bring messages and documents.        

&ldquo;When I told Mr. Stanekzai this, he got very happy,&rdquo; said Mr. Wahidyar, and he instructed his staff to pick up the guest when he arrived and treat him &ldquo;honorably and respectfully and bring the guest to Kabul.&rdquo;        

A few days later, Mr. Wahidyar received a telephone call from a man in Kandahar who said he had been sent by Mr. Akhund. Mr. Wahidyar sped there, using vehicles lent by Mr. Stanekzai, who was on his way back from a quick trip to Pakistan.        

The man sent by the Quetta Shura was housed in a guesthouse kept by the peace council in Kabul, and the guesthouse staff was admonished not to let him leave the grounds. The guest, whose name was Mullah Esmatullah, brought with him two audio clips: the first was for Mr. Stanekzai, and the second was for Mr. Rabbani. The first recording included a warning that only Mr. Rabbani should hear the message addressed to him.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Mr. Karzai, who also heard the audio clip for Mr. Stanekzai, said it was an &ldquo;amazing&rdquo; message. He listened to it shortly before leaving on his trip to the United Nations &mdash; the trip he cut short after Mr. Rabbani was killed.        

&ldquo;There were lots of good messages in that CD,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai said, adding that a deputy of Mr. Rabbani listened excitedly to the recordings.        

Mr. Wahidyar said there were some &ldquo;motivating things&rdquo; in the message. The Taliban repeated that they would return to Afghanistan after the foreign troops left. They also expressed concern that &ldquo;there is lots of adultery in Afghanistan and asked what will the government do about this, and there was some other stuff that I don&rsquo;t remember,&rdquo; he said.        

On Monday, the day before the assassination, Mr. Wahidyar went to check on the Taliban messenger, Mr. Esmatullah. He was not in the guesthouse. Mr. Wahidyar said that he called him, and that Mr. Esmatullah said he had &ldquo;gotten bored and gone out to offer prayers at a nearby mosque.&rdquo;        

The next day, near dusk, Mr. Wahidyar picked up Mr. Esmatullah in his car and drove him to Mr. Rabbani&rsquo;s house. They entered the house, and the secretary for Mr. Rabbani greeted Mr. Wahidyar warmly and asked permission to have guards search the two men.        

&ldquo;I said, &lsquo;Sure,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said Mr. Wahidyar, but it seemed that the guards did not search them well because moments later the bomb exploded just after the two greeted Mr. Rabbani, who was standing next to Mr. Stanekzai in a small room.        

Mr. Esmatullah approached Mr. Rabbani and &ldquo;embraced him, and at this time I heard an explosion,&rdquo; Mr. Wahidyar said. &ldquo;After that I went unconscious. I did not know what happened.&rdquo; When he came to, &ldquo;I saw the guy lying at my feet, and I saw his body without his head.&rdquo;        

Mr. Esmatullah had hidden the explosives in his turban.        

At the end of the his statement, Mr. Wahidyar pledged to continue to try to bring peace, and Mr. Karzai ended his news conference by saying that &ldquo;peace is something that all the people in Afghanistan want.&rdquo;        

The American ambassador here, Ryan C. Crocker, made a statement on Thursday supporting the peace council, but he acknowledged the damage done by Mr. Rabbani&rsquo;s murder.        

He said the attack &ldquo;raises very serious questions as to whether the Taliban and those who support them have any real interest in reconciliation.&rdquo;        
