
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Some say he went shopping and never returned. Others say he was a bargaining chip in a clandestine prisoner swap between Syria and Turkey. Still others insist that he was betrayed.        

One way or another, there he was last week, Lt. Col. Hussein Harmoush, on Syrian state television, the highest-ranking military defector to date, now firmly back in the government&rsquo;s hands and recanting every critical remark he had made only a few months earlier.        

Syria&rsquo;s popular uprising has burned since March, with more than 2,600 dead &mdash; including at least three killed on Friday &mdash; and many thousands arrested. After four decades in power, Assad family rule has been shaken and even the government&rsquo;s closest allies have begun to call for a change.        

But throughout it all, the protests and the crackdown, Syria has tried to conceal the events, sealing its borders to the foreign media. It has refused to allow most international reporters inside, making it hard to know precisely what is happening. Internally it has remained disciplined on its narrative of events, insisting that gangs of thugs and foreigners are responsible for the unrest.        

Colonel Harmoush&rsquo;s case offers a microcosm of the opacity that obscures events in Syria as its leaders press a lethal crackdown.        

Even now, no one seems to know exactly what transpired between June 9, when a video clip was posted on YouTube of Colonel Harmoush announcing that he was splitting from the army in protest at the killings of civilians, and Sept. 15, when Syrian state television triumphantly broadcast an interview with the colonel parroting the government&rsquo;s narrative.        

&ldquo;The story is so ambiguous that it is scary,&rdquo; said Omar Idlibi, an activist with the Local Coordination Committees, a group of activists who track and help plan the uprising. &ldquo;We have not found any source to tell what happened exactly,&rdquo; he said from Beirut. &ldquo;The Syrian authorities did not say how he was arrested, and the Turkish officials did not give any details.&rdquo;        

According to activists, Colonel Harmoush deserted his post along with several soldiers from his unit in early June, during an attack on Jisr al-Shoughour, a town near the Turkish border in northwest Syria. That incident itself remains murky: activists say it was a clash between rival military units, but the government says it was a slaughter perpetrated by Islamist militants. Either way, hundreds were killed, and thousands fled over the border into Turkey, where the authorities helped construct camps for them that are still there.        

Colonel Harmoush was one of those who fled to Turkey, and while he was a refugee there, declared that he was going to lead a movement of disaffected officers against the Syrian government.        

But on Aug. 29, he disappeared from the camp in circumstances that are unclear.        

A relative of the colonel from his hometown, Ebleen, in the northwestern province of Idlib, said that he last heard from Colonel Harmoush on Aug. 27, when the colonel called to tell him that he was scheduled to meet with Turkish intelligence officers and to expect good news in two days.        

Some Syrian refugees in Turkey, reached by telephone, said that Colonel Harmoush met with Turkish officials in the Hatay refugee camp on that day, and then went with them on an unspecified trip. Others in the camp said that he left the camp to go shopping and never came back.        

Human rights activists from Avaaz, a group that helps document protests, said they believed that the Turkish authorities handed Colonel Harmoush back to Syria in exchange for nine members of the Kurdistan Workers Party, an insurgent group that has been fighting for Kurdish autonomy in southeastern Turkey since the early 1980s. The activists offered no proof of their claim.        

Another account given by activists and refugees suggested that Colonel Harmoush had been invited to dinner on Aug. 29 along with two other officers who also defected. According to this version, the three Syrians were then drugged and smuggled back across the border to Syria with the help of Turkish intelligence officers. The whereabouts of the other two officers are not known.        

None of the accounts could be verified. Turkish officials insisted that they had nothing to do with the affair, and said that a recent investigation had led to the arrest in Turkey of three men, two Syrians and an Iranian, who are believed to be Syrian intelligence operatives.        

In an interview, the Turkish foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, angrily denied that Turkey had played any role in Colonel Harmoush&rsquo;s return to Syria.        

&ldquo;This is not true at all,&rdquo; he said on Sunday. &ldquo;He himself decided to go back. Whoever wants to go back, they can go back. We don&rsquo;t prevent them.&rdquo;        

In his appearance on Syrian state television last week, Colonel Harmoush did not say when or how he had returned to Syria. He said he had been thinking about returning for weeks, but was nonetheless &ldquo;shocked to be used in a trade.&rdquo; He did not explain.        

For 20 minutes in the broadcast, Colonel Harmoush, his face grim, answered questions that seemed intended to humiliate him. Some of his answers seemed rehearsed.        

&ldquo;What were the reasons for your defection?&rdquo; the anchor asked.        

&ldquo;The reasons are the bloody events that we witnessed on the streets,&rdquo; he answered.        

&ldquo;What does bloody mean?&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Bloody means there were a lot of dead people, killed on the streets.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Who was killing the civilians?&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The gangs,&rdquo; Colonel Harmoush answered.        

&ldquo;Armed gangs?&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Armed gangs, of course. They were killing civilians,&rdquo; he finally said.        

On state television, Colonel Harmoush said that at least 300 Syrian pro-democracy activists and dissidents had contacted him during his three months in Turkey, but that none of their promises were kept.        

&ldquo;We were drafting a plan to protect unarmed civilians,&rdquo; he told the interviewer. &ldquo;They told me, &lsquo;You will be provided with weapons and money and logistical support for the liberation,&rsquo; but these were all empty promises.&rdquo;        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and Anthony Shadid from Ankara, Turkey.
