
SANA, Yemen &mdash; President Ali Abdullah Saleh made a sudden return to Yemen on Friday after almost four months in a Saudi hospital, stunning his partisans and opponents alike, leaving many wondering whether his presence here in the capital would calm or worsen the political crisis that has gripped Yemen for six months.        

While United States officials, apparently caught off guard by Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s return, said he should relinquish power, the besieged president called for a cease-fire after five days of bloody clashes on the streets of the capital. About 70 people have been killed since Sunday in gun battles between government troops and soldiers allied with the opposition.        

&ldquo;The solution is not in the barrels of guns and cannon, but in dialogue,&rdquo; Mr. Saleh said in a statement released by the state news agency. The report also said he planned to deliver a speech on Sunday.        

As word spread of Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s return earlier in the day, gunfire broke out across the capital &mdash; much of it celebratory &mdash; and mixed with the thundering of artillery as clashes continued in the city center. Protesters in cities across Yemen reacted with rage and defiance, though their voices have largely been drowned out in a conflict now dominated by armed tribesmen and soldiers.        

Late in the day, fighting spread to the northern neighborhood of Hasaba, where government troops fought a bloody two-week battle with opposition tribal fighters in May. Around midnight, shells and sniper fire rained down on an antigovernment sit-in along a two-mile stretch of the Ring Road.        

&ldquo;They are firing at us by bomb and everything,&rdquo; said Nader al-Qershi, a youth protest leader, who said that he and a small group of friends fled inside the gates of Sana&rsquo;s Old University to escape the fighting.        

Mr. Saleh has not been in Yemen since June, when he left to seek medical treatment in Saudi Arabia after a bomb blast at his palace mosque left him seriously burned and killed several guards and a member of the governing party. A government investigation of the blast, with forensic assistance from the F.B.I., is expected to release its conclusions soon, and that could also have unpredictable effects on Yemen&rsquo;s tense political scene. Yemeni officials have hinted that the report may point to Maj. Gen. Ali Mohsin al-Ahmar, a top-ranking general who defected to the opposition in May, as the culprit.        

Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s return was shrouded in mystery, with many diplomats saying they were not aware of it until it was broadcast by state television. Saudi and American diplomats had urged Mr. Saleh to stay in Riyadh, fearing that his return would provoke more violence. But neither country felt it had the right to dictate terms to him, according to one Western diplomat who spoke on condition of anonymity, under standard diplomatic protocol.        

Obama administration officials appeared surprised by Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s return, though they acknowledged the possibility had existed for weeks following his recovery. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton met in New York with ministers from the Persian Gulf states that make up the Gulf Cooperation Council only hours after his arrival in Yemen.        

The council has brokered a plan for a political transition that would lead to Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s departure from power after 33 years of autocratic rule, and Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, reiterated American support for that plan and for a peaceful political transition.        

&ldquo;Whether President Saleh is in or out of the country, he can make that happen by signing this accord, stepping down from power and allowing his country to move forward,&rdquo; Ms. Nuland said.        

Mr. Saleh, who has long seen himself as the lone guarantor of his country&rsquo;s unity, hopes to re-establish his frayed authority by calming the recent round of violence, according to Yemeni officials and analysts on both sides of the political divide.        
Laura Kasinof reported from Sana, and Robert F. Worth from Washington. J. David Goodman contributed reporting from New York, and Steven Lee Myers from the United Nations.
