
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; The Zambian opposition leader Michael Sata, a 74-year-old veteran politician who had whipped up not-so-subtle anti-Chinese sentiment (China runs several big mines in Zambia), handily won the presidency in election results announced Friday.        

It was a rare example in Africa of an opposition candidate&rsquo;s cruising to victory and, perhaps more important, the incumbent&rsquo;s graciously admitting defeat.        

Rupiah Banda, who was elected president in 2008, tearfully acknowledged that he had lost and called for his supporters to recognize Mr. Sata as president, paving the way for a smooth transition of power. News services reported that Mr. Sata was sworn in to office on Friday.        

Zambia, a sparsely populated, copper-rich country in southern Africa, had been ruled by the same party for 20 years. But Mr. Sata, a former government minister who once worked as a railway porter and is popularly known as &ldquo;King Cobra&rdquo; for his fierce tongue, tapped into anger about the deplorable conditions in Zambia&rsquo;s Chinese-run mines.        

On Friday, he said, &ldquo;Foreign investment is important to Zambia, and we will continue to work with foreign investors who are welcome in the country.&rdquo;        

But, he warned, &ldquo;they need to adhere to the labor laws.&rdquo;        

Last year, Chinese managers opened fire on protesters at a huge coal mine in southern Zambia, and though the Zambian government initially indicated that the Chinese managers would be punished, the charges were quietly dropped. The shootings outraged many Zambians who resent China&rsquo;s enormous economic influence over their country, where most people live on less than $5 a day, and the episode seemed to feed straight into Mr. Sata&rsquo;s political campaign.        

On Friday, Mr. Banda said, &ldquo;The people of Zambia have spoken, and we must all listen.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;Now is not the time for violence and retribution. Now is the time to unite and build tomorrow&rsquo;s Zambia together.&rdquo;        

A smooth transition of power is nothing to be taken for granted in this part of the world. Kenya exploded in violence in 2007 after a deeply flawed election kept the president in power, and Robert Mugabe&rsquo;s refusal to give up the reins in Zimbabwe in 2008 set off nationwide bloodshed.        

In Ethiopia in 2005, government forces gunned down hundreds of opposition supporters after a contested election. And in Ivory Coast last year, the president&rsquo;s refusal to acknowledge that he had been roundly defeated plunged the country into months of suspense, turmoil and ultimately violence before he was finally captured.        

On Friday, all reports indicated that Zambia was calm and that Mr. Banda&rsquo;s supporters had accepted the result &mdash; 43 percent to 36 percent, with most votes counted. The election was held Tuesday, but totals were delayed after hackers infiltrated the government&rsquo;s vote-tallying Web site.        

&ldquo;Everyone is very happy,&rdquo; said Guy Scott, a politician in Mr. Sata&rsquo;s party. &ldquo;There were no signs of trouble, no signs of anything. This election is not going to be Kenya-fied, Zimbabwe-fied or Ivory Coast-ified.&rdquo;        
