
BERLIN &mdash; Pope Benedict XVI made a historic visit on Friday to the monastery where Martin Luther studied before he initiated the Reformation that led to a split from the Catholic Church nearly 500 years ago.        

By visiting the monastery in the eastern German city of Erfurt, a region that is considered the heartland of German Protestantism, and holding an ecumenical service in its stone chapel, the pope sought to emphasize how far relations had improved between the Catholic and Protestant churches.        

Benedict praised Luther for his &ldquo;deep passion and driving force in his beliefs.&rdquo; But he made no mention of how the two faiths could achieve greater unity, which some Lutheran leaders had been hoping for.        

Still, the fact that he had chosen to visit Erfurt, an old university city that had been part of communist East Germany, showed that the Vatican wanted to forge closer ties with Protestantism.        

&ldquo;It must be recalled that the pope has come to this monastery in Erfurt as a gesture that is an indication that he is fully aware of its meaning,&rdquo; said Thies Gundlach, a deputy in the German Lutheran Church.        

Nikolaus Schneider, leader of Germany&rsquo;s Lutheran Church, told the pope that &ldquo;it is time to take real steps for reconciliation.&rdquo;        

Mr. Schneider even suggested that Catholics join Protestants in marking the 500th anniversary of Luther&rsquo;s 95 theses, which he is said to have nailed to the door of the Castle church in Wittenberg, not far from Erfurt, demanding changes in the Catholic Church.        

Luther, a professor of theology, was ordained in Erfurt and lived in the Augustine monastery as a monk before he protested the tenets of the Catholic Church in 1517.        

After his visit, the pope traveled to a small chapel to honor Catholics who had resisted Communist rule. He then said an open-air Mass in Etzelsbach, where more than 70,000 pilgrims had gathered, according to the organizers.        

Earlier in the second day of his visit to Germany, Benedict met with the Muslim community in Berlin in a bid to improve interfaith relations.        

The German-born pope was facing far fewer protesters than on Thursday, when up to 10,000 people gathered in Berlin to demonstrate against his visit.        

During his talks with Muslim leaders, he called for Christianity and Islam to forge &ldquo;a relationship based on dialogue and mutual esteem.&rdquo;        

Muslim leaders had been cautious in expecting any major speech or initiative by the pope. During a previous visit to Germany in 2006, Benedict delivered a long speech at the University of Regensburg in which he appeared to link Islam with violence.        

This time, he emphasized the similarities that bind the two faiths. &ldquo;I am thinking, for example, of the protection of the family based in marriage, respect for life in every phase of its natural course or the promotion of greater social justice,&rdquo; the pope said during his meeting with Muslim community leaders.        
