
This article was written by 

Mark Mazzetti, 

Scott Shane and 
Alissa J. Rubin.        

WASHINGTON &mdash; They are the Sopranos of the Afghanistan war, a ruthless crime family that built an empire out of kidnapping, extortion, smuggling, even trucking. They have trafficked in precious gems, stolen lumber and demanded protection money from businesses building roads and schools with American reconstruction funds.        

They safeguard their mountainous turf by planting deadly roadside bombs and shelling remote American military bases. And they are accused by American officials of being guns for hire: a proxy force used by the Pakistani intelligence service to carry out grisly, high-profile attacks in Kabul and throughout the country.        

Today, American intelligence and military officials call the crime clan known as the Haqqani network &mdash; led by a wizened militant named Jalaluddin Haqqani who has allied himself over the years with the C.I.A., Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s spy service and Osama bin Laden &mdash; the most deadly insurgent group in Afghanistan. In the latest of a series of ever bolder strikes, the group staged a daylong assault on the United States Embassy in Kabul, an attack Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, charged Thursday was aided by Pakistan&rsquo;s military spy agency, the Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence, or ISI. According to two American officials, cellphones used by the attackers made calls to suspected ISI operatives before the attack, although top Pakistani officials deny their government played any role.        

But even as the Americans pledge revenge against the Haqqanis, and even amid a new debate in the Obama administration about how to blunt the group&rsquo;s power, there is a growing belief that it could be too late. To many frustrated officials, they represent a missed opportunity with haunting consequences. Responsible for hundreds of American deaths, the Haqqanis probably will outlast the United States troops in Afghanistan and command large swaths of territory there once the shooting stops.        

American military officers, who have spent years urging Washington to take action against the Haqqanis, express anger that the Obama administration has still not put the group on the State Department&rsquo;s list of terrorist organizations out of concern that such a move would scuttle any chances that the group might make peace with Afghanistan&rsquo;s government.        

&ldquo;Whoever is in power in Kabul will have to make a deal with the Haqqanis,&rdquo; said Marc Sageman, a former C.I.A. officer who served in Pakistan during the Soviet-Afghan war. &ldquo;It won&rsquo;t be us. We&rsquo;re going to leave, and those guys know it.&rdquo;        

When their threat was less urgent, the Haqqanis &mdash; estimated at 5,000 to 15,000 fighters in the mountains of Afghanistan and Pakistan &mdash; were not a top priority for the Americans. But even then the United States also had little leverage against them. The Haqqanis have expanded their reach and numbers as top American officials have tried repeatedly over the last decade to berate and cajole officials in Pakistan to cut ties to a group it considers essential for its own security, all with little effect.        

&ldquo;Some have become convinced that after 10 years, it&rsquo;s a bridge too far to try to change Pakistan&rsquo;s strategic calculus,&rdquo; said Col. Bob Cassidy, who recently returned from Kabul after serving as a top aide to Lt. Gen. David Rodriguez, a senior American commander in Afghanistan.        

Now largely run by two of Mr. Haqqani&rsquo;s sons, who experts say are even more committed Islamists than their father, the network is in a position of strength as the United States tries to broker a peace deal in Afghanistan before pulling its troops from the country.        

In recent days, top Haqqani network leaders have indicated that they are willing to negotiate, but on their own terms. The group maintains close ties to the Taliban, but often works independently, and some intelligence officials see Haqqani operations like the American Embassy attack this month as a very public message from the group that it will not be cut out of any grand bargain.        

One former American intelligence official, who worked with the Haqqani family in Afghanistan during the Soviet occupation in the 1980s, said he would not be surprised if the United States again found itself relying on the clan.        

&ldquo;You always said about them, &lsquo;best friend, worst enemy.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

 Militia and Ministate        

With a combination of guns and muscle, the Haqqani network has built a sprawling enterprise on both sides of a border that barely exists.        

The Haqqanis are Afghan members of the Zadran tribe, but it is in the town of Miram Shah in Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal areas where they have set up a ministate with courts, tax offices and radical madrasa schools producing a ready supply of fighters. They secretly run a network of front companies throughout Pakistan selling cars and real estate, and have been tied to at least two factories churning out the ammonium nitrate used to build roadside bombs in Afghanistan.        
Mark Mazzetti and Scott Shane reported from Washington, and Alissa J. Rubin from Kabul, Afghanistan. Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington.
