
BERLIN &mdash; The German police said Saturday that they had arrested a man suspected of shooting a security guard with an air gun in the eastern city of Erfurt shortly before Pope Benedict XVI was about to celebrate Mass.        

But the Vatican spokesman, the Rev. Federico Lombardi, said there was &ldquo;no worry&rdquo; for the papal entourage. The episode occurred close to the zone established to protect the pope and carry out security checks on the pilgrims.        

Thousands of pilgrims had already lined up during the early hours of the cold morning to get as close as possible to the pope.        

A local police spokesman said the man was arrested in his apartment in Erfurt, from where the shots were fired, Agence France-Presse reported. The shots were fired about two hours before Benedict, 84, began celebrating Mass in front of 30,000 people. No one was injured.        

The pope was beginning the third day of his four-day official visit to Germany, where security has been extremely tight. He had already faced large protests in Berlin on Thursday, where the German-born pope addressed the Bundestag, or Parliament.        

On Friday, the pope reached out to other faiths, meeting Muslims in Berlin and later the leadership of the Protestant Church in Erfurt. It was in Erfurt where Martin Luther studied before he initiated the Protestant Reform that led to a split from the Catholic Church nearly 500 years ago.        

Luther, a professor of theology, was ordained in Erfurt and lived in an Augustine monastery as a monk before he protested against the tenets of the Catholic Church in 1517.        

In an unannounced meeting on Friday evening, Benedict also met with victims of sexual abuse by priests. He expressed &ldquo;deep compassion and regret.&rdquo;        

The pope met for half an hour with five victims after he had held an ecumenical service with members of the Lutheran Church.        

Victims&rsquo; groups and their lawyers have accused the pope of refusing to address the issue openly and of a cover-up. Hundreds of Germans came forward last year with stories of having been physically or sexually abused by members of the Catholic clergy.        

After the meeting with the victims in Erfurt, the Vatican said in a statement that the pope was &ldquo;moved and deeply shaken.&rdquo; He expressed the hope that God &ldquo;may heal the wounds of the victims and grant them inner peace,&rdquo; the Vatican said.        

Father Lombardi said the victims were two women and three men from across Germany. He said the meeting was &ldquo;very calm.&rdquo;        
