
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Afghan officials said Sunday that they had arrested a man connected to the Taliban militants who sent a suicide bomber to kill the leader of Afghanistan&rsquo;s peace process.        

Few details were released about the suspect in the killing, Hamidullah Akhund, or the circumstances of the arrest. Sifatullah Safi, a government spokesman, said only that Mr. Akhund was detained &ldquo;somewhere in Kabul in the past days&rdquo; and was being investigated by Afghan intelligence agents.        

President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan and his government have come under intense pressure from political rivals and the Afghan public to arrest whoever was responsible for the plot to assassinate Burhanuddin Rabbani, a former president and the head of the High Peace Council. Mr. Rabbani&rsquo;s death last Tuesday was a severe blow to the government&rsquo;s struggle to negotiate peace with the Taliban. It also threatens to open fresh rifts among the country&rsquo;s ethnic groups. The killer posed as a Taliban emissary carrying conciliatory messages. He was escorted into Mr. Rabbani&rsquo;s heavily guarded home on Tuesday and then set off explosives hidden in his turban as he greeted Mr. Rabbani.        

Since then, Afghan officials have revealed fragments of a coordinated plot that led the killer, identified as Mullah Esmatullah, toward Mr. Rabbani. They said Mr. Akhund was a critical interlocutor between the peace council and Taliban leaders in Quetta, Pakistan, near the Afghan border. Beginning four months ago, Mr. Akhund traveled to Kabul twice to meet with Mr. Rabbani and another member of the High Peace Council, Masoom Stanekzai, according to an account given at a news conference this week by Ramatullah Wahidyar, a former Taliban member who now serves on the council.        

Mr. Akhund recorded an audio message from Mr. Rabbani to the Taliban, which he promised to deliver, and passed along reports of his progress and conversations with high-ranking Taliban leaders, Mr. Wahidyar said.        

About a week ago, he said, Mr. Akhund called with news of what seemed like a breakthrough: the Quetta group was ready to talk to the Afghan government, and had an important message to send. Mr. Akhund said he could not go to Kabul personally, but would send a man he trusted, Mr. Wahidyar said. The substitute turned out to be the bomber.        

In eastern Afghanistan, a new barrage of shelling from the Pakistani side of the border drew condemnation from Afghan officials. An American official in the area who spoke on the condition of anonymity said that about 100 families had fled their homes in Kunar Province because of the shelling. Over the summer, more than 40 Afghans were killed by rockets and artillery fired from Pakistan over the course of five weeks. The mountainous area around the ill-marked border is rife with militant activity and it is rarely possible to determine responsibility for each explosion. But Pakistan&rsquo;s military has previously acknowledged firing at people suspected of being militants crossing into Afghanistan.        

In Kabul on Sunday, insurgents attacked the Central Intelligence Agency station, the latest indication of their ability to strike at the most fortified American installations in the capital. Witnesses in Afghanistan said bursts of gunfire were heard and helicopters swooped overhead. An American official in Washington confirmed that the attack took place but gave no further details, and declined to say whether there had been any casualties.        

The C.I.A. station in Kabul, the agency&rsquo;s largest outpost overseas, is in the Ariana Hotel, part of the sprawling United States Embassy complex. On Sept. 13, militants carried out a daylong attack on another part of the embassy grounds, and top American officials have attributed that attack to a group called the Haqqani network, which they say is supported by parts of Pakistan&rsquo;s spy service, the Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence. A C.I.A. spokesman declined to comment about Sunday&rsquo;s attack.        

The NATO-led International Security Assistance Force also reported that two of its soldiers were killed in separate attacks in eastern Afghanistan on Sunday, each involving bombs.        
Mark Mazzetti contributed reporting from Washington.
