
MOSCOW &mdash; When Lyubov Volkova, 63, woke up on Sunday, it was a few moments before she remembered what had happened.        

She had spent the summer examining President Dmitri A. Medvedev&rsquo;s face like a psychoanalyst, looking for signs that he had a chance to stay in power. An activist since the anti-Soviet uprisings of the late 1980s, Ms. Volkova felt an infusion of hope when Mr. Medvedev forced the subjects of corruption and judicial misconduct into the open.        

On Sunday she awoke to the reality that Vladimir V. Putin had, in effect, appointed himself president, and she knew that the aspirations of the Mikhail S. Gorbachev era had been snuffed out.        

She compared it to a science fiction story by Ray Bradbury in which the death of a butterfly sets off a cascade of events that change history. At some point in their 20-year path, she said, Russians lost interest in democratic reform.        

&ldquo;Sometime &mdash; maybe not 20 years ago, but maybe 17 years ago &mdash; the butterfly was crushed, and the consciousness of the Russian citizens traveled along a different path,&rdquo; Ms. Volkova said. &ldquo;Something happened, maybe in 1994, or maybe in 1996. Different people began to grow up here. They will accept anything.&rdquo;        

Russia&rsquo;s liberals, a small but influential slice of the population, have faced lacerating truths this month.        

Mr. Putin, who dominates politics here, is popular with members of the overall public in Russia, who have seen steady gains in their living standards over the last decade. And though he is an unapologetic advocate of centralized power, his government has offered political vehicles for the educated elites who disagree. Chief among these vehicles was Mr. Medvedev, Mr. Putin&rsquo;s successor as president, who as a candidate promised to fight &ldquo;legal nihilism&rdquo; and &ldquo;limitless corruption.&rdquo; Another was Right Cause, a hastily created opposition party whose leader vowed to introduce genuine competition to Parliament.        

Now those vehicles appear hollow. On Saturday, Mr. Putin announced that he and Mr. Medvedev had agreed &ldquo;several years ago&rdquo; that the younger man would cede the presidency to him in 2012, suggesting that Mr. Medvedev had served as merely a convenient placeholder all along. Two weeks ago, the leader of Right Cause quit in a scandal, complaining of oppressive Kremlin control. The political fog has cleared to reveal certainties: Mr. Putin never had any intention of leaving power, and he has maneuvered so that he can remain until 2024.        

Liberal-minded Muscovites poured out their despair on the Internet on Sunday, passing around a portrait of Mr. Putin superimposed on Leonid Brezhnev, whose 18-year rule became known as the &ldquo;era of stagnation.&rdquo; The political scientist Sergei M. Markedonov said the news put him in mind of Charles Talleyrand&rsquo;s description of Napoleon&rsquo;s army as it crossed into Russia, toward a catastrophic defeat.        

&ldquo;&nbsp;&lsquo;The beginning of the end&rsquo; &mdash; you cannot think of a better diagnosis,&rdquo; he wrote in a posting on his Facebook page. &ldquo;Putin as president &mdash; that is the beginning of the end. I don&rsquo;t give a damn who of them is on top, and who is on the bottom. But the institutionalization of Putin as president &mdash; that is total stagnation. It is the victory of a corrupt oligarchy. It is the failure of modernization.&rdquo;        

Others turned their anger on Mr. Medvedev, who, during his three and a half years in office, has put forward an ambitious modernization agenda and critiqued some of his predecessor&rsquo;s policies.        

&ldquo;Doesn&rsquo;t he wish to explain to his fellow citizens, those who trusted him to be the guarantor of their rights and freedoms, to be their commander in chief, why he suddenly decided to voluntarily leave his post?&rdquo; wrote Vladimir Varfolomeyev, a journalist for the radio station Ekho Moskvy, on his blog.        

&ldquo;At the convention he only spoke in generalities about his readiness to engage in &lsquo;the practical work of the government&rsquo; and about a &lsquo;party&rsquo; career,&rdquo; Mr. Varfolomeyev wrote. &ldquo;This will not be enough. At this point it looks like an extremely disrespectful attitude to the citizens of Russia.&rdquo;        

As for Ms. Volkova, she listened to the broadcast of Saturday&rsquo;s party convention alone in her apartment, which she said was too modest to show to a reporter.        
Michael Schwirtz contributed reporting.
