
JERUSALEM &mdash; A government-appointed committee on socioeconomic change, set up in the wake of the social protests that swept Israel this summer, proposed new policies on Monday that are intended to ease the high cost of living. The plan would cost an estimated $8 billion over five years, to be financed partly by cuts to the defense budget.        

Manuel Trajtenberg, a respected professor of economics at Tel Aviv University who led the committee over its seven weeks of work, presented its recommendations to the prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, and then to the public in a televised news conference.        

Professor Trajtenberg, who described the summer&rsquo;s popular social protest movement as authentic, said the committee had tried to lay the foundation for a more just society.        

Despite the continuing threats against Israel, he said, &ldquo;Social security is no less important than physical security,&rdquo; adding that it was necessary to find a new balance between those two factors. The fruits of Israel&rsquo;s economic growth, he said, should be more evenly shared.        

The committee&rsquo;s recommendations include the construction of almost 200,000 apartments over the next five years, the availability of more apartments for rent and an increase in housing subsidies for the needy. The panel also recommended raising taxes on the wealthy and on corporations, and it called for free education for children starting at age 3 &mdash; it now begins at age 5 &mdash; and for the construction of more day care centers.        

But critics said the proposals just moved money around within the existing budget framework and did not present any drastic change to the system.        

The protest movement&rsquo;s grass-roots leaders, some of whom rejected the Trajtenberg committee from the outset as a fig leaf for the government&rsquo;s shortcomings, said they would put forward alternative ideas on Tuesday. The social movement began in mid-July when a group of young Israelis pitched tents in the center of Tel Aviv to protest the inflated price of housing.        

Daphni Leef, who pitched the first tent and invited others to join her on Facebook, said she was disappointed in the committee&rsquo;s conclusions and said the panel had adopted the protesters&rsquo; language to &ldquo;mislead the public.&rdquo;        

The government must still adopt the recommendations and decide how they will be carried out. Professor Trajtenberg said he believed that they would all be approved.        

Mr. Netanyahu said the proposals were a social and economic milestone for Israel, and he suggested that the defense establishment could be run with more efficiency and transparency. But the recommendations are bound to face hurdles, particularly from defense officials who fiercely oppose a budget cut, citing the threats to Israel arising from growing instability in the region.        

Ram Belinkov, who used to be in charge of budgets in the Finance Ministry, told Israel Radio on Monday that it was possible to cut the defense budget without harming the country, and he suggested that military officials could start by &ldquo;driving less fancy cars.&rdquo;        

Meanwhile, there was growing concern over how the authorities had handled the deaths of a 25-year-old Israeli man and his infant son after their car overturned Friday on a road near Hebron in the West Bank.        

The authorities initially said that the two had died in a road accident, but a police spokesman said on Monday that a subsequent investigation concluded that the crash occurred after the man was struck in the head by a stone.        

A nonintrusive autopsy performed Sunday on the dead man, Asher Palmer, who lived nearby in the Kiryat Arba settlement, showed that he had suffered a serious head injury from a rock that was found in the car, said the spokesman, Micky Rosenfeld. Mr. Palmer&rsquo;s year-old son, Yonatan, was killed when the car overturned.        

The victims&rsquo; relatives and settler activists maintained from the outset that the car crashed after coming under attack from Palestinians who were throwing stones. The relatives and settlers accused the Israeli military and the police of trying to cover up the facts, fearing more violence in the hours before the Palestinian president was scheduled to address the United Nations and submit a request for membership and recognition of a Palestinian state.        

The Israeli authorities recently expressed concern that some radical-extremist settlers could set off a round of violence, and settlers&rsquo; security teams had been preparing for Palestinian marches on West Bank settlements.        

The Israeli military issued a statement on Monday saying that it &ldquo;categorically rejects accusations of intentionally misleading reports&rdquo; about the Palmers&rsquo; deaths. It added that initial examinations conducted by the military, and backed by the police, suggested that no rocks were thrown at the vehicle from the side of the road. The police &ldquo;have since made additional findings,&rdquo; it said.        

Earlier Friday, a Palestinian boy had been run over by an Israeli car in the same area of the West Bank and died. The police said that the boy died in an accident and that there was no connection between the two events.        
