
The Iranian lawyer for the two American hikers released on bail and repatriated last week after a two-year odyssey through Iran&rsquo;s penal system appeared to distance himself from his clients in an interview published on Monday, calling their accusations of mistreatment baseless and politically motivated.        

The comments by the lawyer, Masoud Shafiei, made in an interview with Iran&rsquo;s Fars News Agency, came a day after a news conference held in New York by the Americans, Joshua F. Fattal and Shane M. Bauer, both 29. In their first comments on American soil, they provided new details about their captivity in Iran on spying and trespass charges before their release on $500,000 bail each, granted Sept. 21 by Iran&rsquo;s judiciary.        

The Americans said their captors had regularly blindfolded them and withheld mail sent by their families. Sometimes, they said, they heard the screams of other inmates at Tehran&rsquo;s Evin Prison, where they spent 781 days.        

In the Fars News Agency interview, Mr. Shafiei cast doubt on the Americans&rsquo; accusations. If they had been mistreated, Mr. Shafiei was quoted as saying, they could have raised a complaint during their court hearings.        

&ldquo;If my clients contact me, as an Iranian national, I will definitely inform them of my protest at their baseless claims,&rdquo; the lawyer was quoted as saying. &ldquo;Why have they made such allegations when their problem has been resolved and they have left the country?&rdquo;        

Reached by telephone after Fars published the interview, Mr. Shafiei said some of his comments had been misconstrued. He said he was never able to consult with his clients in private and therefore did not know about their claims of mistreatment. Nonetheless, Mr. Shafiei did not deny the Fars account or say he would seek a retraction.        

Asked about his legal fee for representing the Americans, Mr. Shafiei said he had been paid, but he declined to specify the amount.        

The mixed messages from the lawyer may reflect the difficulty he faces in navigating Iran&rsquo;s judicial system. He is known for his specialty of representing clients with American-linked legal problems, and may have been under some political pressure to repudiate the accusations by Mr. Fattal and Mr. Bauer in order to preserve his business.        

Mr. Fattal, Mr. Bauer and a third American hiker, Sarah E. Shourd, Mr. Bauer&rsquo;s fianc&eacute;e, were arrested by the Iranian frontier authorities in July 2009 while hiking on the northern Iraqi border with Iran. Ms. Shourd was released on $500,000 bail and left Iran a year ago. All three contended that if they had strayed into Iran, it was an innocent mistake.        

An Iranian court convicted Mr. Fattal and Mr. Bauer of espionage and trespass charges earlier this year and sentenced both to eight years in prison. Prosecutors never presented evidence of their claims that the Americans were spies.        

The case was seen as a public relations problem for Iran, and confusing statements from the country&rsquo;s leaders about the hikers&rsquo; fate appeared to reflect deeper signs of friction within the government about the estranged Iran-American relationship.        

Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Iran&rsquo;s president, announced on Sept. 13 that the Americans would be freed imminently, just as he was departing for the annual United Nations General Assembly meeting. But judicial authorities contradicted him, asserting that it was not up to the president to make such pronouncements. The order granting the hikers&rsquo; release did not come for another week.        

Although the spying case against all three hikers remains open, none of them are expected to return to Iran, and the bail money paid to the Iranian authorities essentially amounted to a ransom for their freedom.        
Artin Afkhami contributed reporting from Boston.
