
LONDON &mdash; With the leaders of both parties in the governing coalition pledged to uphold their pact until a new election in 2015, Britain, at least on the face of it, has the basis for political stability as it wrestles with the financial crisis roiling Europe and the apparent drift of Britain&rsquo;s own economy toward stagnation.        

But as it approaches the 18th-month mark, Britain&rsquo;s first peacetime coalition government in nearly 70 years has come to resemble a leaky boat in heaving seas. A groundswell of unease in both parties, the Conservatives under Prime Minister David Cameron and the Liberal Democrats under the deputy prime minister, Nick Clegg, has heightened the underlying political tensions and raised new doubts about how long the pact will last.        

If most political analysts believe that the coalition will endure, their judgment rests less on inherent strength in the partnership than in the reluctance of all three major parties, including Labour, which governed for 13 years until the May 2010 election, to agree to an early election. Voters, too, seem opposed to an early election, especially at a time of deepening economic uncertainty.        

Each fall, their annual conferences provide a showcase for the parties. This week, with Labour meeting in Liverpool, marks the midpoint; the Liberal Democrats met last week in Birmingham and the Conservatives gather next week in Manchester. Exhaustive television coverage attracts mainly political wonks, but the conferences can present hazards for the party leaders, especially when powerful blocs are close to open revolt, or at least in vigorous dissent.        

That is the case for all three parties this year, with the touchstones being the economy and the government&rsquo;s harsh program of public spending cuts, averaging close to 20 percent across the board over the government&rsquo;s projected four-year span. Although the cuts were announced last fall, they began to bite more deeply this summer.        

In the past week, the economic news has gotten worse, emboldening the left wings of Labour and the Liberal Democrats to argue that the government&rsquo;s bid to cut record levels of government borrowing &mdash; said by Mr. Cameron to be worse, proportionally, than in Greece, Italy and Spain &mdash; has been a case of &ldquo;too far, too fast.&rdquo; Many of these critics say the government should ease the cuts and follow the Obama administration, which advocates a combination of cuts and new stimulus spending to try to reduce unemployment.        

The latest figures &mdash; more than 2.5 million people in a British work force of 30 million out of work; inflation rising to 4.5 percent, the highest in years; and limp quarterly growth, at little more than 1 percent annually &mdash; have led some experts to predict an extended period of stagflation. With the economy weakening, monthly government borrowing, which had been falling, rose sharply again in August. This suggests that the austerity plan is, at least for now, failing either to stimulate the economy or cut the deficit, as the government had promised.        

But Mr. Cameron, in New York last week for the United Nations General Assembly, said the government would hold course. &ldquo;You have got to deal with the debts,&rdquo; he told ABC News. It was, he said, &ldquo;vitally important to prove to the world that we can pay our way.&rdquo; That has been the message, too, from Mr. Clegg, who told the Liberal Democrats&rsquo; conference that the historic burden of debt bequeathed by the Labour government had left Britain &ldquo;teetering on the edge of an economic precipice.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Burying your head in the sand, that&rsquo;s not liberal,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Saddling our children with the nation&rsquo;s debt, that&rsquo;s not fair.&rdquo;        

Mr. Clegg emerged from the conference with what amounted to a reluctant assent from many of the delegates to remain in the coalition. But the coalition endured a barrage of hostility.        

The party&rsquo;s president, Tim Farron, made a speech in which he described &ldquo;divorce&rdquo; from the Conservatives after four years as inevitable. Taunting the Conservatives with words like &ldquo;wickedness,&rdquo; &ldquo;reactionary Tory drivel&rdquo; and &ldquo;witless knee-jerk populism,&rdquo; he added: &ldquo;Being in coalition with the Tories has tainted us. Our identity is blurred. Many who support us are confused.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
The barrage extended to Liberal Democrat ministers. Chris Huhne, the energy minister, compared Conservative backbenchers restless with the concessions Mr. Cameron has made to the Liberal Democrats to hold the coalition together to conservative Republicans in the United States. &ldquo;We need no Tea Party tendency in Britain,&rdquo; he said.        

Recent opinion polls have shown that the Liberal Democrats have plunged in public support to as little as 11 percent, and that an early election could lead to the loss of many of the 59 seats they currently hold in the 650-seat House of Commons. Across a wide range of polls, the Conservatives have trailed Labour, though the Conservatives have narrowly outpolled Labour in polls taken among respondents who say they plan to vote.        

Many commentators in Britain say that the signs point to a new era of coalition politics, and that the disillusionment for the coalition among Liberal Democrats makes an alliance with Labour beyond the next election more likely than a renewed deal with the Conservatives. That prospect appeared to be one of the few items that stirred much enthusiasm among delegates at the Birmingham conference, where Mr. Clegg, noting the &ldquo;docility&rdquo; in the conference hall, compared the gathering at one point to a party conference in North Korea.        

But Labour, too, has problems. Unreconciled differences flourish between the centrist wing of the party that dominated for 10 years under Prime Minister Tony Blair, and the party&rsquo;s left-wing, labor union base, which has been newly assertive since the election defeat last year. Senior Labour figures, including the new leader, Ed Miliband, have said that to regain power the party must first regain the trust among voters by owning up to the mistakes it made in economic management including allowing the annual deficit to balloon.        

But left-wing stalwarts, including the party&rsquo;s chief economic spokesman, Ed Balls, have been slow to acknowledge past errors. Though Mr. Balls did say on Monday that he regretted some of the Labour government&rsquo;s decisions, like instituting a tax on low earners and a slight rise in state pensions, much of the focus in Liverpool is expected to be on a new emphasis on candor about past mistakes, along with a renewed effort to boost Mr. Miliband&rsquo;s lagging popularity, which has trailed far behind Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s in many polls.        

Even Mr. Balls has joined in. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve got to rebuild our credibility,&rdquo; he told The Sunday Telegraph in an interview. &ldquo;And that&rsquo;s hard.&rdquo;        
