
LONDON &mdash; Scotland&rsquo;s chief prosecutor has asked Libya&rsquo;s new government to assist in tracking down documentary evidence and witnesses for a possible new trial for those responsible for the Lockerbie airliner bombing.        

A statement issued Monday by a spokesman for Scotland&rsquo;s lord advocate, Frank Mulholland, said Britain&rsquo;s Foreign Office had been asked to relay the request to the Transitional National Council, Libya&rsquo;s interim governing body after the overthrow of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

The Scottish statement said the new Libyan authorities had been asked for assistance in Scotland&rsquo;s continuing investigation into the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over southwestern Scotland in December 1988. A total of 270 people were killed in the attack, including 189 Americans, 43 Britons and citizens of 19 other countries.        

The new Libya government gave conflicting indications of its possible response to the request.        

Speaking to reporters in Tripoli on Monday night, the provisional government&rsquo;s justice minister, Mohammed al-Alagi, firmly shut the door on any further prosecution of Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi, the former Libyan intelligence officer who is the only person ever convicted in the attack.        

Mr. Alagi said: &ldquo;He was tried and he was convicted, and he was pardoned by the Scottish judicial system and the British authorities. As justice minister, I consider this case closed.&rdquo;        

Pressed further, he left open the possibility that he would help Scottish prosecutors pursue other lines of inquiry. &ldquo;If there is any other crime about Lockerbie, we&rsquo;ll cooperate and talk about it,&rdquo; he said.        

But other officials in the government have signaled that they would cooperate.        

The Scottish statement noted that the investigation into the bombing &ldquo;remains live.&rdquo; That referred to a unit in the Scottish prosecutor&rsquo;s office that has continued to seek evidence, more than 10 years after Mr. Megrahi was found guilty at a trial in the Netherlands.        

The statement said Scottish investigators had asked the government for &ldquo;documentary evidence and witnesses which could assist in the ongoing inquiries.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mulholland, a 52-year-old former trial lawyer with a record as a relentless prosecutor, refused to answer any questions from reporters, tacitly acknowledging the political, as well as legal, significance of his step.        

In effect, the Scottish authorities appeared to be hoping that the new step could take some of the sting out of the opprobrium visited on Scotland for its decision two years ago to release Mr. Megrahi, 59. He had been serving a life sentence and was freed to return to Libya in August 2009 after having served only 8 &frac12; years in Scotland&rsquo;s Greenock Prison.        

The release followed prolonged pressure on Britain from Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government, carried out during visits to Britain by the colonel&rsquo;s favored son and presumed heir, Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi. Ultimately, the British government left the decision to the Scottish authorities.        

They decided to free Mr. Megrahi on the basis of medical evidence indicating that Mr. Megrahi was terminally ill with prostate cancer and was likely to die within three months.        

That set off a furor among American and British relatives of the bombing victims and vehement protests by the Obama administration. The anger aimed at Scotland &mdash; and at the former Labour government of Britain, which was deeply involved in negotiations by the British-based oil giant BP for huge Libyan oil deals &mdash; continued to burn when Mr. Megrahi, far from dying, showed up this summer at a pro-Qaddafi rally in Tripoli.        

Officials of the British coalition government that succeeded the Labour administration last year, including Prime Minister David Cameron, have condemned the decision to free Mr. Megrahi.        

But since Mr. Megrahi surfaced again this summer, senior officials, including the foreign secretary, William Hague, have said that attempts to have the new Libyan authorities return Mr. Megrahi to Britain to resume serving his sentence would serve little purpose. Better, they said, to ask the new Libyan government to seek evidence against others in the files of the Qaddafi government&rsquo;s intelligence and security agencies, and from officials of the old government.        
