
LONDON &mdash; Six men have been charged with planning an act of terrorism in Britain, as part of a plot that included training in Pakistan, preparing for suicide bombings and constructing an explosive device, the police said on Monday.        

The men, ages 25 to 32, are all from Birmingham, Britain&rsquo;s second-largest city. Four were charged with &ldquo;preparing for an act of terrorism in the U.K.,&rdquo; and the other two were charged with failing to disclose information. A seventh man was being questioned, the West Midlands police force said in a statement.        

The men were arrested last week in a raid led by the counterterrorism unit of Britain&rsquo;s West Midlands police.        

The police have given no details of the alleged plot, but a police statement said the arrests were part of a &ldquo;major operation&rdquo; prompted by intelligence work, a formulation that has often been used to describe a lengthy period of surveillance, including phone-tapping, by undercover units and Britain&rsquo;s secret intelligence and security agencies, MI5 and MI6.        

The police statement said the six men appeared in a magistrate&rsquo;s court in west London on Monday and were denied bail.        

Two of the men, Irfan Nasser, 30, and Irfan Khalid, 26, are facing 12 counts, including &ldquo;planning a suicide bombing campaign/event,&rdquo; &ldquo;making a martyrdom film,&rdquo; and &ldquo;traveling to Pakistan for training in terrorism, including bomb making, weapons and poison making.&rdquo;        

The police declined to provide further details of the plot or make officers available for interviews.        

These are the first major terrorism arrests in Britain in several months. In recent years, major British cities have been fertile grounds for terrorist recruiters, generating a steady stream of international plots that have prompted concerns in Washington.        

American officials engaged in counterterrorism operations have said that the proliferation of Islamic militant cells in Britain that have links to Al Qaeda and other jihadist organizations, many of them involving people from Britain&rsquo;s large population of migrant families with roots in Pakistan, are a threat to American as well as British security.        

Britain&rsquo;s counterterrorism capabilities have been expanded to deal with the threat, but top officials of MI5, the domestic security agency, have said that a shortage of qualified agents forces it to prioritize, leaving some potential leads unexploited. That was part of MI5&rsquo;s explanation for its failure to pursue fragmentary clues that might have led to the plotters who carried out the 2005 suicide bombings on London&rsquo;s transit system, which killed 56 people, including the four bombers, in the worst terrorist attack ever carried out in mainland Britain.        

But Britain has successfully uncovered other major plots. A plan by a group of Islamic militants in London, many of them with Pakistani roots, to detonate liquid bombs in soft-drink bottles aboard a group of trans-Atlantic airliners heading for the United States and Canada in 2006 led to life terms for several men after a series of trials that ended in 2009.        

In the so-called Crevice trial that ended in 2007, five men of Pakistani origin were sentenced to life in prison for their roles in a plot that the prosecution said involved the hoarding of 1,300 pounds of ammonium nitrate to make bombs, a plot to smuggle detonators into Britain in bottles of shampoo and shaving cream, and plans to set off explosions in shopping centers, nightclubs and synagogues.        

More recent plots with links to Britain have included the connections between Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, a former engineering student at University College London, and Anwar al-Awlaki, the American-born imam associated with Al Qaeda&rsquo;s Yemeni branch, Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.        

Mr. Abdulmutallab, a Nigerian, is awaiting trial in the United States for his attempt to detonate explosives sewn into his underwear aboard Northwest Airlines Flight 253 as it landed in Detroit on Dec. 25, 2009. The bomb did not explode.        
