
MOSCOW &mdash; Russia&rsquo;s fallen finance minister was tossed out of his office on Tuesday and told that he would have to leave his government country house in what appeared to be swift retribution for defying President Dmitri A. Medvedev that was clearly meant as a warning to other would-be rebels.        

Few could have predicted such an ignominious end for the finance minister, Aleksei L. Kudrin, who was fired on Monday for publicly questioning Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s authority and was quickly replaced on Tuesday by his deputy, Anton G. Siluanov, on an interim basis.        

After nearly two decades of government service, Mr. Kudrin was widely considered to be indispensable to the government.        

But even as the Kremlin moved to quiet the tumult raised by Mr. Kudrin&rsquo;s dismissal, few were certain that it could repair the cracks in the ruling elite that his confrontation with Mr. Medvedev exposed.        

&ldquo;I believe that we are standing on the threshold of a very important, perhaps tectonic shift in the consciousness of the elite,&rdquo; Mikhail D. Prokhorov, the Russian billionaire who was recently expelled from a Kremlin-backed political party after a short stint as its leader, wrote on his blog Tuesday. &ldquo;They are becoming polarized, and this will inevitably be accompanied with the emergence of new ideologies and philosophies of development as well as with new people.&rdquo;        

Mr. Prokhorov, who himself is probably still aching from his recent dustup with the Kremlin, predicted a further shake-up of the government before parliamentary elections in December and the presidential election next year.        

This was probably not the situation Vladimir V. Putin envisioned when he unveiled a leadership shuffle last weekend that would allow for his return to the presidency next year after four years as prime minister. Under the plan, Mr. Medvedev would become prime minister and would lead United Russia, Russia&rsquo;s dominant political party.        

The plan was supposed to ensure a smooth transition through the coming election cycle that would allow Mr. Putin, who is sure to win a return to the presidency, to remain in power for possibly the next 12 years.        

Mr. Kudrin&rsquo;s defiance has somewhat complicated that equation.        

Mr. Putin tried to head off any further disruption on Tuesday, convening a session of the government and ordering his ministers to fall into line.        

&ldquo;The country has entered into a very long and critical period,&rdquo; Mr. Putin said. &ldquo;I request that each of you honorably fulfill your duties to the end, until the formation of the new government, to raise the level of discipline and responsibility.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kudrin showed no sign of regret on Tuesday. He said he had long been unhappy with Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s economic policies and had in February even discussed with Mr. Putin the possibility of resigning.        

&ldquo;Over the last several months, despite multiple warnings from me, including public ones, decisions have been made in the sphere of budgetary policy that will without a doubt increase the risks of implementing the budget,&rdquo; Mr. Kudrin wrote in a statement published by Russian news agencies.        

Over the weekend, Mr. Kudrin criticized Mr. Medvedev for what he said was irresponsible military and social spending, telling reporters at an economic meeting in Washington that he would quit rather than work with Mr. Medvedev when he becomes prime minister.        

It was an unusual affront to Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s authority, and the Kremlin has worked quickly to try to regain the upper hand.        

Less than 24 hours after Mr. Medvedev fired Mr. Kudrin, his name was removed from the government&rsquo;s daily agenda and workers arrived at his office and began boxing up his belongings.        

A spokesman from the presidential administration told the Interfax news agency that Mr. Kudrin would have a month to move his things from his government-owned country house outside Moscow.        

Mr. Medvedev, meanwhile, donned a bomber jacket on Tuesday and met with soldiers at a military base in the Ural Mountain town of Chebarkul.        

In a swipe at Mr. Kudrin, he vowed that military spending would remain the government&rsquo;s highest priority.        

&ldquo;It can be no other way,&rdquo; Mr. Medvedev said. &ldquo;And whoever does not agree with this can work somewhere else. That is an imperative.&rdquo;        
