
PERUGIA, Italy &mdash; Femme fatale or hapless young American woman abroad? Sex-starved &ldquo;she-devil&rdquo; or bright-eyed ing&eacute;nue who liked to affectionately rub noses with her new Italian beau?        

Such are the starkly contrasting portraits being painted by prosecutors and defense lawyers of Amanda Knox, the American student convicted for the 2007 murder of her British roommate, Meredith Kercher, as they deliver their closing arguments in the appeal trial in this hilltop town.        

If anything, the defense lawyer Giulia Bongiorno said in her closing argument on Tuesday, Ms. Knox is more like the cartoon character Jessica Rabbit &mdash; a man-eater in appearance but actually a loving woman. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a case of &lsquo;I&rsquo;m not bad, I&rsquo;m just drawn that way,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Ms. Bongiorno said, quoting a line from the 1988 film &ldquo;Who Framed Roger Rabbit.&rdquo;        

Ms. Bongiorno represents Raffaele Sollecito, briefly Ms. Knox&rsquo;s boyfriend and now her co-defendant, but she spoke at length about Ms. Knox because, she said, the prosecutors have built the case against her client based in part on the false notion that he followed Ms. Knox&rsquo;s lead the night of the murder.        

According to prosecutors, Ms. Knox and Mr. Sollecito tried to force Ms. Kercher, 21, into a sex game that went awry. They have presented DNA evidence indicating that the two defendants were at the scene, despite the defendants&rsquo; claims that they were elsewhere, but the evidence has since been questioned by independent experts appointed by the court.        

Ms. Knox is an &ldquo;enchanting witch,&rdquo; a &ldquo;she-devil,&rdquo; Carlo Pacelli said in his summation on Monday. He represents a Congolese man whom Ms. Knox initially accused of the crime.        

Ms. Kercher, a University of Leeds student, was found dead on Nov. 2, 2007, in the house she shared with Ms. Knox. Her body was on the floor of her bedroom under a blood-stained comforter, partly naked with her throat slit.        

Four days later, Ms. Knox, then 20, and Mr. Sollecito, then 24, were arrested as suspects. In December 2009, they were found guilty of murder; Ms. Knox was sentenced to 26 years in prison, and Mr. Sollecito to 25 years. They deny any wrongdoing.        

With its blaring, sexually charged headlines, the case immediately drew immense media attention and won Ms. Knox sudden &mdash; and unwanted &mdash; notoriety. Detractors of Ms. Knox, who is from Seattle, see her tale as a cautionary one for students abroad gone wild; her supporters, however, say she is a victim of a justice system that convicted her on unpersuasive evidence.        

The appeal, which began last November, has been dominated by the re-examination of the DNA evidence.        

The court-appointed independent experts filed their report this year, saying that the DNA had been collected in a way that could have allowed for contamination and that the genetic information on two main pieces of evidence could not be matched to the defendants with certainty. Ms. Bongiorno said evidence collected 46 days after the police first went through the scene should have been thrown out.        

Prosecutors gave their closing arguments last week, dismissing the findings of the independent experts, calling them inept and inexperienced. They also reiterated other evidence from the first trial, including eyewitness evidence placing Ms. Knox and Mr. Sollecito at the scene.        

&ldquo;There is a gigantic, unfaltering case against them that can&rsquo;t be bypassed,&rdquo; Manuela Comodi, a prosecutor, said in her closing argument on Saturday.        

Ms. Knox&rsquo;s lawyers will deliver their arguments on Thursday. A verdict is expected this week.        
