
MADRID &mdash; Hundreds of thousands of disillusioned Indians cheer a rural activist on a hunger strike. Israel reels before the largest street demonstrations in its history. Enraged young people in Spain and Greece take over public squares across their countries.        

Their complaints range from corruption to lack of affordable housing and joblessness, common grievances the world over. But from South Asia to the heartland of Europe and now even to Wall Street, these protesters share something else: wariness, even contempt, toward traditional politicians and the democratic political process they preside over.        

They are taking to the streets, in part, because they have little faith in the ballot box.        

&ldquo;Our parents are grateful because they&rsquo;re voting,&rdquo; said Marta Solanas, 27, referring to older Spaniards&rsquo; decades spent under the Franco dictatorship. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re the first generation to say that voting is worthless.&rdquo;        

Economics have been one driving force, with growing income inequality, high unemployment and recession-driven cuts in social spending breeding widespread malaise. Alienation runs especially deep in Europe, with boycotts and strikes that, in London and Athens, erupted into violence.        

But even in India and Israel, where growth remains robust, protesters say they so distrust their country&rsquo;s political class and its pandering to established interest groups that they feel only an assault on the system itself can bring about real change.        

Young Israeli organizers repeatedly turned out gigantic crowds insisting that their political leaders, regardless of party, had been so thoroughly captured by security concerns, ultra-Orthodox groups and other special interests that they could no longer respond to the country&rsquo;s middle class.        

In the world&rsquo;s largest democracy, Anna Hazare, an activist, starved himself publicly for 12 days until the Indian Parliament capitulated to some of his central demands on a proposed anticorruption measure to hold public officials accountable. &ldquo;We elect the people&rsquo;s representatives so they can solve our problems,&rdquo; said Sarita Singh, 25, among the thousands who gathered each day at Ramlila Maidan, where monsoon rains turned the grounds to mud but protesters waved Indian flags and sang patriotic songs.        

&ldquo;But that is not actually happening. Corruption is ruling our country.&rdquo;        

Increasingly, citizens of all ages, but particularly the young, are rejecting conventional structures like parties and trade unions in favor of a less hierarchical, more participatory system modeled in many ways on the culture of the Web.        

In that sense, the protest movements in democracies are not altogether unlike those that have rocked authoritarian governments this year, toppling longtime leaders in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya. Protesters have created their own political space online that is chilly, sometimes openly hostile, toward traditional institutions of the elite.        

The critical mass of wiki and mapping tools, video and social networking sites, the communal news wire of Twitter and the ease of donations afforded by sites like PayPal makes coalitions of like-minded individuals instantly viable.        

&ldquo;You&rsquo;re looking at a generation of 20- and 30-year-olds who are used to self-organizing,&rdquo; said Yochai Benkler, a director of the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University. &ldquo;They believe life can be more participatory, more decentralized, less dependent on the traditional models of organization, either in the state or the big company. Those were the dominant ways of doing things in the industrial economy, and they aren&rsquo;t anymore.&rdquo;        

Yonatan Levi, 26, called the tent cities that sprang up in Israel &ldquo;a beautiful anarchy.&rdquo; There were leaderless discussion circles like Internet chat rooms, governed, he said, by &ldquo;emoticon&rdquo; hand gestures like crossed forearms to signal disagreement with the latest speaker, hands held up and wiggling in the air for agreement &mdash; the same hand signs used in public assemblies in Spain. There were free lessons and food, based on the Internet conviction that everything should be available without charge.        

Someone had to step in, Mr. Levi said, because &ldquo;the political system has abandoned its citizens.&rdquo;        

The rising disillusionment comes 20 years after what was celebrated as democratic capitalism&rsquo;s final victory over communism and dictatorship.        

In the wake of the Soviet Union&rsquo;s collapse in 1991, a consensus emerged that liberal economics combined with democratic institutions represented the only path forward. That consensus, championed by scholars like Francis Fukuyama in his book &ldquo;The End of History and the Last Man,&rdquo; has been shaken if not broken by a seemingly endless succession of crises &mdash; the Asian financial collapse of 1997, the Internet bubble that burst in 2000, the subprime crisis of 2007-8 and the continuing European and American debt crisis &mdash; and the seeming inability of policy makers to deal with them or cushion their people from the shocks.        

Frustrated voters are not agitating for a dictator to take over. But they say they do not know where to turn at a time when political choices of the cold war era seem hollow. &ldquo;Even when capitalism fell into its worst crisis since the 1920s there was no viable alternative vision,&rdquo; said the British left-wing author Owen Jones.        
Ethan Bronner contributed reporting from Tel Aviv, and Jim Yardley from New Delhi.
