
Syria is scrambling to find foreign buyers for its oil because of the tightening grip of a European embargo that has severely impeded Syrian oil sales, a vital source of earnings for Damascus.        

The effects of the oil embargo were beginning to pinch Syria as the United Nations Security Council renewed its efforts on Tuesday to issue a resolution condemning the repression of pro-democracy demonstrators there, although continued Russian opposition to any Security Council sanctions means the measure is unlikely to include any, diplomats at the United Nations said.        

Even without international sanctions coming from the United Nations, Europe and the United States have imposed their own.        

Syria normally exports about only 100,000 barrels of crude daily, but earnings from that oil have become more important to an economy battered by months of political unrest. Nearly all of the exports went to Europe until the European Union imposed sanctions this month, depriving the regime of President Bashar al-Assad of a quarter of its earnings denominated in foreign currency.        

The last oil cargo loaded from a Syrian port was on Friday, and potential buyers are unable to finance purchases of Syrian crude so far because of the sanctions, said Andrew Lipow, president of Lipow Oil Associates, a Houston consulting firm, and former Amoco trader.        

With the world economy slowing and Libya poised to begin exporting some oil again over the next month, supplies on the world market have become more plentiful in recent weeks, so there is no great urgency for an Asian buyer to do business with Syria, oil experts said.        

Syria has requested that foreign oil companies operating in Syria cut back production because excess crude is filling the country&rsquo;s storage capacity. Some of those companies have already stopped their operations in Syria anyway &mdash; in order to comply with the sanctions.        

But oil experts say it is only a matter of time before the Syrians will be able to sell at least some of the oil, although they may have to sell at a discount.        

&ldquo;There is almost certainly someone who will buy it,&rdquo; said Michael C. Lynch, president of Strategic Energy and Economic Research, a consulting firm. &ldquo;In the past there have been trading companies that would launder oil for Iraq or Iran, for example. Some countries will buy gasoline from Caribbean refiners without knowing the origin of the oil.&rdquo;        

Ayham Kamel, a Middle East analyst at Eurasia Group, another consulting firm, said one Indian oil company had already been contacted by the Syrians and was considering making purchases.        

Whether Syria is eventually able to sell its oil may depend on how hard the United States and Europe pressure Asian countries to abstain from buying.        

It may also depend on how strongly protests in Syria continue, since Asian buyers may not want to be perceived as backing a losing government, especially after the victorious rebel forces in Libya have said they will favor countries that supported them and not the Qaddafi government during their rebellion.        

Foreign oil companies operating in Syria include Royal Dutch Shell, the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation of India, Total of France and the China National Petroleum Corporation. Bill Tanner, a Shell spokesman, said the company had stopped production in Syria and was not supplying &ldquo;any refined products to the Syrian government.&rdquo;        

Before the oil embargo, Syria sold nearly two-thirds of its exports to Italy and Germany, with almost all of the rest going to France, the Netherlands, Austria, Spain and Turkey. Shipping to Asia would cost the country at least $3 a barrel more in transportation costs.        

At the United Nations, four European members of the Security Council &mdash; Britain, France, Germany and Portugal &mdash; negotiated the language of a draft resolution on Syria, trying to test the limits of what Russia would accept, diplomats said.        

Until now, the Security Council has been able to issue only two statements about the uprising in Syria, falling short of the support needed for a full resolution, its strongest instrument. The decision to try again emerged from a meeting last Friday of the foreign ministers from the five permanent members on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly.        

&ldquo;Politically speaking, morally speaking, it will be progress, because we cannot accept the silence of the Security Council when we see the violence and repression in Syria,&rdquo; Alain Jupp&eacute;, the French foreign minister, said in an interview after the meeting.        

In his speech to the United Nations on Monday, the Syrian foreign minister, Walid Moualem, portrayed the government as having been on the brink of introducing reforms when a rebellion inspired by foreign radicals forced Syria to put aside change to maintain a united country. He warned that international sanctions would harm the daily lives of ordinary Syrians.        

Russia and China, as well as other emerging powers currently on the Security Council &mdash; India, Brazil and South Africa &mdash;were dismayed that the tough resolution passed on Libya in March was used as justification for the NATO bombing campaign. They appear determined not to allow a recurrence.        

Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, defended Syria in his speech on Tuesday before the United Nations, calling on the opposition to work with the Assad government.        

&ldquo;It is inadmissible to boycott proposals on a national dialogue, stir up confrontation and provoke violence,&rdquo; Mr. Lavrov said, &ldquo;while neglecting albeit late but still achievable reforms proposed by President Bashar al-Assad.&rdquo;        

He added, &ldquo;It is important to encourage the authorities and the opposition to start negotiations and agree on the future of their country.&rdquo;        
