
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Yemen&rsquo;s defense minister survived an assassination attempt on Tuesday in the volatile southern port city of Aden, where a suicide attacker detonated a car bomb next to his convoy.        

It was the second time in less than a month that the defense minister, Mohammed Nasser Ahmed, emerged unscathed from an attack on his convoy in Yemen&rsquo;s restive south. In late August, two of his bodyguards died when their vehicle hit a land mine in Abyan Province.        

The government said in a statement that several of the minister&rsquo;s guards were wounded in Tuesday&rsquo;s attack. Witnesses said the explosion occurred in the Tuwahi district of the city as the convoy was leaving a hotel.        

The government immediately blamed &ldquo;terrorists from Al Qaeda&rdquo; for the assassination attempt. In Zinjibar, the capital of Abyan Province, about 30 miles northeast of Aden, security forces have battled militants linked to Al Qaeda who took over the city this spring.        

The attack followed the surprise return of President Ali Abdullah Saleh on Friday after nearly four months in Saudi Arabia, as well as a week of urban warfare in the country&rsquo;s capital, Sana, between government troops and fighters loyal to a powerful general who defected this year to join protesters.        

Even before fighting flared in the capital, the government was struggling to contain its southern cities, hotbeds of antigovernment sentiment and militancy. Residents in Aden say that gangs of armed men whose loyalties are unclear roam the streets in several districts of the city.        

While Aden has been spared the kind of major fighting seen in Sana &mdash; with rival forces lobbing artillery shells back and forth, shaking the city &mdash; car bombings and shootings aimed at security forces there have increased in recent months.        

Yemen, the poorest country in the Arab world and a hub for Al Qaeda, remains in a state of political and economic paralysis that has stretched on for more than six months. Mr. Saleh has repeatedly backed away at the last minute from an internationally brokered plan for him to hand over power.        

His return, after months of treatment in a Saudi hospital for wounds suffered during a bombing in his presidential palace in June, appeared unlikely to calm tensions. Tens of thousands of antigovernment demonstrators continue to hold daily protests throughout the country demanding his immediate ouster.        
