
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Eight police officers were killed overnight at a hilltop checkpoint in the fourth episode in three months taking aim at the police in Helmand Province.        

One officer was missing after the attack, and police officials are investigating whether he betrayed his comrades to the Taliban. The attack came just a day after a suicide bomber attacked a shop in Helmand&rsquo;s provincial capital, Lashkar Gah, that was owned by an Afghan who supplied the police with bread, cooking oil and firewood.        

During the summer, there were two attacks on the police in and near Lashkar Gah. In one case, seven police officers were poisoned. In the other, a guest at a police post outside a ministry office killed his hosts and escaped, police officials in Helmand Province said.        

Lashkar Gah was among the five cities and two provinces where Afghan security forces assumed sole control over the summer in the first stage of a transition from American security.        

Also in Helmand this week, the counternarcotics police found and destroyed three drug laboratories, according to an announcement by a NATO official. The estimated street value of the drugs, which included nearly 2,000 gallons of opium solution, 220 pounds of heroin and 176 pounds of opium, was $350 million.        

The killings in Helmand came as the United Nations released its quarterly report Wednesday on Afghanistan, which noted that there had been a nearly 40 percent increase in violent episodes in June, July and August over the same period last year.        

A vast majority were the result of insurgent attacks. The subset of suicide attacks, however, was down over the same period.        

Most striking was the continued &ldquo;campaign of intimidation&rdquo; through the assassinations of high-ranking Afghan government officials, said the report, noting that 181 people were killed in July and August.        

Among those killed during the three months were a number of high-profile figures including President Hamid Karzai&rsquo;s half brother, Ahmed Wali Karzai, who led the Kandahar provincial council; Hikmatullah Hikmat, the head of Kandahar&rsquo;s religious council; Jan Mohammed Khan, an adviser to President Karzai from Oruzgan Province; and Ghulam Haider Hamidi, the mayor of Kandahar.        

NATO has yet to release overall figures for the same period. There are differences in the criteria used by the two groups, and the groups gather information in different ways. For instance, NATO in roughly the same period of June, July and much of August had noted a decline in complex attacks. And over all, NATO has said that the insurgents&rsquo; capability, especially in the south, has been degraded by NATO and Afghan troop operations.        

In another measure of Afghanistan&rsquo;s insecurity, the United Nations recorded an estimated 130,000 people displaced in the first seven months of the year, a 64 percent increase over 2010. Displacement includes both big and small moves by families. Typically families with some means flee farther when escaping violence, while poorer families might move only a few miles to a place where there is less fighting. The numbers of the displaced are still small relative to the numbers who were displaced or became refugees during the Afghan civil war of 1992-96 and during the Taliban&rsquo;s rule.        

Also in southern Afghanistan on Wednesday, the police chief of the Chora district in Oruzgan Province, Mohammed Gul, was killed by a roadside bomb as he drove to a rural village.        

Three NATO service members were killed by an improvised explosive device in eastern Afghanistan on Wednesday, the military said, and a fourth died of a non-battle-related injury in southern Afghanistan.        
