
UNITED NATIONS &mdash; Despite new resolve to issue a Security Council resolution addressing violence in Syria, the first negotiations on Wednesday among all 15 members of the Council over the wording bumped along an old rut.        

Western nations rejected what they called a Russian attempt to equate government attacks on civilians with violent acts fomented by the opposition, while Russia disparaged what it called a stealth attempt to bring about regime change.        

&ldquo;We have also heard statements in various capitals describing who is legitimate and who is not,&rdquo; Vitaly I. Churkin, the Russian envoy, told reporters. &ldquo;We believe that this line of thinking and speaking is encouraging violence in Syria.&rdquo;        

Similar disagreements have blocked all attempts to negotiate a resolution since the violence erupted in March, with the Council able to produce only two statements despite a death toll that the United Nations put at more than 2,600.        

The foreign ministers of the five permanent members of the Security Council agreed last Friday that it was time for a full-blown resolution. But in a rare move, Russia and the Western nations circulated their own draft texts and are now trying to reconcile them.        

The Western draft resolution dropped sanctions, but warned that they would be put in place should the Syrian government ignore the Council&rsquo;s demands to stop the violence. That wording is the minimum necessary to give the resolution some teeth, European diplomats said, with one describing the talks as &ldquo;tense.&rdquo;        

The main point of agreement in the two drafts is that the violence must stop in tandem with a Syrian-led political reform process conducted in an atmosphere free of bloodshed and fear.        

Bashar Ja&rsquo;afari, the Syrian envoy, said a new commission would be established in Syria within a couple of days to review the Constitution. He welcomed the Russian draft resolution as a means of countering the attempts to use the &ldquo;Machiavellian machinery&rdquo; in the Council to incite rebellion.        
