
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; A five-judge panel set up last week by Afghanistan&rsquo;s Supreme Court said Monday that it would issue rulings within two weeks on hundreds of complaints of election abuse in September&rsquo;s national vote, in time for President Hamid Karzai to keep his promise to seat a new Parliament by Jan. 20.        

The panel is the latest player in the tug of war,  lasting months, over the vote, which was widely perceived as being seriously tainted by fraud and skewed by rampant insecurity, which kept large numbers of people from the polls. The outcome left Pashtuns &mdash; Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s ethnic group, as well as the Taliban&rsquo;s main base &mdash; largely underrepresented, and the Karzai government has mounted repeated efforts to alter the official results, pushing the country toward a constitutional crisis.        

&ldquo;The high court does have the authority to cancel the entire process in light of the national Constitution,&rdquo; said the head of the special panel, Sediqullah Haqiq, at a news conference on Monday.        

However, numerous Afghan officials, opposition politicians and human rights activists loudly denounced the panel, calling it politically motivated and redundant of existing structures.        

&ldquo;The law clearly says that no other organization has the right to intervene in elections&rdquo; except the Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission, said Ahmad Zia Rafat, a spokesman for the second group. &ldquo;So it&rsquo;s clear that the special court which is created right now is illegal, according to the election laws.&rdquo;        

Both election groups have been criticized by Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s attorney general, and he has even had some members arrested.        

The parliamentary election was pushed forward by the United Nations and a coalition of foreign countries, including the United States, in an effort to restore legitimacy to democracy in Afghanistan after the well-documented and widespread fraud in the presidential election in 2009 that kept Mr. Karzai in power. But the effort has backfired, prompting increasingly serious internal clashes.        

Nader Nadery of the Free Election Foundation of Afghanistan, an independent monitoring organization, called the court panel &ldquo;unconstitutional.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;It is not for the courts to make a decision about the election results,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;If they start ruling outside of their legal mandate, they call into question the entire democratic process.&rdquo;        

The attorney general&rsquo;s office defended the special panel, saying that the Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission had not adequately resolved dozens of complaints before announcing the election results, and had therefore left the government few options.        

&ldquo;Before we finished our investigation, the election commission announced the results of the election,&rdquo; said Hafizullah Hafiz, the head of the attorney general&rsquo;s complaints department. &ldquo;They announced 59 people as successful winners &mdash; people whom they originally said were involved in the fraud.&rdquo;        

Over all, Pashtuns lost at least 26 seats, according to the results announced by the Independent Election Commission. Pashtuns, forming nearly half of the Afghan population, will hold only 94 out of 249 seats if the results stand.        

Some rivals were blunt in accusing Mr. Karzai of trying to return power to his supporters. &ldquo;Karzai has a much lesser number of allies in Parliament than he wanted,&rdquo; said Abdullah Abdullah, who ran against Mr. Karzai in the last election. &ldquo;He wants to stack Parliament and have a hand &mdash; leverage for the future.&rdquo;        

Among the dozens of disqualified politicians, the panel has inspired new hope.        

&ldquo;We can&rsquo;t afford a Parliament where millions of people are not represented at all,&rdquo; said Daoud Sultanzoi, a Pashtun politician from Ghazni Province, who for months has been prominently protesting his disqualification by the electoral commission.        

&ldquo;I do hope they will nullify this election,&rdquo; he said of the court, adding that international governments and the United Nations had &ldquo;meddled in Afghanistan&rsquo;s internal affairs,&rdquo; pushing the electoral commission to declare results that he called illegal.        

Ahmad Khan Samangani, a disqualified Tajik politician from Samangan Province, agreed.        

&ldquo;We have complained to government institutions that our votes have been stolen and that we have to be given our rights back,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We are happy that the Supreme Court has created the new court.&rdquo;        

At the news conference Monday, Mr. Haqiq, the head of the new five-judge panel, stressed that his members would work closely with the country&rsquo;s Electoral Complaints Commission if necessary. Members of the commission grudgingly pledged to share minimal information.        

&ldquo;We are ready to help them only in giving them the numbers of complaints we have examined,&rdquo; said Mr. Rafat,  the commission&rsquo;s spokesman.        

&ldquo;We will provide information to them on how many cases we have looked at and how we reached our conclusion,&rdquo; he said, before denouncing the court.        

&ldquo;The court was established under pressure from the government and political groups,&rdquo; Mr. Rafat said. &ldquo;Therefore, I tell you that this court will not be impartial and it will be under pressure from the government and other people with links with the government.&rdquo;        

Hyperbole is not unknown here, but neither is violence, and some Afghans predicted trouble if Pashtuns were not awarded more seats.        

&ldquo;We are trying to calm our followers, but if they don&rsquo;t get justice, many will turn to violence,&rdquo; said Mr. Sultanzoi, the disqualified candidate. &ldquo;It is not a question of them joining the Taliban. Our followers are the majority. The Taliban will join them.&rdquo;        

Tribe to Oppose Insurgents        

KABUL, Afghanistan (AP) &mdash; The leaders of the largest tribe in a Taliban stronghold in southern Helmand Province have pledged to halt insurgent attacks and expel foreign fighters from one of the most violent spots in the country, the senior United States Marine general in Afghanistan said Monday.        

Maj. Gen. Richard Mills, who commands coalition forces in the southwest, said the deal was struck between local elders in the Sangin District and the Helmand governor, Gulabuddin Mangal, with the consultation of coalition forces.        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting.
