
South Africa&rsquo;s failure to issue a visa to the Dalai Lama, or even respond to his repeated requests for one, was sharply criticized on Wednesday by the Dalai Lama and by Desmond Tutu, the former Archbishop of Capetown. The two men called the failure disrespectful.        

The Dalai Lama wants to travel to South Africa to attend an 80th birthday party on Oct. 7 for Archbishop Tutu, a fellow Nobel laureate and anti-apartheid champion.        

The criticism &mdash; made in unusually blunt language by two icons of peaceful dialogue &mdash; did not address the reason for the official inaction. But it has been clear for some time that the South African government is reluctant to grant the visa for fear of angering China, one of the country&rsquo;s most important trading partners and an increasingly prominent investor in the country.        

China says the Dalai Lama, the 76-year-old Tibetan spiritual leader in exile, is a subversive agent of independence for Tibet, which China regards as part of its territory. Though he fled Tibet more than 50 years ago when the Chinese military suppressed an uprising there, Tibetans still idolize the Dalai Lama as their leader, an allegiance that infuriates Beijing. The Dalai Lama, who lives in India, has said he does not favor Tibetan independence, but he has criticized what he has called China&rsquo;s suppression of Tibetan culture.        

In their joint statement, reported by Agence France-Press, Archbishop Tutu and the Dalai Lama said South Africa&rsquo;s handling of the visa request was &ldquo;profoundly disrespectful of two Nobel Peace laureates who are among the most revered spiritual leaders on earth.&rdquo;        

It quoted Archbishop Tutu as saying such disrespect was &ldquo;reminiscent of the way authorities dealt with applications by black South Africans for travel documents under apartheid.&rdquo;        

There was no immediate comment from either the South African or the Chinese government.        

The criticism on Wednesday coincided with a visit to China by the vice president of South Africa, Kgalema Motlanthe, who signed agreements on Wednesday for cooperation in geology, mineral resources and financial support.        

Ominously for the Dalai Lama&rsquo;s chances of getting the visa, an account of Mr. Motlanthe&rsquo;s visit by Xinhua, China&rsquo;s official news agency, noted that his host, Vice President Xi Jinping, expressed gratitude for South Africa&rsquo;s &ldquo;valuable support&rdquo; on the Tibet issue.        
