
CAIRO &mdash; By force of this year&rsquo;s Arab revolts and revolutions, activists marching under the banner of Islam are on the verge of a reckoning decades in the making: the prospect of achieving decisive power across the region has unleashed an unprecedented debate over the character of the emerging political orders they are helping to build.        

Few question the coming electoral success of religious activists, but as they emerge from the shadows of a long, sometimes bloody struggle with authoritarian and ostensibly secular governments, they are confronting newly urgent questions about how to apply Islamic precepts to more open societies with very concrete needs.        

In Turkey and Tunisia, culturally conservative parties founded on Islamic principles are rejecting the name &ldquo;Islamist&rdquo; to stake out what they see as a more democratic and tolerant vision.        

In Egypt, a similar impulse has begun to fracture the Muslim Brotherhood as a growing number of politicians and parties argue for a model inspired by Turkey, where a party with roots in political Islam has thrived in a once-adamantly secular system. Some contend that the absolute monarchy of puritanical Saudi Arabia in fact violates Islamic law.        

A backlash has ensued, as well, as traditionalists have flirted with timeworn Islamist ideas like imposing interest-free banking and obligatory religious taxes and censoring irreligious discourse.        

The debates are deep enough that many in the region believe that the most important struggles may no longer occur between Islamists and secularists, but rather among the Islamists themselves, pitting the more puritanical against the more liberal.        

&ldquo;That&rsquo;s the struggle of the future,&rdquo; said Azzam Tamimi, a scholar and the author of a biography of a Tunisian Islamist, Rachid Ghannouchi, whose party, Ennahda, is expected to dominate elections next month to choose an assembly to draft a constitution. &ldquo;The real struggle of the future will be about who is capable of fulfilling the desires of a devout public. It&rsquo;s going to be about who is Islamist and who is more Islamist, rather than about the secularists and the Islamists.&rdquo;        

The moment is as dramatic as any in recent decades in the Arab world, as autocracies crumble and suddenly vibrant parties begin building a new order, starting with elections in Tunisia in October, then Egypt in November. Though the region has witnessed examples of ventures by Islamists into politics, elections in Egypt and Tunisia, attempts in Libya to build a state almost from scratch and the shaping of an alternative to Syria&rsquo;s dictatorship are their most forceful entry yet into the region&rsquo;s still embryonic body politic.        

&ldquo;It is a turning point,&rdquo; said Emad Shahin, a scholar on Islamic law and politics at the University of Notre Dame who was in Cairo.        

At the center of the debates is a new breed of politician who has risen from an Islamist milieu but accepts an essentially secular state, a current that some scholars have already taken to identifying as &ldquo;post Islamist.&rdquo; Its foremost exemplars are Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan&rsquo;s Justice and Development Party in Turkey, whose intellectuals speak of a shared experience and a common heritage with some of the younger members of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt and with the Ennahda Party in Tunisia. Like Turkey, Tunisia faced decades of a state-enforced secularism that never completely reconciled itself with a conservative population.        

&ldquo;They feel at home with each other,&rdquo; said Cengiz Candar, an Arabic-speaking Turkish columnist. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s similar terms of reference, and they can easily communicate with them.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ghannouchi, the Tunisian Islamist, has suggested a common ambition, proposing what some say Mr. Erdogan&rsquo;s party has managed to achieve: a prosperous, democratic Muslim state, led by a party that is deeply religious but operates within a system that is supposed to protect liberties. (That is the notion, at least &mdash; Mr. Erdogan&rsquo;s critics accuse him of a pronounced streak of authoritarianism.)        

&ldquo;If the Islamic spectrum goes from Bin Laden to Erdogan, which of them is Islam?&rdquo; Mr. Ghannouchi asked in a recent debate with a secular critic. &ldquo;Why are we put in the same place as a model that is far from our thought, like the Taliban or the Saudi model, while there are other successful Islamic models that are close to us, like the Turkish, the Malaysian and the Indonesian models, models that combine Islam and modernity?&rdquo;        

The notion of an Arab post-Islamism is not confined to Tunisia. In Libya, Ali Sallabi, the most important Islamist political leader, cites Mr. Ghannouchi as a major influence. Abdel Moneim Abou el-Fotouh, a former Muslim Brotherhood leader who is running for president in Egypt, has joined several new breakaway political parties in arguing that the state should avoid interpreting or enforcing Islamic law, regulating religious taxes or barring a person from running for president based on gender or religion.        
Anthony Shadid reported from Cairo, and Istanbul and Ankara, Turkey, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Cairo, Tunis and Tripoli, Libya. Heba Afify contributed reporting from Cairo.
