
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Dozens of pro-government Syrians attempted to assault an American diplomatic delegation that included the ambassador on Thursday, striking its motorcade as it traveled to a meeting with an opposition figure in Damascus and then trying to break into an office where the meeting was held, essentially trapping the participants inside for 90 minutes.        

The United States protested the episode and suggested that the attackers had been deliberately allowed to harass the diplomatic delegation by Syrian security forces, who arrived belatedly to provide safe passage for the Americans to leave. The ambassador, Robert S. Ford, an outspoken critic of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, was reported safe, but some vehicles in his motorcade were damaged.        

&ldquo;We condemn this unwarranted attack in the strongest possible terms,&rdquo; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said in a statement. &ldquo;Ambassador Ford and his aides were conducting normal embassy business, and this attempt to intimidate our diplomats through violence is wholly unjustified.&rdquo;        

It was the second attack on American diplomats in Syria since the antigovernment uprising started in mid-March. In July, after Mr. Ford&rsquo;s visit to Hama, a restive city in central Syria, supporters of the government attacked the embassy&rsquo;s compound.        

Hassan Abdel-Azim, who leads the National Democratic Gathering, was the host for the meeting with Mr. Ford&rsquo;s delegation at Mr. Abdel-Azim&rsquo;s office building. He said that about 100 protesters were shouting outside the building &ldquo;from the moment he arrived.&rdquo; He said the protesters tried to break into the office, but he and others were able to stop them by locking all the gates.        

Mr. Abdel-Azim is a moderate politician who has called for an end to the six-month crackdown on pro-democracy protesters as a prerequisite for a dialogue with Mr. Assad and his government.        

Mr. Ford and his staff returned safely to the embassy.        

In Washington, the State Department deputy spokesman, Mark Toner, said the harassment began as Mr. Ford&rsquo;s group traveled to Mr. Abdel-Azim&rsquo;s office building. He said &ldquo;a crowd of demonstrators tried to assault Ambassador Ford and embassy colleagues&rdquo; as they were preparing to meet Mr. Abdel-Azim.        

&ldquo;The mob was violent,&rdquo; Mr. Toner said in a statement. &ldquo;It tried, unsuccessfully, to attack embassy personnel while they were inside several embassy vehicles, seriously damaging the vehicles in the process.&rdquo; He suggested that Syrian security forces had been late in assisting Mr. Ford.        

At least 2,700 people have been killed since the uprising started, according to the United Nations, and thousands have been arrested. The government disputes those numbers and says it is facing armed groups who have killed at least 700 police officers and soldiers.        

On Friday, the state news agency reported that seven soldiers and police officers had been killed in a military operation in Rastan, Reuters reported. The statement also said the military had &ldquo;inflicted big losses on the armed terrorist groups&rdquo; the government says it has been fighting there since Tuesday.        

On Thursday, the Syrian Foreign Ministry accused Washington of providing verbal support to those who attack Syria&rsquo;s military.        
