
CAIRO &mdash; Saudi men voted in local elections on Thursday for just the second time in the history of the conservative kingdom, but the polls remained closed to a majority of the Saudi population, including women, who were promised the right to vote in municipal elections scheduled for 2015 in a royal decree issued last week.        

The elections were for local advisory councils with no lawmaking authority or ability to alter the status quo in one of the world&rsquo;s few remaining absolute monarchies. Also barred from voting were men employed by the police and security forces as well as all men under the age of 21. Official figures estimate the number of eligible voters to be 1.2 million out of more than 18 million Saudi citizens.        

&ldquo;These elections are not representative of Saudi society,&rdquo; said Ibrahim al-Mugaiteeb, the director of the Human Rights First Society, a Saudi organization. &ldquo;Only 5 to 8 percent of the population is able to vote. That is very small.&rdquo;        

Official figures for the turnout were not available on Thursday, according to The Associated Press, which reported that the Saudi news media and activists said it was low.        

The vote took place two years behind schedule; it was postponed in 2009 by King Abdullah. The first-ever vote was held in 2005, at which time rights activists said the king promised that women would vote next time around.        

The vote and the renewed promise to allow women greater future political participation demonstrate the careful steps that Saudi rulers appear to be taking to preserve the prerogatives of absolute rule and shield their kingdom from greater demands for democracy that have spread through the region.        

Saudi Arabia has tried to inoculate itself against the wave of upheaval challenging autocrats across the Arab world.        

This year, it has spent billions of dollars to pump up salaries, build housing and finance religious organizations, among other outlays, in a bid to preserve public stability. In March, it sent troops into neighboring Bahrain to help a fellow monarch crush an uprising whose popular nature and Shiite sectarian overtones were deemed a threat to the country&rsquo;s regional interests and stability.        

Saudi Arabia has no penal code and no elected legislature at any level of its government. The national counterpart to the toothless local advisory councils is the Shura Council, whose members are appointed by King Abdullah. Last week, he also vowed to name women to the council during its next round of appointments in 2012.        

Many saw those pledges as a promising move, but optimism was quickly tempered two days later when a court convicted Shaimaa Ghassaneya, a woman from the Red Sea port city of Jidda, of violating the country&rsquo;s ban on women&rsquo;s driving. She was sentenced to receive 10 lashes for the crime, a surprisingly harsh sentence that provoked an outcry that threatened to overshadow the promise of women&rsquo;s suffrage in 2015.        

King Abdullah revoked that sentence on Thursday, an act of clemency that, for many, remained a reminder of the arbitrary power of the Saudi monarchy.        

&ldquo;Can you imagine a local council member or a Shura Council member who cannot drive her own car to the grocery store?&rdquo; asked Mr. Mugaiteeb, whose organization abandoned plans to boycott Thursday&rsquo;s vote after the pledge to allow women to vote. &ldquo;It is a disgrace.&rdquo;        

Others celebrated the news of Ms. Ghassaneya&rsquo;s royal pardon. Ameerah al-Taweel, a prominent Saudi philanthropist and member of the royal family, applauded on Twitter.        

&ldquo;Thank God, the lashing of Shaima is cancelled. Thanks to our beloved King,&rdquo; she wrote. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m sure all Saudi women will be so happy, I know I am.&rdquo;        
