
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; First there were the blindfold, the wrist-scarring handcuffs and the death threats. Then came beatings and electric shocks. In the fog of pain, the detainee, who said he had done nothing wrong, would have confessed to anything, he later recalled.        

The techniques were familiar to Libyans, but the perpetrators were not: they were former rebels, according to the detainee, a 36-year-old man who said he had worked in military intelligence for the government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

The man, who requested that his name not be published because he feared retribution from his former captors, said he was arrested by armed former rebels almost two weeks ago, held in a building for four days and tortured.        

His story was impossible to immediately verify, but he displayed what he said was evidence of the torture: huge bruises and welts on his legs, stripes of black and blue across the back of his thighs, and scars on his feet and ankles that he said marked the spots where his captors attached electrical wires.        

He was later transferred to another building in Tripoli, across the street from the cabinet offices of the Transitional National Council, the former rebels&rsquo; provisional government. There, in cells with fresh blood on the walls, he was held for another day until he was released, with apologies, by a former rebel official, he said.        

Now, he is moving to Tunisia, he said. &ldquo;I do not trust anyone in Libya.&rdquo;        

His case underscores the growing concern about armed brigades of former rebel fighters in the Libyan capital who rushed to fill the power vacuum after Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces fled more than a month ago. In a city with weak central authority and a justice system being rebuilt almost from scratch, the fighters have become detectives, prosecutors, judges and jailers, many of whom answer only to their own commanders, or to no one.        

The fighters have detained thousands of people; some are criminal suspects, former officials or Qaddafi soldiers. Others simply come from towns that opposed the revolution. Some are being held in prisons, others at makeshift, and sometimes secret, detention centers.        

Some are being tortured. The ordeal of the 36-year-old detainee bore similarities to cases recorded by the group Human Rights Watch in six facilities administered by the anti-Qaddafi forces in Tripoli. In a report released Friday, the group said that detainees reported abuse including beatings and electric shocks. None of the 53 detainees interviewed, the group said, had been brought before a judge.        

&ldquo;What we&rsquo;re seeing is a symptom of a fundamental problem,&rdquo; said Tom Malinowski, the group&rsquo;s Washington director. &ldquo;Civilians have good plans but lack authority over the militia groups.&rdquo; Mr. Malinowski credited the transitional government with allowing observers to visit detention centers, and said that some were well run. He added, &ldquo;I doubt there&rsquo;s a civilian official who knows where all the facilities are.&rdquo;        

Human Rights Watch reported that many of the people arrested by militias, brigades and other security groups associated with the transitional government were sub-Saharan Africans or dark-skinned Libyans. In some cases, the former rebel guards at detention facilities forced sub-Saharan African prisoners to perform manual labor.        

Detainees suspected of the most serious crimes, including murder and rape, received the worst abuse, the report said.        

The 36-year-old detainee said bad luck, not guilt, had led to his arrest and torture, after he tried to buy a gun to replace one confiscated by the former rebels. Soon, the man found himself accused of supplying arms to a Qaddafi cell.        

From their accents, he guessed that some of his captors were from the mountain city of Zintan. One was kind, loosening his blindfold and his handcuffs. Another asked him to write his life story on a few sheets of paper.        

He broke down crying, he recalled. &ldquo;How can I write my whole life story? What do they want from me?&rdquo;        

The beatings started on the third day. Some guards cursed him as a former intelligence officer, and others chanted, &ldquo;The blood of the martyrs will not be shed in vain.&rdquo; He was strung from the ceiling and his legs were beaten, he said.        

On the fourth day, he was transferred to a former government building in Tripoli. His fellow captives, he said, included someone accused of wearing a pro-Qaddafi hat, several women and a man who had been helping the transitional government secure the former government&rsquo;s secret files.        

A doctor treated him, and one of his captors congratulated him on being cleared of wrongdoing, adding, &ldquo;This is a clean revolution.&rdquo;        
