
BANGKOK &mdash; In a rare concession to public pressure, Myanmar&rsquo;s government on Friday ordered the suspension of a controversial hydroelectric project financed and led by a state-owned Chinese company.        

The Myitsone dam project would have been the first to span the Irrawaddy River, the largest waterway in Myanmar, and was a showcase project for the previous military government. The halt in construction was a victory for dissidents in a country with a long history of stifling opposition.        

A number of prominent people inside Myanmar, including writers, scientists and the Nobel Peace laureate Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, had opposed the project.        

The government&rsquo;s announcement underscores the nascent stirrings of democracy in Myanmar, also known as Burma, after a nominally civilian government took control from a military junta in March.        

The dam&rsquo;s suspension was a blow to China, long considered a benefactor to the government in Myanmar. China Power Investment, a state-run Chinese company, was leading the construction of the project, which would have delivered electricity to southern China. It is unclear how the suspension will affect six other Chinese-led hydroelectric projects in northern Myanmar.        

The announcement on Friday was made during a session of Parliament in the capital, Naypyidaw. The statement acknowledged the role that public pressure had played in the decision.        

&ldquo;Being the government elected by the people, it upholds the aspiration and wishes of the people,&rdquo; said a statement by President U Thein Sein, according to the Weekly Eleven, a newspaper in Myanmar. &ldquo;It is also responsible to solve the problems that worry the public. Therefore, the government will suspend the Myitsone dam project during its tenure.&rdquo;        

Although top officials in Myanmar, including Mr. Thein Sein, are former military officers, the government has sought to distance itself from decades of army rule. The new government has loosened restrictions on the news media, is drafting laws on economic liberalization and is holding regular meetings with Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi, who was released from years of house arrest last November. An estimated 2,000 political prisoners remain in detention.        

Despite describing its decision on Friday as a suspension of the dam&rsquo;s construction, Mr. Thein Sein&rsquo;s statement seemed to suggest that the project would not continue, at least not in its current form.        

&ldquo;To fulfill the electricity need of the country, the government will continue to implement other hydropower projects that are not harmful to the nation after conducting systematic surveys,&rdquo; it said.        

The statement added that the government would negotiate terms with China &ldquo;without affecting the friendly bilateral relations between the two countries.&rdquo;        

Chinese businesses have rapidly spread throughout Myanmar in recent years, causing friction in some areas. Chinese companies are sometimes blamed for deforestation and are resented for their voracious appetite for Myanmar&rsquo;s natural resources. A pipeline that would carry natural gas and oil from the Bay of Bengal to southern China is currently under construction.        

The Myitsone dam project, which was largely being carried out by Chinese workers, aggravated anti-Chinese sentiment. As the cradle of Burmese civilization, the Irrawaddy River carries great symbolic significance in Myanmar. Critics of the dam said the trade-off between the electricity that would be produced by the project and the potential environmental impact was not worth it.        

A report commissioned and financed by China Power Investment actually highlighted these questions. The company never released the report publicly, but a copy leaked out and was shared among environmentalists and opponents of the dam.        

The report said a number of migratory fish species were likely to be wiped out, and it warned that more studies needed to be carried out to understand the possible impact of the dam, which would have flooded 26,238 hectares, or 64,835 acres.        

Two smaller dams on tributaries of the Irrawaddy could produce the same amount of electricity, the report said.        

Ultimately, the authors concluded, &ldquo;There is no need for such a big dam.&rdquo;        
