
CAIRO &mdash; With police stations and the governing party&rsquo;s headquarters in flames, and much of this crucial Middle Eastern nation in open revolt, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt deployed the nation&rsquo;s military and imposed a near-total blackout on communications to save his authoritarian government of nearly 30 years.        

Protesters continued to defy a nationwide curfew in the early hours of Saturday, as Mr. Mubarak, 82, breaking days of silence, appeared on national television, promising to replace the ministers in his government, but calling popular protests &ldquo;part of bigger plot to shake the stability&rdquo; of Egypt. He refused calls, shouted by huge, angry crowds in the central squares of Cairo, the northern port of Alexandria and the canal city of Suez, for him to resign.        

&ldquo;I will not shy away from taking any decision that maintains the security of every Egyptian,&rdquo; he vowed, as gunfire rang out around Cairo.        

Whether his infamously efficient security apparatus and well-financed but politicized military could enforce that order &mdash; and whether it would stay loyal to him even if it came to shedding blood &mdash; was the main question for many Egyptians.        

It was also a pressing concern for the White House, where President Obama called Mr. Mubarak and then, in his own Friday television appearance, urged him to take &ldquo;concrete steps&rdquo; toward the political and economic reform that the stalwart American ally had repeatedly failed to deliver.        

Whatever the fallout from the protests &mdash; be it change that comes suddenly or unfolds over years &mdash; the upheaval at the heart of the Arab world has vast repercussions for the status quo in the region, including tolerance for secular dictators by a new generation of frustrated youth, the viability of opposition that had been kept mute or locked up for years and the orientation of regional governments toward the United States and Israel, which had long counted Egypt as its most important friend in the region.        

Many regional experts were still predicting that the wily Mr. Mubarak, who has outmaneuvered domestic political rivals and Egypt&rsquo;s Islamic movement, the Muslim Brotherhood, for decades, would find a way to suppress dissent and restore control. But the apparently spontaneous, nonideological and youthful protesters also posed a new kind of challenge to a state security system focused on more traditional threats from organized religious groups and terrorists.        

Friday&rsquo;s protests were the largest and most diverse yet, including young and old, women with Louis Vuitton bags and men in galabeyas, factory workers and film stars. All came surging out of mosques after midday prayers headed for Tahrir Square, and their clashes with the police left clouds of tear gas wafting through empty streets.        

For the first time since the 1980s, Mr. Mubarak felt compelled to call the military into the streets of the major cities to restore order and enforce a national 6 p.m. curfew. He also ordered that Egypt be essentially severed from the global Internet and telecommunications systems. Even so, videos from Cairo and other major cities showed protesters openly defying the curfew and few efforts being made to enforce it.        

Street battles unfolded throughout the day Friday, as hundreds of thousands of people streamed out of mosques after noon prayers on Friday in Cairo, Alexandria, Suez and other cities around the country.        

By nightfall, the protesters had burned down the ruling party&rsquo;s headquarters in Cairo, and looters marched away with computers, briefcases and other equipment emblazoned with the party&rsquo;s logo. Other groups assaulted the Interior Ministry and the state television headquarters, until after dark when the military occupied both buildings and regained control. At one point, the American Embassy came under attack.        

Six Cairo police stations and several police cars were in flames, and stations in Suez and other cities were burning as well. Office equipment and police vehicles burned, and the police seemed to have retreated from Cairo&rsquo;s main streets. Brigades of riot police officers deployed at mosques, bridges and intersections, and they battered the protesters with tear gas, water, rubber-coated bullets and, by day&rsquo;s end, live ammunition.        
Reporting was contributed by Kareem Fahim, Mona El-Naggar, Liam Stack and Dawlat Magdy from Cairo, Anthony Shadid from Beirut, Lebanon, Alan Cowell from Paris, and Maria Newman and Christine Hauser from New York.
