
WASHINGTON &mdash; Anwar al-Awlaki did not leave much of a trail, frustrating the American and Yemeni intelligence officials pursuing him over the last two years.        

They believed they finally had found him in a village in southern Yemen last year. Yemeni commandos, equipped with tanks and heavy weapons, surrounded the hamlet, but he slipped away, according to a Yemeni official. In May, his pursuers targeted him in a drone attack, but narrowly missed him and other members of his entourage as they drove across a desert.&nbsp;        

The search for Mr. Awlaki, the American-born cleric whose fiery sermons made him a larger-than-life figure in the shadowy world of jihad, finally ended on Friday. After several days of surveillance of Mr. Awlaki, armed drones operated by the Central Intelligence Agency took off from a new, secret American base in the Arabian Peninsula, crossed into northern Yemen and unleashed a barrage of Hellfire missiles at a car carrying him and other top operatives from Al Qaeda&rsquo;s branch in Yemen, including another American militant who had run the group&rsquo;s English-language Internet magazine.        

The strike was the culmination of a desperate manhunt marked not only by near misses and dead ends,&nbsp;but also by a wrenching legal debate in Washington about the legality &mdash; and morality &mdash; of putting an American citizen on a list of top militants marked for death. It also represented the latest killing of a senior terrorist figure in an escalated campaign by the Obama administration.        

&ldquo;The death of Awlaki is a major blow to Al Qaeda&rsquo;s most active operational affiliate,&rdquo; President Obama said in remarks at a swearing-in ceremony for the new chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, outside Washington. Mr. Obama said the cleric had taken &ldquo;the lead role in planning and directing the efforts to murder innocent Americans.&rdquo;        

Mr. Obama also called Mr. Awlaki &ldquo;the leader of external operations for Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula&rdquo; &mdash; the first time the United States has publicly used that description of him. American officials say he inspired militants around the world and helped plan a number of terrorist plots, including the December 2009 attempt to blow up a jetliner bound for Detroit.        

The drone strike was the first C.I.A. strike in Yemen since 2002 &mdash; there have been others since then by the military&rsquo;s Special Operations forces &mdash; and was part of an effort by the spy agency to duplicate in Yemen the covert war the it has been running in Pakistan. Friday&rsquo;s operation was the first time the agency had carried out a deadly strike from a new base in the region. The agency began constructing the base this year, officials said, when it became apparent to intelligence and counterterrorism officials that the threat from Al Qaeda&rsquo;s affiliate in Yemen had eclipsed that coming from its core group of operatives hiding in Pakistan.        

American officials said that the missile strike also killed Samir Khan, an American citizen of Pakistani origin who was an editor of Inspire, Al Qaeda&rsquo;s English-language online magazine. Mr. Khan, who grew up in Queens and North Carolina, proclaimed in the magazine last year that he was &ldquo;proud to be a traitor to America,&rdquo; and edited articles with titles like &ldquo;Make a Bomb in the Kitchen of Your Mom.&rdquo;        

United States officials said that Friday&rsquo;s strike may also have killed Ibrahim Hassan al-Asiri, a Saudi bomb maker responsible for the weapon carried by Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the so-called underwear bomber in the jetliner plot. He is also thought to have built the printer-cartridge bombs that, 10 months later, were intended to be put on cargo planes headed to the United States. Neither of those plots were successful.        

A high-ranking Yemeni security official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that Mr. Awlaki was killed while traveling between Marib and Jawf Provinces in northern Yemen &mdash; areas known for having a Qaeda presence and where there is very little central government control.        

A tribal sheik from Jawf Province, Abdullah al-Jumaili, said he had seen the place where Mr. Awlaki was killed. Reached by phone in Jawf, Mr. Jumaili said that the car Mr. Awlaki and two or three companions had been traveling in was nearly destroyed, and that it might be difficult to recognize bodies. But he said he had also spoken to other tribesmen in the area and was &ldquo;100 percent sure&rdquo; that Mr. Awlaki had been killed.        

There had been an intense debate among lawyers in the months before the Obama administration decided to put Mr. Awlaki on a target list in early 2010, and officials said that Mr. Khan was never on the list. The decision to make Mr. Awlaki a priority to be sought and killed was controversial, given his American citizenship. The American Civil Liberties Union, which fought unsuccessfully in the American court system to challenge the decision to target Mr. Awlaki, condemned the killing.        

Mr. Awlaki&rsquo;s death comes in the midst of a deepening political crisis in Yemen, the Arab world&rsquo;s poorest country, where President Ali Abdullah Saleh has been resisting repeated calls to relinquish power. Mr. Saleh has argued that he is essential to the American efforts to battle Al Qaeda in Yemen, but American officials said there was no connection between Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s abrupt return this week from Saudi Arabia, where he had been recovering from injuries sustained in an assassination attempt, and the timing of Friday&rsquo;s airstrikes.        
Reporting was contributed by Laura Kasinof from Sana, Yemen; Alan Cowell from London; and Souad Mekhennet and Rick Gladstone from New York.
