
MANILA (AP) &mdash; The second typhoon in a week battered the rain-soaked northern Philippines on Saturday, adding misery to the lives of thousands of people, some still perched on rooftops from previous flooding.        

Thousands of people were ordered to evacuate their homes after Typhoon Nalgae slammed ashore south of northeastern Palanan Bay in Isabela Province with winds of 100 miles an hour and gusts of 121 m.p.h. At least one person was killed in a landslide.        

The fast-moving typhoon blew westward, barreling across the mountainous regions of Luzon Island. It weakened slightly as it reached the shore of La Union Province around 4 p.m., about seven hours after it made landfall.        

Forecasters said it would be over the South China Sea by Saturday night and regain strength as it headed farther west toward China&rsquo;s island Hainan Province and Vietnam.        

A landslide in northern Bontoc Province smashed into a passenger van on a mountain highway, killing one passenger and injuring another, said the civil defense chief, Benito Ramos.        

The typhoon took a similar path across areas on Luzon saturated by Typhoon Nesat, which trapped thousands on rooftops and sent huge waves that breached a seawall in Manila Bay. The death toll from Nesat rose to 52 after two more victims drowned in its floodwaters, and 31 others were missing, the Office of Civil Defense said.        

Nesat also pummeled southern China and was downgraded to a tropical storm Friday afternoon just before churning into northern Vietnam, where flood warnings were issued and 20,000 people evacuated. There were no immediate reports of casualties in Vietnam, and the country did not appear to have suffered any major problems.        

In the Philippines, nearly 400,000 people hunkered down in evacuation centers and in the homes of relatives and friends along the new typhoon&rsquo;s path. Rainfall of about an inch an hour within the storm&rsquo;s 340-mile diameter put the northern provinces, including the capital, Manila, on alert.        

Isabela authorities earlier shut down electricity in the province to prevent accidents from falling power pylons and snapped cables.        

The howling winds toppled trees and blew away tin roofs of some houses in Isabela&rsquo;s provincial capital, Ilagan. In nearby Luna township, a bus with about 30 passengers fell on its side on a rice field because of the strong winds, but no one was seriously injured, police said.        

&ldquo;The ground is still supersaturated, and it cannot absorb more water,&rdquo; said Graciano Yumul, the Philippines&rsquo; weather bureau chief. &ldquo;This will just flow down to rivers and towns, and there is a big possibility that landslides, flash flooding and flooding could occur.&rdquo;        

He urged residents still refusing to leave their homes despite the floods from Typhoon Nesat to evacuate because the water was going to rise as Typhoon Nalgae, aggravated by the seasonal monsoon, dumped more rain later Saturday over the northern region, including Manila.        

At least five towns in the rice-growing province of Bulacan and Pampanga, north of Manila, remained submerged three days after Typhoon Nesat had moved on.        

&ldquo;We have nowhere to go,&rdquo; said Celenia Espino of Calumpit township, whose home was filled with knee-deep murky water. &ldquo;We have no means of transportation out of here.&rdquo;        
