
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; NATO forces said Saturday that they had captured a man they described as a high-ranking member of the Haqqani network, the brutal Pakistan-based clan the United States considers one of the biggest threats to bringing stability to Afghanistan.        

Afghan forces, meanwhile, announced Saturday that they had killed a Taliban leader in the north responsible for the stoning deaths of a young couple last year that led to an international outcry.        

The Afghan-led Haqqani clan, which American officials have said has strong links to Pakistan&rsquo;s top spy agency, is accused of conducting an assault lasting hours on the American Embassy in Kabul last month.        

NATO said the captured man, Haji Mali Khan, was the Haqqanis&rsquo; top figure inside Afghanistan, a &ldquo;revered elder&rdquo; among the clan and an uncle of two of its top leaders. In a statement, the coalition called his capture a &ldquo;significant milestone&rdquo; in its escalating efforts to damage the militant group.        

Mr. Khan was arrested Tuesday by Afghan and Western forces in the Jani Khel district of Paktia Province, in eastern Afghanistan. NATO said that Mr. Khan was heavily armed but surrendered without resistance.        

It was unclear how Mr. Khan&rsquo;s detention would affect the Haqqanis&rsquo; leadership, their criminal money-making activities or their ability to send suicide bombers and gunmen into Afghanistan.        

The highest echelons of the clan&rsquo;s leadership are believed to live in Pakistan, which has been loath to jump into the fight against them. American officials say they believe the Pakistanis refuse to do so because they want to use the clan as a way of maintaining influence in Afghanistan, but Adm. Mike Mullen, who stepped down last week as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, recently went further, setting off a diplomatic firestorm when he called the clan &ldquo;a veritable arm&rdquo; of Pakistan&rsquo;s spy agency &mdash; a charge the Pakistanis vehemently deny.        

Mollawi Sardar Zadran, a former Haqqani commander, said he expected the arrest to degrade the network&rsquo;s relationships with local tribal elders in the eastern provinces of Afghanistan, at least temporarily.        

&ldquo;He had special tactics in fighting and attacking military convoys and roadside bombs, and he was a very close and trusted commander,&rdquo; Mr. Zadran said.        

Although Mr. Khan was described as an important Haqqani figure, his name does not appear to have surfaced publicly until recently. In late June, in a news release announcing an airstrike that killed Mr. Khan&rsquo;s deputy, the NATO-led military coalition identified Mr. Khan as the top Haqqani leader in Afghanistan.        

The Haqqani network, which is aligned with the Taliban, attacks American and Afghan forces in Afghanistan&rsquo;s mountainous provinces in the east and has conducted high-profile assaults on targets in Kabul, including the American Embassy and, in June, the Intercontinental Hotel.        

American forces have been fighting to sever the routes that allow the Haqqanis to evade Afghanistan&rsquo;s border police and slip into the country. Lt. Col. Jesse Pearson, the commander of an infantry battalion in Khost Province, said this summer that disrupting the Haqqanis&rsquo; operations and passage through the area was a main priority as coalition forces prepared to draw down.        

&ldquo;I have the most combat power that anyone will have here, the most resources, the most intelligence-gathering ability,&rdquo; he said. His task, he said, was to &ldquo;do as much damage as I can to these enemy networks &mdash; capture as many as I can, kill as many as I can.&rdquo;        

According to NATO, Mr. Khan was based in Paktia Province, where he managed Haqqani bases, brought fighters into Afghanistan across its rugged and porous border with Pakistan, and coordinated the group&rsquo;s supply lines and operations.        

Mr. Zadran said Mr. Khan had coordinated attacks against security convoys and construction crews along an important highway between Khost and Gardez.        

The stoning of the young couple in Kunduz Province in August 2010 offered a glimpse into the consequences of the Taliban&rsquo;s growing influence in previously secure parts of the country. The lack of arrests despite a grisly video of the execution intensified the anger from rights groups.        

The couple, Siddiqa, 19, and her fianc&eacute;, Khayyam, 25, were stoned to death by villagers in broad daylight at the behest of the Taliban. They had tried to elope only to be lured back to their remote village in the Archi district by relatives who turned them in.        

On Saturday, Afghan officials said the Taliban leader who ordered the stoning, Mollawi Mansoor, had been killed in a gun battle with the Afghan border police. At least two police officers were also killed, Afghan officials said.        

Sheik Sadruddin, the district governor, said that officials had been pursuing Mr. Mansoor for months. He said that the Taliban leader had also personally helped to stone the couple.        

&ldquo;Finally, he got what he needed,&rdquo; the governor said.        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul, and an Afghan employee of The New York Times from Kunduz.
