
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; Nelson Mandela, South Africa&rsquo;s frail elder statesman, returned home Friday after spending two nights in a hospital where he was treated for an acute respiratory infection. Officials said the former president joked with them and teased his wife, Gra&ccedil;a, before his discharge.        

&ldquo;For a 92-year-old, he surprises us on a daily basis with his powers of recovery,&rdquo; Lt. Gen. Vejay Ramlakan, the surgeon general of South Africa&rsquo;s National Defense Force, said during a news conference Friday.        

Headlines in the newspapers Friday morning described a nation that was holding its breath for news of its iconic leader, and the announcement that he was going home seemed to lead to a vast, relieved exhalation across the country.        

Mr. Mandela responded well to treatment during his hospitalization, General Ramlakan said, and military doctors responsible for his care will continue to intensively monitor him at his home in a wealthy suburb of Johannesburg. The general noted that Mr. Mandela had had respiratory infections before and reminded the public that Mr. Mandela had tuberculosis during his 27-year imprisonment. It is a disease that can damage the lungs.        

The news conference on Friday, attended by the country&rsquo;s deputy president, the head of Mr. Mandela&rsquo;s foundation, members of his family and senior officials from the governing African National Congress, quieted growing fears over his condition.        

The failure of officials to plainly describe Mr. Mandela&rsquo;s ailment or to provide regular updates since his admission to the hospital on Wednesday afternoon had led many to suspect that he was gravely, perhaps even fatally, ill. Reporters had set up an all-night vigil at Milpark Hospital.        

A chastened Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe promised Friday, &ldquo;From now onwards we will keep you posted if there are any developments.&rdquo; And Mr. Motlanthe conceded later in the news conference, &ldquo;With the wisdom of hindsight we could have handled this matter differently.&rdquo;        

Though Mr. Mandela&rsquo;s doctors declined to answer specific questions about his infection, citing patient confidentiality, they did offer some details that suggested the severe encroachments of age on Mr. Mandela&rsquo;s life. General Ramlakan said that for the past few years, Mr. Mandela has not been as mobile as he once was and has needed help getting around.        

&ldquo;Despite all of this, his amazing positive attitude allows him to cope with the difficulties of old age with the greatest of graces,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Motlanthe said he expected Mr. Mandela to be around for his 93rd birthday in July &mdash; and beyond.        

&ldquo;He is receiving the best treatment from the best available health professionals in the country, and that should reassure all of us that there is no need for us to panic,&rdquo; Mr. Motlanthe said.        
Alan Cowell contributed reporting from Paris.
