
WASHINGTON &mdash; After his Senate confirmation as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Martin E. Dempsey knew he had some catching up to do before being sworn in last Friday as the nation&rsquo;s highest-ranking officer and the principal military adviser to the president and secretary of defense.        

The gap in his training was not the geopolitics of the Middle East, a perpetual source of American security&nbsp;concerns. Even before the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, General Dempsey was among the few senior officers who had spent significant time immersed in Muslim culture, having served for several years as an adviser to Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s security forces. And since 9/11, he has had two tours in Iraq and has been the acting commander of American forces across the Middle East and Central Asia.        

He also did not need to study how to hold together a military distressed by the longest period of nonstop war ever sustained by an all-volunteer force. General Dempsey was a chief architect of the blueprints on maintaining and rebuilding the Army when he ran its Training and Doctrine Command before his elevation to Army chief of staff.        

Instead, General Dempsey said in an interview, he realized he needed a better understanding of the economy, which seemed likely to define his tenure in the way that counterterrorism, counterinsurgency and combat preoccupied his predecessors over the past decade. During General Dempsey&rsquo;s term, a significant challenge will be how best to care for the military and protect the United States&rsquo; national security interests with drastically fewer Defense Department dollars.        

So he traveled to his alma mater, West Point, entered the social sciences department and asked the professors to educate him about economics.        

&ldquo;I have to confess, I paid no attention to this as a cadet and have done nothing to increase my awareness of economic issues between age 22 and 59,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And here I am, back as the prodigal son, saying, &lsquo;I should have paid attention.&rsquo; The economic factors exist. They will inform my tenure as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. To use the old clich&eacute;: that is what it is.&rdquo;        

General Dempsey acknowledged an emerging truth about the size of the American military during the coming years: &ldquo;I do think that we will be smaller,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But there are things we&rsquo;ve learned over the last 10 years, capabilities that didn&rsquo;t exist 10 years ago that exist today that can, for example, offset and mitigate the risk of a somewhat smaller conventional or traditional force.&rdquo;        

It is up to his two bosses, President Obama and Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta, to decide with Congress how much money can be committed to national security and on the current missions that are no longer affordable.        

General Dempsey said his task was &ldquo;to articulate the risk that we face at certain levels of resourcing,&rdquo; and he pledged to do that without &ldquo;threat inflation or fear tactics.&rdquo;        

General Dempsey has filtered those challenges through his 37 years in uniform. But he articulates them in terms that are not surprising coming from one of the few four-star officers with an advanced degree in humanities, in this case a master&rsquo;s in English from Duke University.        

He said he believes that in the second decade after the terrorist attacks of 9/11, the military is confronting &ldquo;a strategic inflection point, where the institution fundamentally re-examines itself.&rdquo;        

It is the third such inflection point in his career.        

The first was after the war in Vietnam, when the draft ended, challenging the military to build an all-volunteer force and keep a edge in quality even as it shrank significantly. The second was after the Persian Gulf war of 1991, when the military had to reassess and defend its role in a post-Soviet world, and again shrank significantly.        

&ldquo;And then along comes the threat of Al Qaeda and its associated movements, global networks that threaten us,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And we go through this period in the first decade of the 21st century and become extraordinarily good at counterterrorism, counterinsurgency, stability operations and building partner capacity.        

&ldquo;Now, I think we are at another inflection point, frankly, and what that inflection point will involve is a re-examination of the roles, missions, core competencies of the joint force,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;With each inflection point, there is a complication. The complication this time is our economic stature as a nation.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
Asked to reflect on the military axiom that &ldquo;when the money is gone, you have to think smarter,&rdquo; General Dempsey paused and replied, &ldquo;Inshalla,&rdquo; the Arabic word for &ldquo;God willing.&rdquo;        

He has already made one change to the operations of the military&rsquo;s joint staff, resurrecting the position of senior enlisted adviser to the chairman, which has been vacant since 2008. He gave the post to Sgt. Maj. Bryan Battaglia of the Marine Corps, a veteran of the Iraq war with a Purple Heart, who will focus on the development of enlisted personnel and noncommissioned officers across the military.        

General Dempsey grew up in Bayonne, N.J. His father was an oil refinery worker who held a second job as a mail carrier, and his mother stocked shelves at a local department store. He married his high school sweetheart, Deanie, and they have three children, Christopher, Megan and Caitlin. All three have served in the Army.        

In lighter moments, General Dempsey has been known to reveal a fine Irish tenor, channeling his inner American songbook on such standards as &ldquo;New York, New York.&rdquo;        

On that topic, he shares an interest with the new secretary of defense, Mr. Panetta, who has kept secret that he is a devoted pianist. Mr. Panetta says he is as proud of his Italian-American roots as General Dempsey is of his Irish-American upbringing.        

&ldquo;He is a soldier&rsquo;s soldier,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta said of the new chairman. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s nice to have somebody who is a straight shooter because, frankly, the challenges are too damn tough to begin with if you&rsquo;re dealing with somebody who doesn&rsquo;t tell it like it is.&rdquo;        

Over dinner with General Dempsey and in other conversations, Mr. Panetta said he gained an important insight.        

&ldquo;He&rsquo;s a big Sinatra fan,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta said. &ldquo;He likes to belt out favorite Sinatra tunes. I basically told him, though, that, &lsquo;I&rsquo;m sorry, but a guy from an Irish background is not going to be a member of Rat Pack.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        
