
CAIRO &mdash; Egypt&rsquo;s interim military rulers have apparently agreed to allow foreign election observers and to let political parties take a greater role in creating a permanent government.        

The concessions come as the military rulers seek to shore up public support, amid mounting criticism that their management of the transition has been opaque and inconsistent.        

Top military officers signed the agreement over the weekend with leaders of about a dozen political parties, including at least two Islamist groups &mdash; one founded by the Muslim Brotherhood and another by Muslim traditionalists known as Salafis.        

Among other things, the agreement sets out a transition timetable that could put off the election of the next Egyptian president until 2013 or later.        

Last week, the military said elections for a new Parliament would be held in stages beginning in late November and ending in early 2012.        

&ldquo;No later than the first week of April 2012,&rdquo; the agreement said, the Parliament&rsquo;s two chambers will choose a panel to draft a new Constitution, a process that is likely to take at least a year. Most analysts here expect the new Constitution to lean toward a strong Parliament and perhaps a prime minister, with a relatively weak president.        

&ldquo;Doors will be then open for the registering of presidential candidates in the next day after approving the new Constitution,&rdquo; the agreement said, implying an election date in late 2013 or 2014.        

In the weekend agreement&rsquo;s most concrete concession, the military rulers appeared to reverse themselves on foreign election monitors. Military officers had said over the summer that they would be barred as an intrusion on Egyptian sovereignty.        

Several people who have talked to military officials said that the officers objected to election &ldquo;monitors&rdquo; because they believed the word denoted supervision or control, but that &ldquo;observers&rdquo; from nongovernment organizations would be welcome.        

The most far-reaching part of the weekend agreement may be the guiding principles it sets down for drafting the Constitution, a political flashpoint here.        

Liberals have proposed a binding preconstitutional bill of rights to prevent a potential Islamist majority from limiting individual freedom in the name of religious morality. Islamists, including the Muslim Brotherhood, object to that idea as undemocratic. Others, meanwhile, say they worry that the military will build in a role for itself as a guarantor of a secular state.        

The weekend agreement appears to prevent the military from setting ground rules unilaterally or defining its own role. It provides for &ldquo;agreement on a set of principles to be adopted by all the signatory parties when drafting the new Constitution,&rdquo; and adds, &ldquo;Those principles are to be considered an informal code of ethics endorsed by the parties.&rdquo;        

Mustafa al-Naggar, one of the political leaders involved in the weekend meeting, called the principles &ldquo;a bill of honor&rdquo; and said in a note on his Facebook page that &ldquo;everyone will commit to abide by it after the elections, during the choice of the Constitution-drafting committee and the drafting of the Constitution.&rdquo;        

The agreement provides for two-thirds of the seats in Parliament to be filled by party lists through proportional representation, and one-third by individual candidates elected in head-to-head races. Candidates on party lists could run individually as well.        

The agreement includes an endorsement for the embattled military leaders, saying that the signers &ldquo;have declared their full support of the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces&rsquo; decisions and appreciate the efforts made by the military for a safe and sound transition of power.&rdquo;        

On Friday, thousands of protesters gathered in Tahrir Square on the day that the military had once called a deadline for the handover of power to civilian rule, a reminder of how taking control of the country has worn away the military&rsquo;s popularity since it forced President Hosni Mubarak from power eight months ago. Political activists denounced the dozen parties who signed the agreement.        
Heba Afify contributed reporting.
