
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Despite the death of Anwar al-Awlaki, the infamous Yemeni-American cleric who was a propagandist for aspiring jihadists around the globe, Yemen&rsquo;s battle against Al Qaeda is far from complete, as security forces fought over the weekend against Islamic militants who control large areas of territory in the country&rsquo;s restive south.        

In Zinjibar, a city captured last May by Islamic militants linked with Al Qaeda, about 25 militants and 20 soldiers have been killed in fighting over two days, local security officials said.        

Dozens of other militants were killed by airstrikes elsewhere in Abyan Province, the officials said, including one that hit a school in the city of Jaar that was being used by the militants as a base.        

The government also announced Sunday that Ibrahim Hassan al-Asiri, a Saudi bomb maker who was reported to have possibly been killed in the airstrike against Mr. Awlaki on Friday, was not among the dead.        

A Yemeni official identified two other people killed in the American airstrike as Muhammad Salem al-Naaj and Abdul-Rahman bin Arfaj, both believed to be members of Al Qaeda&rsquo;s Yemeni branch, Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.        

As various factions vie for control of the government in Sana, the rising power of Al Qaeda will be a challenge for any future government, as well as a great concern to Saudi Arabia and the United States, the militant group&rsquo;s principal international targets.        

President Ali Abdullah Saleh, who has ruled for 33 years, has faced months of huge street protests, challenges to his power from a rival clan and a defected Army brigade, and international pressure to step down.        

Meanwhile, some outlying provinces have fallen completely out of government control, while in others fighting continues between the government and its foes. The chaos has created a security vacuum that Al Qaeda has proved ready to exploit.        

In Shabwa Province, where Mr. Awlaki&rsquo;s family comes from, residents say tribesmen linked with Al Qaeda control large areas of territory and maintain checkpoints as if they are the governing authority across the province.        

In Abyan, abutting Shabwa to the southwest, Islamic militants first seized Jaar in late March, raiding its banks and taking over government buildings. From Jaar they moved south to take over the coastal provincial capital, Zinjibar, in May.        

According to residents of Jaar and Zinjibar, security forces fled the two cities, allowing the militants to enter and wreak havoc. The fighting in Abyan has displaced thousands of civilians who fled to the nearby coastal city of Aden.        

Until July, the government, preoccupied with unrest in the capital and elsewhere, seemed to pay little attention to Abyan. Only one brigade, whose allegiance was unclear, battled the militants there. For months, the brigade, led by Gen. Muhammad al-Somli, was trapped by the militants in a sports stadium outside Zinjibar, during which it received at least one airdrop of food and essential supplies from the American government.        

In mid-July, the government began airstrikes against the militants, and last month it sent reinforcements from Aden to free General Somli&rsquo;s brigade and retake Zinjibar.        

The government heralded its success three weeks ago, sayings its forces had recaptured Zinjibar and sent the militants fleeing. However, clashes continue inside the city, as the intense fighting over the weekend shows.        

On Saturday night, Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula released a statement taking credit for fighting the security forces in Zinjibar, as well for as a series of bomb attacks on government buildings in Aden in mid-September.        

&ldquo;With the grace of Allah, the mujahedeen were able to ambush the political security forces in the area surrounding the political security building in Zinjibar,&rdquo; the statement said. &ldquo;One hundred and thirty from the political security forces were killed, and an unknown number of others were injured.&rdquo;        

In the south, where large portions of the population remain disgruntled with the central government, it is not always clear who is a member of Al Qaeda and who is just a young man with a gun. However, local reports and video from Zinjibar suggest the presence of at least some Qaeda members among the armed militants fighting the government there, some of whom are foreign citizens. Other militants appear to have come from provinces across Yemen.        
Yasser Alarami contributed reporting.
