
Khaled Abdel Nasser, a son of Egypt&rsquo;s most revered leader, who captured the world&rsquo;s attention in the late 1980s when he was tried and acquitted of helping to assassinate two Israeli diplomats, died Sept. 15 at a Cairo hospital. He was 62.        

The Egyptian government announced the death. The cause was complications from digestive surgery, news reports said.        

Mr. Nasser was the oldest of the five sons of Gamal Abdel Nasser, who helped lead the 1952 revolution that overthrew the Egyptian monarchy and who served as president of Egypt from 1956 to 1970. President Nasser was hailed in the Arab world for championing pan-Arab nationalism and opposition to Israel.        

Khaled Abdel Nasser was indicted in 1988 on charges of murder, attempted murder and conspiracy to murder in connection with what was said to be his membership in a leftist revolutionary organization, Egypt&rsquo;s Revolution. The group had claimed responsibility for killing two Israeli diplomats and trying to kill American diplomats. Mr. Nasser was said to have been one of the group&rsquo;s three founders and to have arranged financing from Libya.        

The legal case aroused Egyptians, many of whom opposed their country&rsquo;s 1979 peace treaty with Israel. They were appalled that the son of their national hero faced the death penalty.        

&ldquo;How can we execute the son of Gamal Abdel Nasser for killing Israelis, our enemies?&rdquo; Khaled Mohieddin asked in an interview with The Los Angeles Times in 1990. Mr. Mohieddin, for whom Khaled was named, had helped Nasser plot the 1952 revolution.        

After the indictment, Mr. Nasser, who was not thought to be the gunman, fled to London and then to Belgrade. For much of the 29-month trial, he was tried in absentia with 19 other defendants, including one of President Nasser&rsquo;s nephews. He returned for the trial&rsquo;s last 10 months.        

Mr. Nasser and four others were acquitted in 1991. The leader of Egypt&rsquo;s Revolution, Mahmoud Nureddin, was sentenced to life imprisonment. He died in jail in 1998. The rest received sentences of 6 months to 15 years.        

Khaled Abdel Nasser was born in 1949. The Daily News Egypt recounted an episode in 1960 in which Khaled was riding with his father in a car as crowds yelled wildly and waved. Khaled waved back. &ldquo;Have you gone nuts, boy?&rdquo; his father snapped, worried that Khaled was feeling self-important.        

At his father&rsquo;s funeral on Oct. 1, 1970, Khaled, weeping wildly, threw himself on his father&rsquo;s coffin as it was being transferred to a gun carriage for the funeral procession.        

Seven months later, Anwar el-Sadat, Gamal Abdel Nasser&rsquo;s successor as president, paid a call on the family to request the $36,000 bulletproof limousine that was parked in the family garage, Time magazine reported. The family said no, arguing that the car belonged to the man, not the office. In the midst of a heated argument, Khaled ran to the garage, doused the car with gasoline and set it on fire, destroying it.        

Mr. Nasser taught engineering at Cairo University for many years. The Egyptian news media reported widely on his presence this year at the demonstrations in Tahrir Square in Cairo that led to the overthrow of President Hosni Mubarak and his government. Mr. Nasser&rsquo;s funeral was attended by Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, chief of the ruling military council, and others viewed as possible presidential candidates.        

Mr. Nasser is survived by three children.        
