
TUNIS &mdash; As the country that kicked off the Arab Spring prepares for its first free election this month, Tunisia&rsquo;s transitional prime minister, Beji Caid Essebsi, has some advice for his counterparts in Egypt, Libya or other former Arab autocracies dealing with impatient public demands unleashed by the revolutions.        

&ldquo;When someone is hungry asking for food, you only give him what he needs,&rdquo; Mr. Essebsi said, describing his go-slow approach to meeting protesters&rsquo; demands for jobs and freedoms. &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t give him more, or else he might die, so we offer a step-by-step approach.&rdquo;        

Mr. Essebsi, 84, was picked as prime minister in February because during a long career as an official of the Tunisian dictatorship he built a record of trying to change the system from within. But as interim leader he found himself obliged to deal with continuous eruptions of protests demanding jobs, wages and immediate retribution against members of the former ruling elite.        

He said he often let the protesters express themselves &mdash; but sometimes found the need to crack down.        

Mr. Essebsi said it was a choice between yielding to chaos, or loosening the grip gradually, defending his occasional reliance on riot police and tear gas to keep order. His approach has won him broad support but also led a few activists to compare him to the ousted dictator Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali.        

&ldquo;Sometimes the proponents of freedom have demands that go beyond logic,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and it is more difficult to protect freedom from the proponents of freedom themselves than from the enemies.&rdquo;        

Mr. Essebsi spoke during an hour-and-a-half interview in an ornately tiled parlor in the centuries-old complex known as Tunis&rsquo;s casbah, on the eve of a visit this week to the White House and weeks before the election, on Oct. 23, of a new constituent assembly that will govern Tunisia while drafting a new constitution. It promises to be the first free and fair election of the Arab Spring, offering him the historic chance to hand over power in a peaceful, democratic transition &mdash; a rare event in the history of the region.        

&ldquo;It is a duty and an honor,&rdquo; he said.        

But sounding at times like a political candidate just beginning a new campaign, he also acknowledged that he was not yet ready to retire and hoped for a continued role in the new government &mdash; perhaps as its prime minister.        

&ldquo;Why not?&rdquo; he asked. &ldquo;When you are a politician, it means to work for the benefit of the country, not to stay home. In politics, it ends only when one dies.&rdquo;        

For Mr. Essebsi, politics began in the early 1950s under French colonial rule. He was a young lawyer representing members of the independence movement around Habib Bourguiba, who in 1956 became Tunisia&rsquo;s first president. Mr. Essebsi served him as an adviser, interior minister, defense minister and ambassador to Paris. After Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s 1987 bloodless coup, Mr. Essebsi served in Tunisia&rsquo;s rubber-stamp Parliament until 1994.        

But he was known since the 1970s as a voice within the ruling elite pushing for more democracy. That combination of experience and relative liberalism is what earned him the job of interim prime minister after Mr. Ben Ali fled on Jan. 14 and mounting street protests forced the sitting prime minister to resign soon after.        

Mr. Essebsi&rsquo;s supporters say he exemplifies the intertwined Western and Arab influences distinctive to Tunisia and its modern founding father, Mr. Bourguiba. Mr. Essebsi often quotes the Koran from memory, his admirers note, but until a few years ago, his family owned a wine store. (Alcohol is prohibited in Islam. Mr. Essebsi could not be reached for comment on this point, but his spokesman said he had never seen him drink alcohol.)        

Some activists, though, call him &ldquo;a new Ben Ali&rdquo; who has failed to deliver fast enough on the revolution&rsquo;s promises of new jobs and dignity.        

&ldquo;The only ones who have legitimacy are those who struggled for change before Jan. 14 and are still struggling,&rdquo; said Assia Haj Salem, a lawyer who helped organize a recent protest.        

&ldquo;If he stays in the coming government, I will assassinate him and declare that I did,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;He is rejected by the people.&rdquo;        

Mr. Essebsi has responded to the continuing protests and occasional violence in the capital and around the country by alternately pushing back and giving in. When a former Ben Ali justice minister was released from prison around the same time that a wealthy family ally fled the country in August, thousands took to the streets of Tunis and other cities to demand legal action, if not a new revolution.        

Police used tear gas to break up the protests. But they also re-arrested the former justice minister, who Mr. Essebsi said remained behind bars.        
Heba Afify contributed reporting from Cairo.
