
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; In the two weeks since the leader of Afghanistan&rsquo;s peace process was assassinated, an intense power struggle has opened among the nation&rsquo;s ethnic groups &mdash; and within them &mdash; as well as among other powerful factions here, laying bare a crisis that is buffeting President Hamid Karzai from every side.        

Though the peace process had made little headway, the figure at the head of the High Council for Peace, Burhanuddin Rabbani, a former president, had given the body stature. He had also protected Mr. Karzai from the rival camps within his government.        

But with Mr. Rabbani&rsquo;s assassination on Sept. 20, the lack of a national consensus on how to make peace has become increasingly apparent. In successive statements over the last two weeks, Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s government appears to be scrambling to appease various domestic factions. But it has done little to assure Afghans that despite the serious breaches of security evidenced in the number of high-level assassinations this year, the government is able to control the country and has a plan for how to end the fighting.        

In a speech to the nation on Monday evening, Mr. Karzai tried to modulate the different messages, giving a little bit to all sides but hardly laying out a vision for the road ahead, other than to say that he planned to hold a traditional jirga, or tribal assembly, to discuss the Strategic Partnership with the United States, the peace process and relations with Pakistan.        

A traditional jirga, compared with a constitutional loya jirga, has no legal standing and will probably be viewed as an effort by Mr. Karzai to give a populist stamp to policies he has already decided on.        

In the context of the last two weeks, amid a series of inconsistent statements from Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s government about the peace process and Pakistan, a jirga offers scant hope of bringing clarity. The apparent receding of peace efforts at a time of persistent violence and a steadily diminishing American role is a bleak prospect for all Afghans and the Westerners who support them.        

&ldquo;The message from the Taliban couldn&rsquo;t be bolder. What else needs to happen for the president to understand it?&rdquo; said Abdullah Abdullah, who ran against Mr. Karzai in the 2009 election.        

&ldquo;Where is it that he is leading?&rdquo;        

Not unlike the chaotic streets of Kabul, it looks increasingly as if each faction is pursuing its own agenda with little sense of the national interest, said Mahmoud Saikal, a former deputy foreign minister under Mr. Karzai.        

&ldquo;If you take away the traffic lights, you have a lot of accidents, you can&rsquo;t guarantee the security of people on the roads, so they take their own initiative,&rdquo; said Mr. Saikal, who is a proponent of a tough-minded approach to reaching out to the Taliban that would require them to renounce their past.        

The problem, according to several Afghans and Westerners, is that the government allowed a free-flowing reconciliation process, which was ill defined from the start, and operated outside government institutions through the High Peace Council, which was itself something of an ad hoc creation.        

Not least, some of those joining the process were not vetted by either the intelligence service or the Interior Ministry, according to officials at each department.        

As a result, many Afghans were left uncertain about what kind of deal might be made and uneasy about whether Mr. Karzai would decide to bring back the Taliban and give them power.        

The opaqueness of the peace process &mdash; only a handful of people, including Mr. Rabbani, appear to have known who was being talked to &mdash; is now being amplified as the different circles around Mr. Karzai all push different messages into the public debate, but with little explanation of their intentions        

&ldquo;The confusion is within the president&rsquo;s team,&rdquo; said an Afghan who is close to the presidential palace. &ldquo;Some have been lobbying for a change in the policy towards Pakistan, some have been trying to downplay it, but there is no one policy in the president&rsquo;s team.&rdquo;        

The former members of the Northern Alliance, most of whom are ethnic Tajiks and Hazaras and distrust the Taliban and hate Pakistan, include the first vice president, Marshal Muhammad Qasim Fahim, and the interior minister, Gen. Bismullah Khan Mohammadi. They appear to be pushing for a tough stance toward Pakistan, accusing the country of direct involvement in the assassination of Mr. Rabbani, who was also a former member of the Northern Alliance.        
Sangar Rahimi and Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul, and Salman Masood from Pakistan.
