
BAGHDAD &mdash; Violence erupted yet again in restive Anbar Province on Monday, as suicide bombers and gunmen disguised as security officers attacked two police headquarters and took hostages.        

No group claimed responsibility for the assaults, but they were similar to others that Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia had committed this year, including one on a provincial council office in the city of Tirkrit in March that killed more than 40 people.        

The suicide bombers stormed the police headquarters in the rural area of Baghdadi at about 9:15 a.m. and took 15 people hostage.        

&ldquo;We were sitting in the lobby of the building, and suddenly four gunmen wearing police uniforms pointed their rifles at us and ordered our guards to drop their weapons,&rdquo; said Abu Aziz, a member of the local government. &ldquo;They pulled their shirts down and said, &lsquo;We have suicide vests.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

Two hours later, Iraqi commandos raided the headquarters, killing two of the suicide bombers. Two other assailants detonated their explosive vests. Five police officers were killed in the attack; the 15 hostages were eventually freed.        

At about the same time, other gunmen attacked a police headquarters in the city of Hit, killing two police officers and kidnapping another.        

Although the attacks raised troubling questions about the security situation in Anbar Province, officials in Baghdad said the fact that the commandos were able to free the hostages in Baghdadi was a sign that the Iraqi government was able to protect its people. The United States is scheduled to withdraw all of its troops from Iraq by the end of the year.        

&ldquo;We were able to kill 4 terrorists and freed 15 policemen,&rdquo; said the spokesman for the Ministry of Defense, Mohammed al-Askari. &ldquo;Members of Al Qaeda in Anbar are trying to send a message to say that we are still here, but their top leaders are being arrested and killed by our security forces.&rdquo;        

In recent months, violence has increased significantly in Anbar, a predominately Sunni province that was once virtually controlled by Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia. Nearly 1,400 American soldiers have been killed there since 2003.        

In September, gunmen executed 22 Shiite pilgrims that were traveling through Anbar to Syria.        

Ahmed Abu Resha, the head of the Awakening in Anbar, a group of Sunni fighters whom the United States nurtured and paid to fight Al Qaeda, blamed Syria for the recent unrest. Syria shares a large border with Anbar Province.        

&ldquo;Syria is trying to make unrest in Iraq to take the attention off the unrest going on there,&rdquo; Mr. Resha said.        
Employees of The New York Times contributed reporting from Anbar, Kirkuk and Diyala.
