
PARIS &mdash; The French colonial experience in Algeria, marked by warfare, terrorism and torture, is a wound that never quite seems to close. Anger and guilt about Algeria infuse some of the anxiety today about the heavily immigrant and Muslim banlieues, or suburbs, about the French concern with national identity, radical Islam and veiled women.        

Lately, France has been moved and angered by two films about Algeria and the French confrontation with its colonial past. The films could not be more different: one, made by Rachid Bouchareb, a Frenchman of Algerian descent, is a raging historical fiction about the Algerian fight for independence; the other, made by Xavier Beauvois, is suffused with religious belief and saintliness.        

But both are set in a period of violence, the first when the Algerian independence fighters of the National Liberation Front, the F.L.N. &mdash; terrorists in French eyes &mdash; began the nasty and blood-drenched struggle to throw off French rule, and the second when radical Islam was gaining hold in Algeria and trying to take power in a civil war, an effort crushed by the Algerian government itself.        

One film features Algerian martyrs and the other French martyrs. Both are remarkably unbalanced, and both use the &ldquo;other&rdquo; as puppets in a historical drama. One glorifies criminality and terrorism in the name of Algerian freedom and justice, while the other, set in the mid-1990s, looks on horrified as religion mixed with Algerian politics seeks to justify murder and terrorism.        

Yet both films have been chosen by their respective countries, France and Algeria, to represent them for the foreign-language Academy Award, which will be presented on Feb. 27.        

&ldquo;It is a wound,&rdquo; said Benjamin Stora, one of France&rsquo;s best historians of Algeria and French colonialism. &ldquo;Algeria is France, it is part of the history of French nationalism. Algeria continues to obsess people and still torments French society.&rdquo;        

Mr. Beauvois&rsquo;s movie, &ldquo;Des Hommes et Des Dieux&rdquo; (&ldquo;Of Gods and Men&rdquo;) is a quiet, contemplative drama about faith, but it sold more than two million tickets here within five weeks of its opening. (It opens in New York on Feb. 25.) It features some of France&rsquo;s best actors, including Michael Lonsdale and Lambert Wilson, in a largely true story of a group of nine Trappist monks who live among the Algerian poor in the monastery of Tibhirine, where they decide to remain even though they sense a growing danger. In March 1996, seven were kidnapped during the Algerian civil war, held for two months and found dead, beheaded, in May.        

The details of their kidnapping and deaths remain unclear, although the Armed Islamic Group (G.I.A.) claimed responsibility.        

The film touched something profound in France, a largely Roman Catholic country that is fiercely proud of its constitutional secularism, but also haunted by the loss of selflessness and faith.        

Le Monde said, &ldquo;The monks of Tibhirine incarnate everything that the public, from the left to the right, no longer finds in society &mdash; nobility of spirit, a sense of sacrifice, freedom, sincerity, daily ecology, meditation, reflection on death.&rdquo; L&rsquo;Express said the film &ldquo;offers a magnificent response to terrorists, as to soldiers, while showing the torments of those who refuse the logic of war.&rdquo; Le Figaro said more acutely that the film touched on contemporary unease: &ldquo;The Islamist surge and the situation of Christians in the Muslim world in general.&rdquo;        

While the murder of the monks hangs over the tale, and the monks themselves talk about the meaning of the sacrifice they sense is coming, the film is idyllic and bizarrely apolitical. It seems strangely ignorant of the colonial implantation that the monastery represents, so many years after Algeria won its independence, and that a proselytizing Roman Catholicism itself represents. It is an odd obliviousness in a poor, divided country where jihad is on the rise as the political response of the very peasantry among whom the monks live so blissfully, and apparently blindly.        

&ldquo;Hors-la-Loi&rdquo; (&ldquo;Outside the Law&rdquo;) is a simpler business, an action film, with lots of noise, speechifying and blood. (It opened in New York in November.) When it was first shown, at the Cannes Film Festival, riot police officers were stationed nearby to deal with angry French demonstrators, and in France it has been something of a commercial flop.        

Le Parisien called it &ldquo;the film that disturbs&rdquo; because it is an angry and coarse indictment of French colonial rule, opening with the May 1945 massacre of mostly unarmed Algerian civilians by French soldiers in the town of S&eacute;tif &mdash; civilians who saw the end of the Second World War, as did many in Africa and Indochina, as marking the end of the French empire.        
Maïa de la Baume contributed reporting.
