
HEBRON, West Bank  &mdash;  A 15-year-old Palestinian was fighting for his life on Friday in a hospital in this city in the southern West Bank after being shot in a brush with armed Jewish settlers.        

It was the second such incident in two days. On Thursday, a young Palestinian was killed by an Israeli, presumed to be a local Jewish settler, in the Palestinian village of Iraq Burin in the northern West Bank.        

The Israeli police said that in both cases, the Israelis opened fire after they were attacked by Palestinians throwing stones. Local Palestinians denied that stones had been thrown in either case.        

After a period of relative calm, there has been an increase in recent weeks in violence on the West Bank, although the incidents have been localized and apparently unrelated. Israeli-Palestinian peace talks have been stalled for months, while the Palestinian Authority leadership faced a new challenge this week when Al Jazeera published leaked documents showing Palestinian concessions to Israel on sensitive issues during past negotiations. Relatives of Yusuf Khlayel, the youth who was critically injured when he was shot in the head on Friday, gathered at the Ahli hospital in Hebron. Yusuf&rsquo;s father, Fakhri, said that he and his son had gone in the morning to work their land between the Palestinian villages of Beit Omar and Safa, north of Hebron, when a group of more than 100 settlers appeared. Mr. Khlayel said he was some distance away from his son when the shooting started and did not see exactly what happened.        

A few hundred yards away, a relative, Murad Khlayel, 19, was shot and injured by one of a smaller group of settlers who had apparently split off from the main group, witnesses said. Murad Khlayel was also hospitalized, with a gunshot wound to his right arm.        

Murad&rsquo;s brother Riad said that half a dozen settlers had approached the village of Safa at about 9 a.m. He said that young Palestinians had come out of their houses and stood before the settlers, who started shooting. Another brother, Ahmed, who witnessed the shooting, said the settlers were in their 20s and 30s. He said that the Palestinians had called the Israeli military, and soldiers arrived after the settlers had fled.        

Micky Rosenfeld, a spokesman for the Israeli police, said that about 100 settlers were on a walking tour of the area near Beit Omar when they were approached by Palestinians who threw stones. He said that 20 of the settlers were detained for questioning.        

In the incident on Thursday in the northern West Bank, the settler who shot and killed Omar Qadous has not been identified. Mr. Rosenfeld said that the police were searching for him. He added that video from closed circuit television from a nearby observation post showed an Israeli being attacked by Palestinians throwing stones.        

In Hebron, about 2,000 Palestinians demonstrated after noon prayers on Friday in support of the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, and against Al Jazeera the satellite channel. While Egyptians were defying the authorities by protesting against their country&rsquo;s entrenched leadership, and after the Tunisians overthrew theirs, the only demonstrations in West Bank cities on Friday were those showing support for Mr. Abbas, orchestrated by his Fatah party.        

Dozens of members of the Palestinian Authority&rsquo;s National Security Forces rode through the streets of Hebron in a show of force. Hebron, a conservative city, has long been considered a stronghold of the Authority&rsquo;s rival, the Islamic militant group Hamas.        

Col. Hussein Yusuf, the chief of the authority&rsquo;s forces in the Hebron district, said in an interview that there was no concern that the kind of protests in other Arab countries could spread to the West Bank.        

&ldquo;For the Palestinians, our enemy is clear,&rdquo; Colonel Yusuf said. &ldquo;Our fight with Israel is long. The Palestinian leaders are with the Palestinian people, and we trust the leaders to achieve Palestinian rights.&rdquo;        

Colonel Yusuf added that the Palestinian Authority was committed to a political process, and that violence against Israel was outlawed.        

In an Israeli TV interview broadcast on Thursday, Maj. Gen. Avi Mizrahi, the Israeli military commander responsible for the Israeli-occupied West Bank, said he would not tolerate violence by settlers against Palestinians.        

The Civil Administration, the department of the military responsible for civil affairs in the West Bank, said in a statement, &ldquo;The security forces wish to condemn the two violent incidents of the past 24 hours.&rdquo;        
