
NEW DELHI &mdash; The Dalai Lama, Tibet&rsquo;s exiled spiritual leader, scrapped plans on Tuesday to attend the 80th birthday celebration of a fellow Nobel laureate, Desmond M. Tutu of South Africa, after the host government did not grant his visa request.        

Critics viewed the South African government&rsquo;s behavior as a capitulation to China, one of South Africa&rsquo;s most important economic partners and a strong opponent of the Dalai Lama, whom the Chinese authorities consider subversive.        

A statement by the Dalai Lama&rsquo;s office in New Delhi said he and his entourage had expected to visit South Africa from Thursday to Oct. 14, had submitted visa applications at the end of August and had submitted their passports two weeks ago. His agenda included the Oct. 6 birthday of Archbishop Tutu and a number of public talks.        

However, his office said in a statement, &ldquo;Since the South African government seems to find it inconvenient to issue a visa to His Holiness the Dalai Lama, His Holiness has decided to call off this visit to South Africa.&rdquo;        

The statement did not address the question of why South Africa did not grant the visa, and the South African Embassy in New Delhi did not immediately respond to a request for comment. But officials in South Africa said they followed normal procedures in reviewing the visa request.        

Archbishop Tutu lashed out at the South African government, calling its conduct disgraceful and discourteous toward the Dalai Lama. At a news conference in Cape Town, he also criticized President Jacob Zuma and his African National Congress. &ldquo;Hey Mr. Zuma, you and your government don&rsquo;t represent me,&rdquo; he told reporters. &ldquo;You represent your own interests.&rdquo;        

He also dismissed what he considered the government&rsquo;s weak explanation for not granting the visa. &ldquo;Clearly, whether they say so or not, they were quite determined that they are not going to do anything that would upset the Chinese,&rdquo; he said.        

Many have accused South Africa of buckling under pressure from China, which has accused the Dalai Lama of trying to split Tibet from China and create an independent state. The Dalai Lama has said he does not favor independence but has criticized what he calls Chinese repression of Tibet&rsquo;s religious and cultural traditions.        

Even before the Dalai Lama&rsquo;s announcement on Tuesday, South Africa&rsquo;s government had come under harsh criticism for not promptly issuing the Dalai Lama a visa. Cosatu, a powerful coalition of trade unions, criticized the government for allowing China to influence South Africa&rsquo;s foreign policy, South Africa&rsquo;s Sapa news agency reported.        

&ldquo;Even though China is our biggest trading partner, we should not exchange our morality for dollars or yuan,&rdquo; the news agency quoted Tony Ehrenreich, a Cosatu leader, as saying.        

Loyiso Nongxa, vice chancellor of the University of the Witwatersrand, said in a statement that denying the Dalai Lama permission to visit undermined South Africa&rsquo;s long struggle against injustice.        

&ldquo;The state&rsquo;s deliberate indecision ridicules the values pertaining to freedom of speech, expression and movement enshrined in our Constitution and the freedoms for which so many South African have lived, and indeed died,&rdquo; Professor Nongxa said.        

Last week, the Desmond Tutu Peace Center, an advocacy group co-founded by him, and the Pretoria branch of the Office of Tibet, the official name of Tibet&rsquo;s government in exile, issued a joint statement calling the failure to issue the visa in a timely manner &ldquo;profoundly disrespectful of two Nobel Peace laureates who are among the most revered spiritual leaders on earth.&rdquo;        

That statement coincided with a visit to China by South Africa&rsquo;s vice president, Kgalema Motlanthe, who signed multiple trade and development agreements.        
