
CAIRO &mdash; Not even Egypt&rsquo;s interim military rulers know when they plan to relinquish power to a new civilian government, the United States ambassador to Egypt, Anne W. Patterson, said Tuesday.        

Speaking at a news conference here with Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta after he met with the Egyptian military leaders, Ms. Patterson offered an unusually candid assessment of the haze over Egypt&rsquo;s path toward democracy after the revolution that ousted President Hosni Mubarak eight months ago.        

Asked if American officials knew whether the Egyptian military council intended to turn over power at the seating of a newly elected Parliament in March, or the planned adoption of a new constitution later in 2012, or the election of a president some months beyond that, Ms. Patterson said, &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think, frankly, the military knows or anyone else knows.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This process has really been fraught with uncertainty from the very beginning and decisions are often made on a day-to-day basis, so I would expect that to continue for a while,&rdquo; she added.        

Mr. Panetta said the timetable was &ldquo;up to the Egyptians.&rdquo; But he also said that &ldquo;obviously the sooner that power could be relinquished to civilian authorities, the better for the democracy that the Egyptian people will have.&rdquo;        

Still, he said that his conversations with the Egyptian military leaders had left him convinced &ldquo;that the Egyptian people, I believe, will succeed in the democratic transition.&rdquo;        

The American officials spoke just three days after senior Egyptian military officers signed an agreement with about a dozen political parties specifying a timetable for elections, and just four days after thousands of Egyptians returned to Cairo&rsquo;s central Tahrir Square to demand that the military expedite the transfer of power.        

The demonstrators also called on the military to end the so-called emergency law, which for 30 years has enabled the authorities to detain suspects indefinitely without trial. Mr. Panetta said he had urged the Egyptian military to follow through on promises to end the emergency law before elections.        

&ldquo;The response I got back is that they are seriously looking at the first opportunity to be able to do that,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I said it was important to be able to lift it if we are going to proceed toward free and fair elections in Egypt. They agreed with that, and the hope is that they will lift the emergency law.&rdquo;        

Mr. Panetta also emphasized that both sides sought to continue the close military partnership between the United States and Egypt, which includes $1.3 billion in American aid each year and semiannual joint exercises.        
