
JERUSALEM &mdash; Hanan Porat, who helped turn Israel&rsquo;s religious settler movement into a powerful force through the establishment of Jewish communities in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, died on Tuesday at his childhood kibbutz, which he had re-established. He was 67.        

In a statement confirming his death, of cancer, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Mr. Porat had &ldquo;dedicated his life to building up the land of Israel, and to educating generations of students about religious Zionism and loving the land of Israel and the Jewish people.&rdquo;        

Mr. Porat, who was a rabbi, faded from the public spotlight in recent years as he sought treatment for cancer. But in his prime, in the 1970s and &rsquo;80s, when the Israeli right began its political ascent, he was a fiery advocate of hard-line Zionism, cutting a handsome figure with a mane of thick dark hair topped by a knitted yarmulke.        

He served in the Knesset, Israel&rsquo;s parliament, from 1981 to 1984 and again from 1988 to 1999, representing a range of religious right-wing parties, including Tehiya, which he helped found in reaction to Israel&rsquo;s 1979 peace treaty with Egypt, and the National Religious Party.        

A fervent advocate of Jewish power across the biblical land of Israel, Mr. Porat helped found Gush Emunim, which means &ldquo;the bloc of the faithful&rdquo; and which led the religious settler movement for years. Founded in 1974, the organization asserts that God had promised the West Bank to the Jewish people and that it was their duty to settle it.        

He also played a crucial role in building a Jewish settlement in the heart of the West Bank Palestinian city of Hebron, where the biblical patriarchs and matriarchs are said to be buried.        

Mr. Porat was a child of the kibbutz Kfar Etzion, which is on land that was later won by Jordan during Israel&rsquo;s 1948 war of independence. He re-established the community after the 1967 Middle East war, when the land was conquered by Israel.        

Today, about 600,000 Israeli Jews live on land captured in the 1967 war. A central goal of settler activists like Mr. Porat was to prevent any other state from being set up between the Mediterranean and the Jordan River. Those settlements remain among the biggest obstacles to creating a Palestinian state.        

The Etzion bloc is one of the large West Bank settlement blocs that Israel wants to keep in any deal with a future Palestinian state. One reason many Israelis consider it theirs by right is that it had been settled by Jews before 1948.        

Mr. Porat opposed the removal of Jews from any land in exchange for peace with Israel&rsquo;s neighbors. In the early 1980s, he fought the return of the Sinai Peninsula to Egypt and the removal of its Israeli settlers. In 2005, he opposed the withdrawal from Gaza, writing a special prayer against it and urging young settlers there to resist their evacuation by the Israeli Army.        

&ldquo;He who lends a hand in uprooting settlements,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;hurts not only the settlers themselves but the Jewish legacy and the prayers of generations as well.&rdquo;        

Mr. Netanyahu said he &ldquo;first met Hanan almost 40 years ago and was immediately impressed by his Zionist fervor and his deep commitment to restoring the Jewish people to its land.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This fervor did not lessen and accompanied him until his last day,&rdquo; Mr. Netanyahu added.        

Mr. Porat is survived by his wife, 11 children and a number of grandchildren.        
