
LONDON &mdash; Arriving at his supposedly empty rental property just outside London recently, Sam Chima, a housing lawyer, was dismayed to find a newly installed lock on the front door and a newly installed stranger glaring from a window.        

&ldquo;Who are you?&rdquo; Mr. Chima asked.        

&ldquo;I live here,&rdquo; the man declared. &ldquo;I have a tenancy agreement with the landlord.&rdquo;        

This was not true &mdash; Mr. Chima is the landlord &mdash; and it provoked several minutes of noisy obscenity-laced exchanges of the &ldquo;No, you don&rsquo;t!&rdquo; and &ldquo;Yes, I do!&rdquo; variety. And because the stranger, who had sneaked in after Mr. Chima&rsquo;s most recent tenants moved out, refused to open the door, Mr. Chima was not legally allowed to enter, he said. He eventually had to go to court to reclaim the property.        

Britain does not compile statistics on how many buildings are being occupied by squatters. But with a number of high-profile London cases in the news lately, like one where a pair of nurses returned from vacation to &ldquo;discover their New Southgate home had been taken over by Romanians,&rdquo; as The Evening Standard put it, the government has promised to tighten anti-squatting laws to make it easier for property owners to evict uninvited tenants.        

&ldquo;Far too many people have to endure the misery, expense and incredible hassle of removing squatters from their property,&rdquo; the justice minister, Crispin Blunt, said recently. &ldquo;Hard-working home and business owners need and deserve a justice system where their rights come first.&rdquo;        

Some squatters are genuinely homeless; others appear to be anti-government or just anti-having-to-pay-rent. In March, a group called Topple the Tyrants occupied a $17 million North London house belonging to Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi, a son of the deposed Libyan leader. And in February, a central London house owned by the director Guy Ritchie was seized by people who said they planned to set up a free school with classes in &ldquo;tarot, house occupation and using public transport for free,&rdquo; according to The Daily Mail.        

The proposed new regulations would, among other things, make trespassing, and by extension squatting, a crime, and would speed up the mechanisms by which squatters could be evicted.        

Currently, it is a crime to occupy a house where someone is living or plans to move in imminently. But squatting in an empty commercial property is a civil offense, and such squatters can be removed only by court order.        

Homeowners are allowed to use &ldquo;reasonable force&rdquo; to get rid of squatters, though it is unclear what that means. Giles Peaker, a housing lawyer, said no one wanted to do anything that might provoke counterclaims of assault. Violence is out. No baseball bats, no pepper spray, no household weapons.        

Mr. Chima explained: &ldquo;If you usher them out peacefully, that&rsquo;s O.K. If you get a carving knife and say, &lsquo;Get the hell out of here or I&rsquo;ll kill you,&rsquo; you could be charged with a criminal offense.&rdquo;        

As for commercial owners, they cannot use any force, not even to break into their own property or muscle their way past the occupiers. Property owners say that the police are loath to intervene, except in the most blatant cases, without formal court orders.        

Meanwhile, a London group called the Advisory Service for Squatters compiles lists of properties that may potentially be available to squatters, publishes &ldquo;The Squatters&rsquo; Handbook,&rdquo; helps squatters with legal problems and posts a set of &ldquo;squatters&rsquo; rights&rdquo; on its Web site.        

The idea of &ldquo;squatters&rsquo; rights&rdquo; makes many homeowners particularly upset.        

&ldquo;Obviously, these laws weren&rsquo;t designed for the 21st century,&rdquo; said Inder Singh, a businessman whose rental property in East London was invaded by a group of squatters so savvy about the regulations that they would not let even his handyman inside, lest they lose possession of the house. It took him two months to get them out of the property.        
(Page 2 of 2)
But there is another side to the debate. Housing advocates say there are an estimated 762,000 empty and abandoned properties in Britain that would actually benefit by having tenants. And with homelessness likely to increase in the next few years, as deep cuts in housing allowances for welfare recipients take affect, advocates say it would make sense to match tenantless homes with homeless tenants.        

&ldquo;Most squatters who are actually looking for a place to live are doing it on entirely rational grounds, and not looking for somewhere where there&rsquo;s a homeowner likely to turn up at any moment,&rdquo; Mr. Peaker said. &ldquo;They&rsquo;re looking for something that&rsquo;s long-term vacant, where the owner has dropped the ball.&rdquo;        

Keithy Robin, an artist and builder who volunteers at the Advisory Service for Squatters, said that criminalizing squatting could allow unscrupulous landlords to evict vulnerable tenants &mdash; those without written rental agreements, for instance &mdash; by inaccurately claiming that they were in fact squatters.        

&ldquo;I personally don&rsquo;t feel it&rsquo;s wrong, if someone&rsquo;s poor, to live in an empty building,&rdquo; said Mr. Robin, 55.        

He is a squatter himself. Eighteen months ago, he and a group of environmental campaigners took over a derelict one-acre site in Sipson, a village near Heathrow Airport, that had been zoned for agricultural use but was being used illegally as an auto-wrecking site.        

The group hauled out 30 tons of car parts and contaminated soil and began growing vegetables that it shared with the community. The group restored crumbling greenhouses, generated electricity via newly installed solar panels, set up art classes and campaigned against the proposed third runway at Heathrow, which would have destroyed Sipson. Mr. Robin put up a tent and moved in.        

The site&rsquo;s owners, who have been repeatedly fined for various land-use violations, are suing to get the property back, but members of the surrounding community prefer the squatters. The police say crime in the area has declined by 50 percent since the group moved in.        

&ldquo;The environment there is now clean, and the neighbors, including a day nursery for youngsters, are most grateful,&rdquo; Linda McCutcheon, chairwoman of the local residents&rsquo; group, wrote recently in a letter supporting the squatters&rsquo; case.        

But such tales tend to get drowned out by newspaper articles about outrageous home invasions. Mr. Chima knows a few such cases. A woman in East London whose handymen finished a paint job and announced: &ldquo;We are not going.&rdquo; A real estate agent who, while showing an apartment to would-be renters, hastily left the premises when someone shouted that his car was being booted, only to have the (fake) prospective tenants take possession while he was outside.        

On the other hand, Mr. Chima said, he recently helped a family who had lived in an abandoned house in Whitechapel, East London, since the 1990s take advantage of the current housing laws to claim it for themselves.        

&ldquo;They&rsquo;d changed the windows and repaired the roof and were paying the electricity bills,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And for 13 years, the owners never noticed.&rdquo;        
