
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Thousands of protesters gathered in Jordan, but Yemen and other restive locales in the Middle East stayed relatively quiet Friday as the region&rsquo;s focus turned to Egypt, the Arab world&rsquo;s most populous country, where tens of thousands staged an unprecedented challenge to the 30-year rule of President Hosni Mubarak.        

&ldquo;It has blown up in Egypt,&rdquo; read the front page of Al Akhbar, a leftist daily newspaper in Beirut. &ldquo;Today, all eyes are focused on the mosques in the land of Egypt.&rdquo;        

The collapse of Tunisia&rsquo;s government and the escalating protests in Egypt, long a pivot on which events in the region turn, sent shock waves across the Middle East, where activists have looked to their examples for inspiration in bringing about deep reform. Al Jazeera and Al Arabiya, the most influential Arab satellite channels, broadcast nonstop coverage of the demonstrations and clashes in Cairo, from morning until well past nightfall.        

&ldquo;This is a moment, and we&rsquo;re definitely going to see change,&rdquo; said Laith Shubailat, a veteran dissident in Jordan, which has been beset by its own protests this month.        

Thousands took to the streets there Friday after prayers in peaceful demonstrations. In central Amman, many of them chanted, &ldquo;We want change,&rdquo; with banners and slogans decrying high food prices and demanding the resignation of Prime Minister Samir Rifai.        

The demonstrations in Jordan have marked the first serious challenge to the decade-old rule of King Abdullah II, a critical American ally in the region. The king, who is contending with the country&rsquo;s worst economic crisis in years, told lawmakers on Thursday that the government needed to do more to reduce the burden on average Jordanians and to increase the trust between the people and government.        

Because direct criticism of the king is banned, the focus has been on his government. Journalists, students and retired generals have taken the unusual step in recent months of attacking corruption, restrictions on freedom of political expression and reductions in government subsidies.        

Friday&rsquo;s protests were led by the Islamic Action Front, the political arm of the Muslim Brotherhood, but included leftists and trade unions. Earlier this week, thousands marched in a similar protest, demanding the right to elect the prime minister, who is currently appointed by the king. The demonstrators also protested economic hardship, a common refrain across the region. In a bid to tamp down some of the frustration, the king announced $125 million in subsidies for basic goods and fuel and an increase in civil servant pay.        

In Yemen, the Arab world&rsquo;s poorest country, thousands gathered on Thursday in Sana, the capital,  and other cities as part of a growing confrontation between the government of President Ali Abdullah Saleh and the opposition, dominated by Islamists. Organizers have said they are seeking assurances from Mr. Saleh that he will not try to stay in office after his term ends in 2013, and that his son will not inherit power from him.        

Mohammed Hazmi, a lawmaker and protest organizer, said the opposition would demonstrate  every Thursday until  the government relents to their program.        

&ldquo;We hope our demands will be met before we protest again,&rdquo; he said by telephone.        

In Tunisia, where an uprising helped set in motion this month&rsquo;s tumultuous events, riot police destroyed a makeshift camp set up by protesters outside the prime minister&rsquo;s office, while Islamists marched for  religious freedom.        

The riot police tore down the protesters&rsquo; tents on the fifth day of their round-the-clock sit-in, which was staged to demand the resignation of the interim government, and chased protesters away after scattering them by firing tear gas, Reuters reported. The police action began after protesters pelted them with rocks, it said. The encampment had cut off access to the city&rsquo;s old market, blocking trading for several days.        

The march by about 200 people in central Tunis was the first significant Islamist protest since the fall of President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, a relentlessly secular figure who carried out a withering campaign of repression against Islamist figures.        

The events came a day after Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi said 12 ministers would be replaced,  purging members of the former governing  party. Some protesters contended the move was sufficient, while others said too many of Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s old guard remained.        

In broad terms, the genesis of Tunisia&rsquo;s protest &mdash; corruption, hardship and abuse of power &mdash; is shared across the region, most notably perhaps in Egypt and Algeria.  Algeria remains tense, with reports that President Abdelaziz Bouteflika is considering a high-level cabinet reshuffle as a response to five days of violent protests early in January.        
Anthony Shadid reported from Beirut, and Ethan Bronner  from Jerusalem. Nada Bakri contributed reporting from Beirut, Ranya Kadri from Amman, Jordan, and Steven Erlanger from Paris.
