
LASHKAR GAH, Afghanistan &mdash; Punctually, at 8 o&rsquo;clock every evening, the cellphone signals disappear in this provincial capital. Under pressure from the Taliban, the major carriers turn off their signal towers, effectively severing most of the connections to the rest of the world.        

This now occurs in some portion of more than half the provinces in Afghanistan, and exemplifies the Taliban&rsquo;s new and more subtle ways of asserting themselves, even as NATO generals portray the insurgents as a diminished force less able to hold ground. The question is whether the Taliban need to hold territory as they once did in order to influence the population. Increasingly, it seems, the answer is no.        

Tactics like the cellphone offensive have allowed the Taliban to project their presence in far more insidious and sophisticated ways, using the instruments of modernity that they once shunned. The shutoff sends a daily reminder to hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of Afghans that the Taliban still hold substantial sway over their future.        

It is just one part of a broader shift in Taliban strategy that has focused on intimidation, carefully chosen assassinations and limited but spectacular assaults. While often avoiding large-scale combat with NATO forces, the Taliban and their allies in the Haqqani network have effectively undermined peace talks with the Afghan government of President Hamid Karzai and sought to pave the way for a gradual return to power as the American-led forces begin scaling back military operations in the country.        

Assaults like the rocket attack on the American Embassy in Kabul on Sept. 13, for which American officials blamed the Haqqanis, effectively shift the fight to cities, where it is harder for NATO to respond with air power for fear of harming civilians. They also allow the Taliban to capture the airwaves for hours, especially in media-saturated cities, and fuel an aura of crisis.        

Likewise, the assassination on Sept. 20 in Kabul of Burhanuddin Rabbani, the head of Afghanistan&rsquo;s peace council, dominated the news and reopened dangerous fissures between the country&rsquo;s Dari-speaking north and the Pashtun south, in a single calculated blow. The new Taliban do not aspire to kill a lot of people, it seems, just a few in the right places and in positions of power.        

The Rabbani assassination not only demonstrated the insurgents&rsquo; rejection of the peace process, but it also reminded people of their ability to shape the next chapter in the country&rsquo;s history as the Americans prepare to leave. Similarly, the Taliban have sought to remake their image this year as a way of positioning themselves to play a prominent role in Afghanistan&rsquo;s future. It is a two-track strategy.        

Interviews with dozens of Afghans suggest that throughout the country the Taliban have married locally tailored terrorist campaigns with new flexibility on issues like education and business development.        

The combination plays on the uncertainty gnawing at Afghans about the looming American withdrawal, while making the most of the insurgency&rsquo;s limited resources. The aim is to undermine the Afghan government by making people question whether it can protect them, while trying to project the image of a group that is more open to the world than when the Taliban ruled the country in the 1990s.        

For now, especially in ethnic Pashtun areas of the country, the Taliban, who are also ethnic Pashtuns, appear to be achieving their goal of making the future seems up for grabs.        

&ldquo;The morale in Kandahar, in Oruzgan, in Helmand and in Kabul of the ordinary civilian was at the lowest level we&rsquo;ve seen throughout July,&rdquo; said Ahmad Nader Nadery, the deputy director of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve never seen that much anxiety, fear and concern in ordinary Afghans and in some of the government officials.        

&ldquo;People say, first, the ability of the Afghan government to reach out and to build on the already existing security arrangements is minimal, and they point to the bigger crisis the government is in, and in addition they see that the international community withdrawal has started,&rdquo; he said.        

Certainly, while NATO troops are in Afghanistan the Taliban cannot enforce their ideas &mdash; but with the transition under way, no one doubts that the Western forces are leaving. So while NATO insists that the Taliban are losing physical ground, insurgents may be gaining psychological space.        
Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar, and Sharifullah Sahak, Abdul Waheed Wafa and Sangar Rahimi from Kabul.
