
China expressed strong objections on Tuesday to a bill in the United States Senate that would threaten higher tariffs on some Chinese goods in response to what the bill&rsquo;s sponsors call China&rsquo;s policy of keeping its currency artificially depressed to give its exports a price advantage.        

The Chinese objections came as the Senate began debate on the bill, which would require the Treasury Department to determine whether China is manipulating its currency and then order the Commerce Department to impose tariffs on certain Chinese goods.        

Ma Zhaoxu, a spokesman for the Chinese Foreign Ministry, said the bill &ldquo;seriously violates rules of the World Trade Organization and obstructs China-U.S. trade ties.&rdquo; The statement, reported by Xinhua, China&rsquo;s official news agency, urged senators to &ldquo;rationally understand Sino-U.S. trade cooperation, which is mutually beneficial in nature, and stop pressuring China through domestic lawmaking.&rdquo;        

The statement did not specify what steps, if any, China might take if the legislation were to pass. But Mr. Ma said the bill would &ldquo;further escalate the exchange rate issue by adopting protectionist measures with an excuse of &lsquo;currency imbalance.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

While the specter of the Senate bill may have vexed Chinese officials, its prospects for passage on Capitol Hill seemed dim. Speaker John A. Boehner told reporters on Tuesday that although he was &ldquo;concerned about the China currency situation,&rdquo; he did not agree with the policy implications of the Senate bill and would not commit to bringing it to his chamber&rsquo;s floor.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s pretty dangerous to be moving legislation through the U.S. Congress forcing someone to deal with the value of their currency,&rdquo; Mr. Boehner said.        

The White House has also reacted coolly to the bill. While administration officials have not rejected the measure outright, they have suggested that it could create trade problems with China.        

Though some Republicans suggest that the bill would set off a trade war, others, as well as some Democrats, say the bill is needed to save American jobs. Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader, told reporters in a rejoinder to Mr. Boehner, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s dangerous for our country to continue to be bullied by China.&rdquo;        

The value of China&rsquo;s currency, the renminbi, has become an increasingly contentious issue in Chinese-American relations. China&rsquo;s critics contend that Beijing intervenes in the currency markets to keep the value of the renminbi artificially low, making Chinese goods cheaper abroad and American goods more expensive in China. Lawmakers and some economists say the policy undercuts American businesses and worsens the American unemployment rate.        

The renminbi has been rising in value. One dollar now buys about 6.4 renminbi, compared with 6.8 renminbi in June 2010, when China&rsquo;s central bank loosened some restrictions on the currency. Economists estimate that the renminbi is still undervalued by about 25 percent relative to the dollar.        

China continues to run large trade surpluses with the United States: $273 billion in 2010, compared with $83 billion a decade earlier. But China&rsquo;s overall trade surplus has declined, relative to the size of its economy, since 2007, a trend that its officials cite as evidence that the renminbi is drawing closer to its natural market value.        
Jennifer Steinhauer and Carl Hulse contributed reporting from Washington.
