
PARIS &mdash; Unesco executive board members voted Tuesday to once again postpone a decision on a proposed scientific award sponsored by a West African leader with a brutal reputation, prolonging what has already been more than a year of negotiations and hand-wringing.        

The board approved a draft resolution calling for a definitive conclusion to the contentious question about the award, known as the Unesco-Obiang Prize, financed by Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, who has ruled the tiny state of Equatorial Guinea since a 1979 coup. Unesco is to take the matter up again, for the last time, at a meeting in April.        

Western officials had hoped the board would discard the prize last week, but African delegations applied &ldquo;tremendous pressure&rdquo; to see it approved, according to a senior Western diplomat who spoke on condition of anonymity because the issue is diplomatically delicate.        

The diplomat said the African and Arab delegations were persuaded not to force a vote when the director general of Unesco, Irina Bokova, openly called for the prize to be withdrawn and said she would not be involved with it, and when the French seized some of Mr. Obiang&rsquo;s assets in Paris. The diplomat said that next spring, when Mr. Obiang will have completed his term as the head of the African Union, it should be easier to get African support to withdraw the prize.        

Mr. Obiang created the prize in 2008 to honor &ldquo;research in the life sciences leading to improving the quality of human life,&rdquo; and Unesco&rsquo;s board accepted it at first. But it suspended that decision in 2010 after criticism by human rights groups and scientists who denounced it as a public relations stunt by Mr. Obiang. No money from the $3 million prize endowment has ever been awarded.        

The United States has called for Unesco &mdash; the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization &mdash; to annul the prize. Last Friday, Ms. Bokova asked that Mr. Obiang retract it.        

Western officials and rights groups viewed the resolution Tuesday as progress toward an eventual rejection of the prize, although the Equatorial Guinean delegation said otherwise. Agapito Mba-Mokuy, an aide to Mr. Obiang and his representative at the Unesco talks, decried what he called an &ldquo;international campaign&rdquo; against his president.        

African representatives on the 58-nation board have publicly backed Mr. Obiang, though diplomats and rights groups say several African delegations are privately unhappy about the prize. Fearful of appearing to be anti-African or colonialist, Western diplomats have insisted that any effort to remove the prize be led by African delegations.        

Rights groups accuse Mr. Obiang of embezzling hundreds of millions of dollars from his state, torture and election fraud.        
Steven Erlanger contributed reporting from Brussels.
