
MANCHESTER, England &mdash; Confronted by deepening economic woes at home and in the euro zone nations that are Britain&rsquo;s major business partners, Prime Minister David Cameron vowed on Wednesday not to bow to growing demands for a retreat from his government&rsquo;s sweeping austerity measures.        

Instead, he promised Britons that they would pull through to better days if they shunned paralyzing &ldquo;gloom and fear&rdquo; about the future and embraced the &ldquo;can-do optimism&rdquo; that had made the country a worldbeater in the past.        

&ldquo;I know that we can turn this ship around,&rdquo; he said at the Conservative Party&rsquo;s annual conference.        

Mr. Cameron admonished those who had pointed to India, China and Brazil as economic models and who had overlooked, he said, the innate potential of Britain and its people.        

&ldquo;I say: We need to become more like us,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The real us. Hardworking, pioneering, independent, creative, adaptable, optimistic, can-do. That&rsquo;s the spirit that has made this United Kingdom what it is: a small country that does great things.&rdquo;        

Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s speech, to a mostly lukewarm reception, came at a moment of foreboding for the country and his party. Less than 17 months since returning to power, the Conservatives confront an economy teetering on the brink of a new recession.        

There has been a growing clamor from political opponents, some Conservatives and influential bodies like the International Monetary Fund for an economic U-turn that would ease the cuts and introduce measures to stimulate growth.        

But Mr. Cameron, like his Conservative predecessor Margaret Thatcher at a similar low point 30 years ago, declared that he was not for turning.        

Britain, he said, will hold to the course set when the Conservatives and their Liberal Democrat coalition partners succeeded the Labour Party in office last year, with a plan that calls for an average of 20 percent cuts in government spending over four years to save tens of billions of dollars and balance the government&rsquo;s books before a new election in 2015.        

It is an increasingly difficult course. Bad economic news has undermined the government&rsquo;s projection of accelerating growth stemming from private sector gains that, it believed, would offset public sector cutbacks.        

As Mr. Cameron prepared to address the Conservatives&rsquo; 4,000 delegates, the government&rsquo;s Office for National Statistics said economic growth between April and June was 0.1 percent, half the previous estimate. It also revised first-quarter growth down to 0.4 percent from 0.5 percent.        

The nearly 5 percent inflation rate is the highest in years, and unemployment is also rising, at close to 8 percent.        

Mr. Cameron acknowledged it was &ldquo;an anxious time,&rdquo; but he rejected pressure for a re-evaluation, as he had before. Some of that pressure has come from the Obama administration, fearful that a wider pattern of austerity across Europe could tip the global economy back into recession.        

The prime minister also acknowledged that the threat to the world economy was &ldquo;as serious today as it was in 2008,&rdquo; when the international banking crisis threatened global chaos.        

A reminder of that crisis came when the man regarded as the architect of the austerity program, George Osborne, the chancellor of the Exchequer, left the party conference after delivering his own defense of the cuts to attend a crisis meeting of European finance ministers in Luxembourg.        

Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s speech amounted to something of a rite of passage. In five years as the party&rsquo;s leader before the 2010 election, he often seemed out of step with the Conservative mainstream as he worked to reposition the party on the political center ground that Labour dominated in winning three successive elections.        

But his &ldquo;heir to Blair&rdquo; approach &mdash; a self-conscious imitation of the centrist political style of Tony Blair, the Labour prime minister for 10 years until 2007 &mdash; did not always sit easily with the Conservative heartland. Voices within the party also complained about Mr. Cameron after Labour denied the Conservatives an outright majority last year, saying he ran a middle-of-the-road campaign that left voters unsure of what he or the Conservatives were offering.        

But the uncompromising tone from the prime minister and a broad representation of his cabinet at the Conservatives&rsquo; conference suggested strongly that despite policy concessions to their left-of-center coalition partners, the Liberal Democrats, nearly a year and a half in office had removed much of the wavering.        

On a wide range of Britain&rsquo;s hottest political issues &mdash; the economy, education, crime, immigration and welfare, to name only a few &mdash; the policies proclaimed at the conference have carried the party&rsquo;s new brand of &ldquo;radical reform,&rdquo; characterized by an emphasis on thrift, discipline, accountability and a pervasive loosening of bureaucratic controls.        

Mr. Cameron and his advisers appear to believe that currents of disarray in the Labour Party &mdash; whose annual conference last week was marked by boos at the mention of Mr. Blair, the most electorally successful leader in the party&rsquo;s history &mdash; has given the Conservatives the time to make their policies succeed.        

That much seemed clear from Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s promise of an eventual return to prosperity. &ldquo;Our plan is right, and our plan will work,&rdquo; he said.        

Likening the austerity program to building the foundations of a house, he added: &ldquo;I know you can&rsquo;t see it or feel it yet. But this is the crucial point: It will only work if we stick with it.&rdquo;        
Alan Cowell contributed reporting from London.
