
WASHINGTON &mdash; President Obama&rsquo;s national security adviser met secretly in the Persian Gulf last weekend with Pakistan&rsquo;s top military officer to deliver a tough message: rein in the Haqqani network, a deadly insurgent group in Afghanistan that the United States says has close ties to Pakistan&rsquo;s main spy agency.        

Just a few weeks before, however, American officials held a secret meeting with leaders of the Haqqani network. But then, the purpose was to explore ever so delicately how the group, or at least some of its members, might join talks to end the war in Afghanistan.        

The two meetings, held just over a month apart, underscore the Obama administration&rsquo;s complicated and seemingly contradictory policies in Afghanistan and Pakistan as it struggles to end the decade-old conflict in Afghanistan and salvage a deteriorating security relationship with Pakistan.        

The talks with the Haqqani network, which were brokered by the Pakistani spy agency, illustrate the administration&rsquo;s recognition that military strikes alone will not end the fighting with the Taliban, the Haqqanis and other insurgents in Afghanistan. But the discussions, which one official described as &ldquo;very preliminary,&rdquo; yielded no results. And within weeks, senior American officials were blaming Haqqani fighters for a truck bombing at a NATO outpost south of Kabul on Sept. 10, which killed at least five people and wounded 77 coalition soldiers, and a 20-hour assault on the United States Embassy in Ka bul.        

The State Department is nearing a decision to designate the entire Haqqani network &mdash; and not just its senior leaders &mdash; as a &ldquo;Foreign Terrorist Organization,&rdquo; which would allow for some of its assets to be frozen and could dissuade donors from supporting the group.        

While some military commanders have called for the designation, the administration has held off until now, fearing such a move might alienate the Haqqanis and drive them away from future talks.        

In the wake of the attacks, the administration is also increasing pressure on Pakistan. Adm. Mike Mullen, who stepped down last week as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said last month that Pakistan&rsquo;s spy agency, the Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence, or ISI, played a direct role in supporting the attacks. He accused the Haqqani network of being &ldquo;a veritable arm&rdquo; of the ISI, which Pakistan vehemently denied.        

The White House later tempered Admiral Mullen&rsquo;s comments, but on Wednesday, the State Department spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, told reporters that with Pakistan, &ldquo;we need a broad and deep collaboration on the whole counterterrorism docket, with Haqqani as Job 1.&rdquo;        

She said that Marc Grossman, the administration&rsquo;s special envoy to Afghanistan and Pakistan, would be traveling to Pakistan in the next several days.        

Mr. Grossman&rsquo;s meetings with senior Pakistani leaders will come on the heels of an unpublicized meeting in the United Arab Emirates last weekend between the White House national security adviser, Thomas E. Donilon; Mr. Obama&rsquo;s top adviser on Pakistan, Douglas E. Lute; and Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, the Pakistani army chief of staff. The White House had said that Mr. Donilon took a one-day, over-and-back trip to Saudi Arabia on Saturday.        

One senior administration official said that it was &ldquo;safe to assume that the Haqqani issue came up&rdquo; at the meetings, and that the American officials stressed to General Kayani the importance of Pakistan&rsquo;s taking more direct action against members of the Haqqani network, who American officials believe plot attacks like the assault on the American Embassy from a safe haven in Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal areas.        

American officials have made veiled threats of increasing the drone strikes by the Central Intelligence Agency or conducting cross-border commando raids into Pakistan if the danger to American and allied forces in Afghanistan is not quelled.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re not going to allow these types of attacks to continue,&rdquo; Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta said on Sept. 16, after the Haqqani network was implicated in the armed assault on the American Embassy in Kabul.        

Spokesmen for the White House, the State Department and the C.I.A. declined to comment for this article.        

Haqqani network leaders have indicated in recent days that they were willing to negotiate, but on their own terms. The group maintains close ties to the Taliban, but often works independently. Some intelligence officials say the attack on the American Embassy was a not-so-subtle reminder that the group will not be on the sidelines of any grand political bargain.        

That was the context for the meeting in late August in Dubai among United States officials, a trusted senior family member of the Haqqanis, other militant leaders and a senior ISI interlocutor. The meeting was first reported by ABCNews.com and The Wall Street Journal.        

One of the main leaders of the network, Sirajuddin Haqqani, told the BBC in an interview published on Monday that the Haqqanis &ldquo;have been contacted and are being contacted by intelligence agencies of many Islamic and non-Islamic countries, including the U.S., asking us to leave the sacred jihad and take an important part in the current government.&rdquo;        

According to a high-level Afghan security official who was briefed on the talks, the discussions about what, if any, role members of the Haqqani network might play in an Afghan government ended fruitlessly.        

&ldquo;They didn&rsquo;t agree on several things, so the meetings were without any outcome,&rdquo; the Afghan official said. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s why we are seeing now all these reactions and attacks going on.&rdquo;        

South Asia specialists pointed to the highly compartmental nature of the political reconciliation talks to explain the seeming contradiction of some American officials&rsquo; engaging with groups like the Taliban and the Haqqanis while many others condemn the Haqqanis&rsquo; violence.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a very small group dealing with reconciliation, and they&rsquo;ve been open-minded about who they talk to,&rdquo; said Daniel S. Markey, senior fellow for India, Pakistan and South Asia at the Council on Foreign Relations. &ldquo;By doing so, they&rsquo;re in conflict with others in the U.S. government who say the Haqqani network is beyond the pale.&rdquo;        
Souad Mekhennet contributed reporting from Frankfurt.
