
CAIRO &mdash; The top officer of the military council now ruling Egypt said Wednesday that the military would not offer a candidate to be Egypt&rsquo;s next president. His remarks appeared to be an attempt to end a frenzy of speculation that erupted after state television recently broadcast an image of him walking the streets in a civilian suit and tie.        

&ldquo;These are only rumors, and we shouldn&rsquo;t waste time talking about rumors,&rdquo; the officer, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, said Wednesday while opening a military medical center, according to the English-language Web site of the state-run newspaper Al Ahram.        

The statement comes at a time when political parties from across the spectrum have joined street protesters in calling for a swift turnover of power by the military council, which took control in February with the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak.        

The council has recently scheduled parliamentary elections over four months beginning at the end of November, but it has said it will await the approval of a new constitution &mdash; which could take another year or more after the seating of the new Parliament &mdash; before holding a presidential election.        

The military has declined to say whether or not it expects Field Marshal Tantawi to continue acting as a de facto chief executive until the election of a new president, raising the possibility that his suit was the test of a new wardrobe suited to an extended period in a nonmilitary political role.        

Field Marshal Tantawi has seldom, if ever, appeared in public out of uniform. He has also begun talking like a political candidate.        

&ldquo;I am an honest man, and I will remain honest, and a fighter,&rdquo; he said Sunday during a visit to factories in the town of Fayoum. &ldquo;I fought for 40 years, more than 40, and I will keep fighting, first for God, then for Egypt.&rdquo;        

The military&rsquo;s Facebook page, previously reserved almost exclusively for official announcements, posted a video of that event and along with other recent appearances by the military council&rsquo;s leader.        

Other Egyptians, on Facebook and Twitter, mocked Field Marshal Tantawi&rsquo;s new attire. One Twitter message, first reported on Al Ahram&rsquo;s Web, site echoed a toy store slogan: &ldquo;We have Tantawi in shorts, Tantawi in a tuxedo, Tantawi the sailor, Tantawi the doctor.&rdquo;        

On Wednesday, Field Marshal Tantawi reiterated that &ldquo;the armed forces have no interest in staying in power for a long time.&rdquo;        

But he also said, &ldquo;We will not leave Egypt until we have fulfilled all we promised and do our duty towards the people.&rdquo;        
