
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Afghan security officials announced on Wednesday that they had foiled a plot to assassinate President Hamid Karzai and had arrested six suspects, including a guard who worked at the gates of the presidential palace.        

A spokesman for the Afghan spy agency, the National Directorate of Security, said the suspects had ties to Al Qaeda and to the Pakistan-based Haqqani militant group, one of the fiercest foes of Afghan and American security forces. But Afghan officials provided only a few details to substantiate those links.        

Afghan officials said the plotters had met in the city of Miram Shah in western Pakistan, a stronghold of the Haqqanis. They said the plot was orchestrated in part by two men living in Pakistan, one an Egyptian and the other a Bangladeshi.        

Afghan officials did not say how far the plot had progressed or when it was to be carried out, nor did they say when the suspects were arrested.        

In videotaped confessions provided to reporters, the suspects &mdash; who included a microbiology professor and four university students &mdash; said they traveled to Pakistan to learn how to fire guns and make bombs. But nothing is said in the recordings about Mr. Karzai or about their larger motivations.        

The announcement was made as Mr. Karzai was visiting India, and he offered no immediate comment. A spokesman for the NATO-led forces here said they were examining the Afghan spy agency&rsquo;s assertions.        

Afghan security and intelligence officials have come under heightened scrutiny in recent weeks after a string of high-profile assassinations and an attack on the American Embassy in Kabul that lasted hours.        

The targets of several of the assassinations have been allies of the Afghan government and of Mr. Karzai, who has survived at least three attempts on his life over the last decade. Last month, a suicide bomber killed the leader of Afghanistan&rsquo;s peace process. Earlier in the summer, Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s half brother Ahmed Wali Karzai, a power broker in southern Afghanistan, was gunned down by a close associate.        

The violence has raised worries about whether Afghan forces will be able to deal with security threats without foreign assistance. Most NATO forces are due to leave the country by the end of 2014, and the United States is preparing to withdraw 10,000 troops by the end of this year.        

The arrest of one of Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s guards &mdash; though a low-ranking one &mdash; has also revived questions about infiltration of the Afghan security forces. Lotfullah Mashal, an intelligence spokesman, said the guard, Mohibullah Ahmadi, worked at one of the exterior palace gates, and his security badge would have given him unfettered access to much of the palace grounds.        

Mr. Mashal said that Mr. Ahmadi&rsquo;s bank account had received wire transfers totaling $150,000 from several sources, which he declined to identify.        

He said the other suspects, the professor and the students, were part of &ldquo;the most sophisticated and highly educated group in Kabul&rdquo; &mdash; a far cry from the largely uneducated and rural backgrounds of many Taliban fighters. He did not explain why the men may have wanted to kill Mr. Karzai.        

The president was not their only target, Mr. Mashal said; the group also planned attacks on international guesthouses and aid organizations as well as high-ranking Afghan officials and was trying to recruit more university students.        

The recent spate of attacks has raised tensions between Afghanistan and Pakistan, which some Afghans accuse of complicity in the violence. But in India on Wednesday, Mr. Karzai modulated the recent stream of harsh rhetoric and sought to reassure Pakistanis about Afghanistan&rsquo;s warming ties with India.        

&ldquo;Pakistan is a twin brother; India is a great friend,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai said in a speech at a research organization in New Delhi. &ldquo;The agreement that we signed yesterday with our friend will not affect our brother.&rdquo;        

He was referring to a deal signed on Tuesday that would open the door for India to arm and train Afghanistan&rsquo;s security forces in anticipation of the withdrawal of American forces.        
Lydia Polgreen contributed reporting from New Delhi.
