
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The family of a Syrian woman who was reported to have been killed by armed men loyal to the government of President Bashar al-Assad, with her body later found decapitated, skinned and armless, said Wednesday that they now thought she was still alive.        

The woman, Zainab al-Hosni, 18, a resident of the restive city of Homs in central Syria, quickly became a symbol of the uprising against Mr. Assad and his government&rsquo;s brutal crackdown on antigovernment activists.        

Ms. Hosni&rsquo;s picture was carried in demonstrations in Syria in recent weeks, and sympathizers across the Arab world held vigils for the woman who came to be known as &ldquo;the flower of Syria&rdquo; and who was thought to be the first woman to have died in detention.        

But on Tuesday night, Ms. Hosni appeared on Syrian state television, dressed in black and her face uncovered, flashing her identification card and saying that she was alive and that she planned to marry and have children. She said that her family did not know her whereabouts and that she had run away from home and stayed with a relative because her brothers had been abusing her.        

Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch said last month in statements that Ms. Hosni&rsquo;s mother had found her body in a morgue after Ms. Hosni vanished in late July. The organizations said that the mother had come across the body while looking for her son Mohammed, a protester who was reported to have been arrested on Sept. 10. His body had multiple gunshot wounds to the head and chest when his mother claimed it, Human Rights Watch said.        

&ldquo;We have no doubt that the woman who appeared on TV is my sister Zainab,&rdquo; said Youssef al-Hosni, a brother who fled from Syria to Lebanon and was reached by telephone. But he talked about how a mistake had been made earlier. &ldquo;My mother identified her in the morgue,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;She knows her daughter. She said, &lsquo;This is my daughter,&rsquo; and the authorities in the morgue told us her name was Zainab and she was 18. So we took her and buried her.&rdquo;        

Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch said the family had confirmed to them that Ms. Hosni was indeed alive. In a joint statement, the organizations said they &ldquo;regret any inaccuracy in the misidentification of the body.&rdquo;        

Amnesty International said that its initial statements on Ms. Hosni&rsquo;s death were &ldquo;based on information provided by sources close to the incident itself, who passed Amnesty International video footage of a dismembered body.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;If the body was not that of Zainab al-Hosni, then clearly the Syrian authorities need to disclose whose it was, the cause and circumstances of the death, and why Zainab al-Hosni&rsquo;s family were informed that she was the victim,&rdquo; Amnesty International said.        

Ms. Hosni&rsquo;s case underscored the depth of the propaganda war between the pro-democracy protesters and the government, in which both sides have made claims that later proved false.        

Last month Syrian state television broadcast an interview with Lt. Col. Hussein Harmoush, the highest-ranking military defector to date who was captured by the authorities. In the interview, he retracted every critical remark he had made only a few months earlier. The episode highlighted the murkiness of events in Syria, which has largely barred foreign journalists from entering the country.        

&ldquo;This shows the need to allow independent observers, journalists, human rights activists into the country to get to the bottom of things,&rdquo; said Nadim Houry, a senior researcher with Human Rights Watch on Lebanon and Syria.        

Mr. Houry said that his group believed that the mother had made an &ldquo;honest mistake&rdquo; when she identified the woman in the morgue as her daughter.        

&ldquo;I could see the features of my daughter under the burns,&rdquo; Human Rights Watch quoted the mother as saying in the initial statement last month. &ldquo;Her jaw, her cheekbones, the shape of her legs. I have no doubt it was her.&rdquo; The report said one of her brothers had taken video of the body.        

Mr. Hosni, the brother who fled to Lebanon, said he had received a telephone call from a man about 10 days after his sister disappeared, saying that he was holding her in custody and would release her in return for another brother who was wanted for his involvement in organizing and leading protests against the government. The Human Rights Watch report said that all six of Ms. Hosni&rsquo;s brothers had been active in protests in Homs.        

&ldquo;I told him, &lsquo;We don&rsquo;t have anyone to give you, you can keep her,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Hosni recalled telling the caller. &ldquo;We were not going to give him another family member, knowing that they would never release her.&rdquo;        

In the interview, he seemed bewildered by the turn of events.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what to think anymore,&rdquo; Mr. Hosni said. &ldquo;My thoughts are unclear, and I don&rsquo;t know what to believe and what not to believe anymore.&rdquo;        
