
UNITED NATIONS &mdash; By vetoing a Security Council resolution condemning Syria for its oppression of antigovernment forces, Russia and China effectively tossed a life preserver to President Bashar al-Assad, seemingly unwilling to see a pivotal ally and once stalwart member of the socialist bloc sink beneath the waves of the Arab Spring.        

A double veto at the United Nations is rare, in this case driven by similar if not exactly parallel concerns in Moscow and Beijing about losing influence in the Arab world as one authoritarian government after another built on the now-faded Soviet model collapses.        

&ldquo;They are gambling that Assad can hold on now; it seems to be an expression of confidence that he can cling to power,&rdquo; said Fiona Hill, a Russia expert at the Brookings Institution.        

Russia enjoys military and commercial deals with Syria worth billions of dollars annually, plus its alliance and only reliable Arab friend give it an entree into the Arab-Israeli peace negotiations. In addition, Moscow maintains perks left over from its superpower days, for instance, a naval base at Tartus, Syria, that accommodates visits by warships like Peter the Great, a nuclear-powered missile cruiser, during its Mediterranean jaunts.        

China worries that the reverberations from falling Arab despots will inspire civil disobedience at home.        

But beyond those concerns, and a stated interest in averting violent change in Syria, China and Russia are also increasingly allied in shutting down what they see as Western efforts to use sanctions and other economic measures to put the United Nations seal of approval on Western-friendly regime change.        

There is a sense in both capitals that the West in general, and the United States in particular, is feeding the protest movements in the Arab world to further its own interests, experts said. Both the Chinese and the Russians are determined to reassert their long opposition to anything that smacks of domestic meddling by outside powers.        

In that effort they have been joined by emerging powers like Brazil, India and South Africa, which have formed their own alliance and as current members of the Security Council all abstained from the Syria vote late Tuesday. Lebanon, where Syria holds sway, also abstained.        

The resolution itself was toothless, demanding that the violence in Syria stop. The draft underwent repeated dilutions, which dropped all but the most vague reference to sanctions as a future possibility. But even that drew objections, in part because the cloud of Libya cast a long shadow over the Syria deliberations. The Russians and the Chinese said they felt bamboozled after a resolution they thought was meant to protect Libyan civilians became what they condemned as a license to wage war on the government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. They are determined to avoid that in the Middle East and anywhere else.        

Western diplomats said the consequences of the Libyan resolution were clearly laid out before the March vote.        

Vitaly Churkin, the Russian ambassador, told the Security Council on Tuesday night in his speech explaining the veto, &ldquo;The demand for a rapid cease-fire turned into a full-fledged civil war.&rdquo; He said that NATO bombed targets like television stations and oil facilities that were not a military threat to civilians.        

Mr. Churkin said the veto was prompted by political differences over the use of force endorsed by the Council, rather than Syria&rsquo;s long ties to the Soviet Union and any economic or arms sales losses. Indeed, Mr. Churkin seemed to go out of his way after the vote to distance Russia from the bloodshed fomented by the Syrian government while noting that unlike others, Moscow does not 
 &ldquo;cast aside old allies in a single breath.&rdquo;        

But there is a long history of close military and commercial ties. Hafez al-Assad, the current president&rsquo;s father, was educated in Moscow and relied on the Soviet Union for weapons during the many Arab-Israeli wars. He died in 2000. Reports by Russian news outlets put current arms contracts at $4 billion. Beyond jet fighters and tanks, Russia has varied interests in Syria, like oil and gas and cement. Russia is ranked as the country&rsquo;s fifth-largest trading partner, experts said.        

&ldquo;The departure of Assad would cause serious problems for us,&rdquo; Aleksandr Sharavin, director of the Institute for Political and Military Analysis in Moscow, told the Prime-Tass news agency, noting that not just weapons sales but also maintenance contracts bring in large sums.        
Michael Schwirtz contributed reporting from Moscow.
