
LONDON &mdash; The Most Rev. Rowan Williams, archbishop of Canterbury, will travel to Zimbabwe this weekend as part of an African tour and will seek to persuade President Robert G. Mugabe to help end a rift among the country&rsquo;s Anglicans, according to the archbishop&rsquo;s office here.        

Archbishop&nbsp;Williams, the spiritual leader of the world&rsquo;s Anglicans, wrote to Mr. Mugabe this year and urged him to stop &ldquo;the continuing bullying, harassment and persecution&rdquo; of Anglicans who support the global Anglican Communion rather than a breakaway group led by Nolbert Kunonga, an excommunicated bishop and ally of the president.        

Mr. Kunonga, an American-trained priest, broke with the church, one of Zimbabwe&rsquo;s major denominations, in 2007, saying that gay priests and congregants had gained to much influence, even though the Anglican Church&nbsp;in Zimbabwe does not ordain gay priests or allow same-sex marriages.        

Mr. Mugabe, who was raised as a Roman Catholic, has frequently expressed loathing for homosexuality and gay people.        

The archbishop&rsquo;s&nbsp;office said he would visit with members of the clergy and Anglican worshipers in Malawi, Zimbabwe and Zambia &mdash; which made up the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland in the British colonial era and are part of the Anglican Church&rsquo;s Province of Central Africa. Archbishop Williams left on the weeklong trip on Wednesday, and his first stop is Malawi, his office said.        

He is to visit Zimbabwe on Sunday and Monday and has scheduled a service at the National Sports Stadium in Harare, the capital, on Sunday. News reports said Mr. Kunonga&rsquo;s followers would not allow the archbishop to pray in the city&rsquo;s Anglican cathedral or other major church buildings that are under the control of the breakaway group.        

Archbishop Williams is rarely seen as a confrontational figure, preferring to seek consensus on issues&nbsp;that have divided the Anglican Communion, like the ordination of gays and the appointment of women as bishops. But an open-air church service in Harare could provide a rallying point for Anglicans opposed both to Mr. Kunonga&rsquo;s schismatic claim to lead them and to Mr. Mugabe.        

A meeting with Zimbabwe&rsquo;s leader, who did not respond to the archbishop&rsquo;s earlier entreaties to heal the Anglican rift, could also provide Mr. Mugabe with an occasion to seek political advantage without conceding ground.        

Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s police and party officials have supported Mr. Kunonga&rsquo;s drive to control thousands of Anglican churches, schools and properties across Zimbabwe and southern Africa. Mr. Kunonga has held on to his bishopric in Harare through the courts, which are widely seen as supporting Mr. Mugabe. Mainline Anglicans are forced to worship in a variety of small churches, sporting clubs, tents and schools.        

Supporters of Bishop Chad Gandiya, who was chosen by the Anglican hierarchy to replace Mr. Kunonga in Harare, have been attacked by the police, reflecting Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s broader campaign against&nbsp;independent churches that are seen as hostile to his government.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not Kunonga we find at the church gates, it&rsquo;s the police,&rdquo; Bishop Gandiya said earlier this year. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not Kunonga who drives us out, who throws tear gas at us, it&rsquo;s the police. When we ask them why, they say they&rsquo;re following orders.&rdquo;        

Anglican leaders who reject Mr. Kunonga&rsquo;s claim to authority say they have received death threats and have been prevented from worshiping in their churches or burying the dead.        

In late September, the state-controlled Herald newspaper quoted Mr. Kunonga as saying he was not a puppet of Mr. Mugabe&rsquo;s ZANU-PF party. He described Archbishop Williams&rsquo;s visit as a propaganda mission to extend British interests in Zimbabwe.        

&ldquo;I am not a puppet of ZANU-PF, and if I am a puppet, then I am a proud and educated puppet,&rdquo; he was quoted as saying, going on to call Archbishop Williams a representative of neocolonialism. &ldquo;He is coming to lobby for homosexuality,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Kunonga holds a doctorate in religious studies from Northwestern University and the Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, which is on Northwestern's campus in Evanston, Ill.&nbsp;His support of Mr. Mugabe has brought him many rewards, including a commercial farm outside of Harare that had been confiscated from white owners.        
