
WASHINGTON &mdash; The United States is considering a significant shift in its long-strained relationship with the autocratic government of Myanmar, including relaxing restrictions on financial assistance and taking other steps to encourage what senior American officials describe as startling political changes in the country.        

The thawing, while in its early stages, follows a political transition in Myanmar after deeply flawed elections last year that nonetheless appears to have raised the possibility that the new government will ease its restrictions on basic freedoms and cooperate with the repressed opposition movement led by the Nobel laureate Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.        

The new president, U Thein Sein, a former general who was part of the military junta that ruled the country for two decades, has in six months in office signaled a sharp break from the highly centralized and erratic policies of the past. Mr. Thein Sein&rsquo;s government is now rewriting laws on taxes and property ownership, loosening restrictions on the media and even discussing the release of political prisoners.        

The apparent shift offers the United States the chance to improve ties with a resource-rich Southeast Asian nation that after many years of semi-isolation counts neighboring China as its main ally. Last week, Myanmar&rsquo;s new leadership unexpectedly halted work on a $3.6 billion dam strongly backed by China, prompting angry criticism from the Chinese government and the state-owned Chinese company that was building it.        

The Obama administration, though skeptical, has responded to this new openness with a series of small diplomatic steps of its own, hoping that a democratic transition in Myanmar could bring stability and greater economic opportunities to the region at a time of increasing American competition with China over influence in Asia.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re going to meet their action with action,&rdquo; the administration&rsquo;s newly appointed special envoy to Myanmar, Derek Mitchell, said in an interview. &ldquo;If they take steps, we will take steps to demonstrate that we are supportive of the path to reform.&rdquo; Mr. Mitchell spent five days last month in Myanmar, meeting with senior leaders in the government and opposition. That visit was followed by two meetings in New York and Washington last week between senior State Department officials and Myanmar&rsquo;s new foreign minister, U Wunna Maung Lwin.        

Mr. Wunna Maung Lwin, whose travel in the United States is normally sharply restricted, was the first foreign minister from Myanmar invited to the State Department since the military junta took power.        

The motivation for the changes has baffled American officials and others, but Myanmar appears eager to end its diplomatic isolation and rebuild a dysfunctional economy that has trapped the country&rsquo;s population of 55 million people in poverty, which the government acknowledged for the first time in Mr. Thein Sein&rsquo;s inaugural address in March.        

Members of Mr. Thein Sein&rsquo;s government have since met several times with Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi, who was released from years of house arrest last November and whose name was so demonized by the previous junta that it was typically whispered in public. She, too, has expressed cautious support for what appears to be a political opening.        

The government has also for the first time discussed with her and American officials the possibility of releasing hundreds of political prisoners, after years of denying there were any at all. The government has even assembled a list of those it is considering releasing. About 600 people are on it, though opposition leaders and diplomats say that there are nearly 2,000 political prisoners listed in a database compiled by an organization in Thailand. &ldquo;We told the government we cannot accept their list,&rdquo; said U Win Tin, a founding member of the National League for Democracy, Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi&rsquo;s party. &ldquo;We gave that message to the government, but we don&rsquo;t know yet whether they will change their list.&rdquo;        

Even so, the senior administration official said that the mere acknowledgment that Myanmar held political prisoners reflected a significant shift in the new government&rsquo;s attitude. Signals like that, even if tentative, have begun to win over skeptics who have seen false dawns before in Myanmar.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s very exciting,&rdquo; said Priscilla A. Clapp, who was the chief of mission at the United States Embassy in Myanmar from 1999 to 2002. &ldquo;They are moving into a more pluralistic form of government. I wouldn&rsquo;t call it totally democratic. But things are changing very rapidly.&rdquo;        
Steven Lee Myers reported from Washington, and Thomas Fuller from Bangkok.
