
BAGHDAD &mdash; How the war ends here is proving nearly as chaotic as the last eight years of fighting and nation building.        

The latest turn came this week when the Iraqi political leadership sent a befuddling message to American officials: It agreed on the need for military troops to remain in Iraq to train security forces, but denied legal immunities to American troops.        

The two points, which are mutually exclusive because the United States has said no troops will remain without immunity from Iraqi prosecution, encapsulated the mixed emotions of a nation that celebrated the fall of a dictator but never embraced the invading force that toppled him.        

&ldquo;They loved being liberated from Saddam Hussein, but they hated being occupied by a foreign force,&rdquo; said Joost Hiltermann, deputy program director with the International Crisis Group. &ldquo;They have always been so conflicted about this.&rdquo;        

Less than three months until all American troops are legally mandated to withdraw, divisive talks between the United States and Iraq, and among Iraqis, over a future military presence have complicated the drawdown and plans for a vast expansion of the State Department&rsquo;s diplomatic mission, an ambitious and expensive effort to secure Iraq&rsquo;s fragile democracy.        

Whatever the outcome, the meaning of the war&rsquo;s end is as different to the United States and Iraq as its beginning.        

For the American officials, who are planning splashy ceremonies in Baghdad and Washington for the end of the year, when the final 48,000 troops are supposed to withdraw, it carries the symbolism of a president&rsquo;s making good on a campaign promise, and closure to a divisive and costly war.        

For Iraq&rsquo;s political elites, the moment is defined by conflicting realities: on one hand, a simmering insurgency and an Iraqi security force that still needs foreign help, and on the other, political pressure to push the Americans out.        

And for average Iraqis, the occupation of their country has been traumatic, especially after decades of war, sanctions and brutal state repression by Mr. Hussein&rsquo;s government.        

&ldquo;Iraqis, from my point of view, are happy even when they are sad; they just want to breathe,&rdquo; said Mohammed Khasim, who manages a riverfront amusement park in Adhamiya, a largely Sunni neighborhood, once one of Baghdad&rsquo;s most dangerous.        

&ldquo;God shall help us, from 1973 until now,&rdquo; he said, referring to a war in the 1970s against the Kurds in the country&rsquo;s north.        

With those dynamics as the backdrop, the deliberations between the United States and Iraq are stuck over the issue of immunity should any troops remain. The point may be a deal-breaker for Americans, but it also carries a lot of baggage for Iraqis, who recall the worst horrors of the war, including the Abu Ghraib prison scandal and abuses by private security contractors.        

&ldquo;The Iraqi people won&rsquo;t forget what they were subjected to, such as killing, hunger and displacement,&rdquo; Hamid al-Mutlaq, a lawmaker, said this week in the Iraqi news media. &ldquo;The atrocities of Abu Ghraib prison remain in their memory.&rdquo;        

On Thursday, on the campus of Baghdad University, Ali Ghazi, a communications student, echoed that view. &ldquo;I am in favor of them staying, but they shouldn&rsquo;t have immunity,&rdquo; he said, sitting with a friend at an outdoor cafe a few days before the start of a new semester. &ldquo;They&rsquo;ve created trouble before, and they weren&rsquo;t held accountable.&rdquo;        

For President Obama, whose opposition to the Iraq war gained him national prominence in 2004 and helped him win the presidency four years later, his promise to withdraw has always conflicted with the hard realities in Iraq, requiring a delicate balance of carefully calibrated calls for withdrawal and private discussion over how to keep troops in Iraq after the first of the new year.        

In August of last year, Mr. Obama addressed the nation from the Oval Office, saying that it was time for the United States to &ldquo;turn the page&rdquo; on Iraq and that all troops would leave by the end of this year. But last year the top American commander here, Gen. Ray Odierno, spent months secretly trying to arrange for thousands of troops to remain. The current commander, Gen. Lloyd J. Austin III, has pushed for keeping close to 20,000 troops in Iraq, said two officials briefed on the matter.        

And this June, Mr. Obama spoke by telephone with the Iraqi prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, and indicated he was willing to leave nearly 10,000 troops, according to a Western diplomat and an Iraqi official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the discussions had been private.        

In August, after a fierce interagency debate in Washington that coincided with the debt ceiling crisis and the declining political fortunes of Mr. Obama, the administration settled on many fewer troops, 3,000 to 5,000, after the views of White House aides prevailed on those of the military and the State and Defense Departments, according to two people briefed on the matter who demanded anonymity to talk about private discussions.        

Some Iraqi leaders are now pushing that all troops leave &mdash; so they can symbolically claim finality to what many Iraqis still regard as an occupation &mdash; and then come back under different auspices, according to American and Iraqi officials &mdash; a perhaps implausible scenario.        

Even in 2008, when the security agreement requiring a complete withdrawal by the end of 2011 was passed, officials said privately that they expected the document to be amended to allow a longer military presence. &ldquo;The expectation was that Iraq&rsquo;s politics and security would still be fragile and that it would need a large capability of U.S. troops, certainly in the tens of thousands of troops,&rdquo; said Kenneth M. Pollack of the Brookings Institution, who has argued that Iraq&rsquo;s fragility requires troops to stay.        

And then the Iraqis seemed to try to split the difference, when political leaders said that the Americans could stay, then put in place a condition &mdash; no immunity &mdash; that they knew would force them to go.        

That seemed to recall a comment made by Gen. David H. Petraeus during the invasion to an embedded reporter, Linda Robinson, that became the title of her book: &ldquo;Tell Me How This Ends.&rdquo;        
