
MOSCOW &mdash; Russia&rsquo;s principal trading partners should decide soon whether to admit Russia to the World Trade Organization, Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin said Thursday in his first direct address to investors after announcing that he would run again for president next year.        

Russia&rsquo;s membership application to the trade group has been pending now for 18 years. But this week, officials in both the United States and Russia suggested that Russia, which is by far the largest economy still outside the W.T.O., was close to membership.        

One remaining obstacle is a demand by Georgia, a member of the organization, that international monitors be positioned at customs clearance points between Russia and two separatist regions, Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Russia, which largely controls the regions but officially considers them independent nations, has rejected monitors.        

Because accepting new nations in the W.T.O. is generally decided by consensus among the members, now numbering 153 states, Georgia has wound up with exceptional leverage.        

Russia has been applying to join the organization since 1993, when the group was called the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. But a series of disputes over airplane tariffs, international trade in chickens and allegations that Russia has allowed flagrant abuse of intellectual property rights has repeatedly blocked its membership. Russia&rsquo;s W.T.O. negotiators appear to have removed most of the remaining obstacles to accession, it emerged this week, including differences on meat imports, sanitary standards and incentives to Russian automobile producers. The World Bank says Russia&rsquo;s economy will benefit by joining, as will companies that export goods to Russia, like Procter & Gamble or John Deere.        

&ldquo;I have a legitimate question,&rdquo; Mr. Putin said in remarks at an economic forum in Moscow called Russia Calling!, sponsored by the state bank VTB.        

&ldquo;Do our main partners in Europe and the United States want Russia to become a W.T.O. member or not?&rdquo; he asked. &ldquo;There is no need to take refuge in the Georgia issue. If they want, they can have this very quickly, especially considering that we have reached a compromise on most issues.&rdquo; In the speech, Mr. Putin said he did not expect the global economy to dip into a second recession, something that could disproportionately affect Russia because of its dependence on oil exports.        

In a comment apparently intended to ease the financial community&rsquo;s concerns about investing in Russia, Mr. Putin said that the widely admired former finance minister, Aleksei L. Kudrin, who was fired last month, would remain a &ldquo;member of our team.&rdquo; He said, &ldquo;We will be working with him,&rdquo; without specifying any position he might have.        

Igor I. Shuvalov, a Russian deputy prime minister, said Tuesday after a visit to Washington that American trade negotiators were now advocating Russia&rsquo;s membership with other nations. They are working &ldquo;24 hours a day&rdquo; to persuade other W.T.O. members to accept Russia&rsquo;s application, he said. The nearly two-decade-long process, he said, is &ldquo;very close&rdquo; to completion.        

But Mr. Putin said that the United States and Europe had asked Russia to negotiate a settlement with Georgia. Mr. Putin said the countries were no closer to a compromise today than when talks began in March.        

The trade organization negotiations have taken on some added significance as a gauge of how the world will react to Mr. Putin&rsquo;s decision, announced late last month, to seek another term as president. Mr. Putin&rsquo;s comments suggested he expected the United States and Europe to pressure Georgia to accede to Russian membership in the organization.        

Georgia&rsquo;s president, Mikheil Saakashvili, has said it is in his country&rsquo;s interest for Russia to join the W.T.O., but he has not backed away from the border monitoring demand. Once Russia becomes a member, Georgia can sue Russia in the organization&rsquo;s courts for banning imports of Georgian vegetables, wine and mineral water, long a source of contention between the two sides.        
