
LONDON &mdash; The British Broadcasting Corporation announced Thursday that it would eliminate 2,000 jobs, cut its sports budget, show more reruns, and broadcast fewer talk and game shows.        

Mark Thompson, the broadcaster&rsquo;s director general, told his staff that the changes &mdash; which amount to cuts of about $1.03 billion a year, or a 20 percent reduction in spending over five years &mdash; would lead to a &ldquo;smaller, radically reshaped BBC.&rdquo;        

He said that no television or radio stations would be closed down and that some money would be reinvested in new programming and services.        

The BBC is financed mostly through a government-approved license fee, paid every year by every household in Britain that owns a television set. The fee brings in about $5.5 billion a year. In the early part of the century, spending increased annually, allowing the broadcaster to expand its services and introduce channels.        

But after a series of embarrassing episodes, including the disclosure of the huge salaries paid to bureaucrats in the organization, the BBC was forced to curtail spending. Last year, confronted with a Conservative-led government skeptical of its financing model, the BBC agreed to freeze the license fee at its current rate of &pound;145.60, or about $224, a year until 2017.        

The steps amount to a 16 percent cut in income, the BBC says. It has also decided to redirect 4 percent of its spending. Among other things, Mr. Thompson said, it plans to invest more money in dramas and comedies for its flagship channel, BBC 1. Its second channel, BBC 2, will broadcast only reruns in the daytime.        

Some of the employees whose jobs are being eliminated may be &ldquo;retrained and redeployed,&rdquo; Mr. Thompson said.        

In addition, 1,000 workers will be relocated from London to Salford, near Manchester, where the BBC has moved a portion of its operations.        

Unions reacted with dismay, saying that the BBC would lose credibility and audiences if it continued to cut its services.        

&ldquo;They are destroying jobs and destroying the BBC,&rdquo; said Gerry Morrissey, general secretary of Bectu, a union that represents technicians.        

Mr. Thompson said that after years of budget cutting, the broadcaster had trimmed its spending as much as possible and could not sustain another freeze or decrease in the license fee.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think we could do this again,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Another real-terms cut in the license fee would lead to a loss of services or potentially a diminution of quality, or both.&rdquo;        
