
SANA, Yemen &mdash; She is only 32 years old, an outspoken human rights activist and mother of three who was unknown outside her own country until she began leading anti-government protests this year.        

Yet when Tawakkol Karman was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize on Friday, she became a standard-bearer for the Arab Spring and for the role of women across the Middle East. And as a liberal Islamist who stopped wearing the full facial veil three years ago, she appears to represent something else, too: the hope in the West that Islamic movements might someday play a positive role in rebuilding Arab societies.        

&ldquo;Giving it to a woman and an Islamist? That means a sort of re-evaluation,&rdquo; said Nadia Mostafa, a professor of international relations at Cairo University. &ldquo;It means Islam is not against peace, it&rsquo;s not against women, and Islamists can be women activists, and they can fight for human rights, freedom and democracy.&rdquo;        

Ms. Karman was one of three women awarded the prize on Friday, alongside President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia and the Liberian peace activist Leymah Gbowee. They were the first women honored by the committee since 2004, and the Nobel citation made clear that female empowerment was the primary message.        

&ldquo;We cannot achieve democracy and lasting peace in the world unless women obtain the same opportunities as men to influence developments at all levels of society,&rdquo; it read.        

Ms. Karman seemed stunned by the award as she sat surrounded by admirers in the worn blue tent where she has lived in a sprawling protest camp for nine months. Many expected the award to go to one of the protest leaders in Egypt or Tunisia, where the revolts have succeeded in toppling authoritarian leaders. Yemen&rsquo;s rebellion is far from over, and many fear that it could still devolve into civil war. And for all her activism, Ms. Karman remains a controversial figure here as a leading member of the nation&rsquo;s largest Islamist party, Islah.        

For these reasons and others, her selection by the Oslo-based Nobel committee seemed more an expression of hope for the future &mdash; what some commentators called wishful thinking &mdash; than a recognition of past achievements, much like the Nobel Peace Prize granted to President Obama in 2009. In both cases, the committee appeared intent on recognizing potential and hoping that its imprimatur might help drive events in its desired direction.        

&ldquo;It sounds churlish to say this, but it seems premature because she&rsquo;s quite young and has been active for only a few years,&rdquo; said Nesrine Malik, who writes on Arab and Middle Eastern Affairs in London, mainly for The Guardian. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s an element of, &lsquo;We&rsquo;re being hopeful,&rsquo; and it&rsquo;s almost irrelevant what&rsquo;s been achieved.&rdquo;        

Yet Ms. Karman&rsquo;s selection was also widely seen in the Middle East as an endorsement of the revolts that broke out across the Arab world early this year, where popular uprisings have challenged entrenched leaders and empowered the disenfranchised. Ms. Karman made clear that she saw the prize that way.        

&ldquo;This is a victory for Arabs around the world,&rdquo; she said on Friday afternoon, her brown eyes wide, a red flowered veil around her head. &ldquo;And it will end the dictatorship of Ali Abdullah Saleh,&rdquo; Yemen&rsquo;s longtime president.        

The award offered a brief respite for a people, and a nation, that are bogged down in a protracted standoff that Ms. Karman helped to start. Mr. Saleh refuses to leave power. Protesters refuse to leave the streets. And lethal gun battles often break out between forces loyal to the president, and defectors who have joined the opposition. Supporters gathered around Ms. Karman&rsquo;s tent excitedly, chanting &ldquo;God is great&rdquo; and &ldquo;This is the biggest prize in the world!&rdquo; Even the government, which has in the past cast Ms. Karman as a villain, offered congratulations.        

Although Ms. Karman is well known here for her bravery and early leading role in the protests &mdash; she acquired the nickname &ldquo;Mother of the Revolution&rdquo; &mdash; many of the more independent protesters resent the dominating influence of Yemen&rsquo;s main Islamist party, known as Islah, and Ms. Karman&rsquo;s role in it. She was seen by some as domineering and selfish, and her influence in the protests has waned in recent months.        
Laura Kasinof reported from Sana, Yemen, and Robert F. Worth from Washington. Anthony Shadid contributed reporting from Istanbul and Sarah Lyall from London.
