
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; A senior American diplomat apologized on Friday in connection with the rape of an 18-year-old South Korean woman for which an American serviceman has been accused, and the United States military imposed a monthlong late-night curfew on its troops in South Korea.        

The apology by Kurt M. Campbell, the assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific affairs, and the curfew reflected Washington&rsquo;s sensitivity over crimes involving American soldiers, which have set off protests here.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;d like to personally and on behalf of the United States government take this opportunity to apologize to the Korean people for the tragic and inexcusable rape,&rdquo; Mr. Campbell said after a meeting with Foreign Minister Kim Sung-hwan of South Korea.        

Mr. Campbell was here to discuss preparations for the planned meeting between President Obama and his South Korean counterpart, Lee Myung-bak, this month in Washington. But he said he also wanted to underscore Washington&rsquo;s concern about the rape case.        

On Thursday, the Second Infantry Division, deployed north of Seoul, near the border with North Korea, handed over custody of the suspect to the South Korean authorities.        

The 21-year-old soldier, a private first class whose name has not been released, is said to have entered the victim&rsquo;s home, a small room in a low-budget motel in Dongducheon, north of Seoul, on Sept. 24 and raped her, according to the South Korean police. The division&rsquo;s Camp Casey is in Dongducheon.        

A surveillance camera recorded the soldier breaking into the victim&rsquo;s room about 4 a.m., the Dongducheon police said. The police said the soldier was drunk and used scissors, a knife, a ballpoint pen and a cigarette lighter in the attack. The victim is being treated in a hospital.        

The case has generated considerable attention. Civic groups and some lawmakers have demanded that the South Korean police be given more authority to investigate criminal cases involving American service members and that a late-night curfew be imposed on American troops.        

Maj. Gen. Edward C. Cardon, the division commander, has already apologized. On Friday, Gen. James D. Thurman, commander of the United States military in South Korea, ordered a monthlong curfew that will keep American service members on their bases from midnight until 5 a.m. on weekdays and from 3 a.m. to 5 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.        

Most South Koreans welcome the presence of the 28,000 American troops, whom they consider essential to their defense against North Korea. But they have also been infuriated by occasional crimes committed by American service members.        

When an American armored vehicle killed two schoolgirls in a traffic accident in 2002, it led to large anti-American protests that political commentators believed helped pave the way for Roh Moo-hyun&rsquo;s victory in the presidential election that year. Mr. Roh had accused his predecessors of what he called &ldquo;kowtowing&rdquo; to Washington, and he championed a diplomacy that was less dependent on the United States.        

The United States military rejected Seoul&rsquo;s request to try the soldiers involved in the accident in a South Korean court. A jury in an American military court later acquitted the soldiers of accidental homicide charges. Many South Koreans considered the handling of the case to be a slight to their national pride.        

The experience prompted both Washington and Seoul to work harder to minimize the political and diplomatic fallout when dealing with similar accidents or crimes.        

On Friday, the police in Seoul said that they were investigating another American soldier who is suspected of raping a South Korean woman and stealing her laptop computer. Mr. Campbell said he was aware of the case.        
