
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Syrian security forces on Friday attacked two prominent opposition leaders, shooting one to death in the north and beating another in broad daylight in the heart of the capital, Damascus, activists said.        

Mashaal Tammo, 53, a leading Kurdish political figure, was killed by four masked gunmen who stormed his house in Qamishli, in northern Syria, activists said. His son, Marcel, and another activist, Zahida Rashkilo, were wounded. Both are members of the liberal Kurdish Future Movement Party, which Mr. Tammo founded and which considers the minority Kurdish community an integral component of Syrian society.        

In Damascus, Riad Seif, a dissident and a former political prisoner, was beaten by government security operatives as he left Al Hassan Mosque in the neighborhood of Midan, activists said.        

The official Syrian Arab News Agency carried a strikingly different account of Mr. Tammo&rsquo;s death, calling him a &ldquo;nationalistic opposition leader&rdquo; who was assassinated by &ldquo;gunmen in a black car.&rdquo;        

Basma Kodmani, a spokeswoman of the newly formed opposition group, the Syrian National Council, said President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s government had &ldquo;crossed a new stage in the strategy of repression. All opposition leaders must protect themselves.&rdquo; Mr. Seif and Mr. Tammo were both members of the group.        

The attacks came as Russia, an ally of Syria that blocked a resolution condemning Damascus&rsquo; crackdown at the United Nations this week, called on Mr. Assad to either change his ways or leave office, joining a chorus of countries alienated by Mr. Assad&rsquo;s violent suppression of the uprising against him.        

&ldquo;If the Syrian leadership is incapable of conducting such reforms, it will have to go,&rdquo; said President Dmitri A. Medvedev, in remarks reported by Russian news agencies. &ldquo;But this decision should be taken not in NATO or certain European countries. It should be taken by the Syrian people and the Syrian leadership.&rdquo;        

Washington welcomed the shift in Russia&rsquo;s position, but a State Department official said that the United States would like to see Russia and other countries exert pressure on Syria by imposing economic sanctions.        

&ldquo;That is very positive,&rdquo; said Victoria Nuland, a State Department spokeswoman, on Friday. &ldquo;But as we have said, we want to see more countries join us not only in increasing the political and rhetorical pressure on the regime, but also tightening the economic noose.&rdquo;        

The White House press secretary, Jay Carney, said in a statement that the attacks on Mr. Tammo and Mr. Seif represented &ldquo;the Syrian regime&rsquo;s latest attempt to shut down peaceful opposition inside Syria. President Assad must step down now before taking his country further down this very dangerous path.&rdquo;        

A Syrian protester reached by telephone in Damascus said the beating of Mr. Seif reflected the government&rsquo;s anxiety about the opposition&rsquo;s influence. &ldquo;He is one of the few members of the National Council inside Syria and this scares the regime,&rdquo; said the protester, who gave his name as Ammar.        

Activists also said that at least eight people were killed elsewhere across Syria as protesters took to the streets after Friday&rsquo;s midday prayers.        

The United Nations said this week that at least 2,900 people have been killed since the uprising started in March. The United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child said the toll included at least 187 children.        

Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government has contended that the uprising is really a crime wave by gangs backed by hostile foreign powers. In keeping with that argument, the deputy foreign minister, Faisal Mekdad, said on Friday that his country had opened an investigation into the killings of 1,100 members of Syria&rsquo;s security forces. Mr. Mekdad, speaking from Geneva where he was attending a meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Council, denied reports that the Syrian Army was shooting deserters and accused other nations of arming protesters.        
