
MEXICO CITY &mdash; When five Cuban intelligence officers were charged with spying against the United States in 1998, the Cuban government immediately hailed them as heroes, with billboards, books and movies, and argued that their convictions and sentences &mdash; handed down in a Miami court &mdash; proved that the United States was an enemy, beholden to radical Cuban exiles.        

Now one of the so-called Cuban Five has been released on probation; Ren&eacute; Gonz&aacute;lez, 55, left a Florida jail on Friday after serving 13 years in prison. But Cuban officials, who have maintained chilly relations with Washington while embarking on a program of dramatic economic change, say they are far from satisfied.        

&ldquo;This is the hour of truth for the Obama administration,&rdquo; said Ricardo Alarc&oacute;n, president of Cuba&rsquo;s National Assembly, at a solidarity rally in Mexico City on Friday. Referring to militant Cuban exile groups that are now mostly dormant, he added, &ldquo;Will the Obama administration stay complicit with the worst assassins in the hemisphere, or truly, finally, do something different?&rdquo;        

Mr. Alarc&oacute;n&rsquo;s demands were familiar: release the other four men, and let Mr. Gonz&aacute;lez, who has dual Cuban and American citizenship, serve his three-year probation in Cuba. The administration has said before that these demands would not be met.        

&ldquo;The so-called Cuban Five were tried and convicted in U.S. Federal Court and are not political prisoners,&rdquo; said William Ostick, a State Department spokesman.        

The chief prosecutor in the case said the United States government opposed Mr. Gonz&aacute;lez&rsquo;s return to Cuba because of concerns that he would resume his spying career outside American supervision. The other four still face lengthy prison terms.        

Mr. Alarc&oacute;n, however, said a pardon for the men would prove to the world that Mr. Obama represented a clean break from the policies of the first and second President Bush. Mr. Alarc&oacute;n referred to the latter as &ldquo;Little Bush.&rdquo;        

Mr. Alarc&oacute;n insisted that the Cuban men were not the dangerous threat described by prosecutors. Acknowledging that they were intelligence officers, he said they had gone to Miami to detect and prevent attacks from exile groups that the Cuban government saw as a threat.        

One of these groups was Brothers to the Rescue, which dropped pro-democracy leaflets on the island and helped Cuban migrants at sea. In 1996, two of the group&rsquo;s planes were shot down by the Cuban Air Force, killing all four men aboard.        

One member of the Cuban Five had gathered information on the group, leading to a conviction on murder conspiracy charges for what prosecutors described as his contribution to the downing of the planes. Court records say that Mr. Gonz&aacute;lez, a pilot, had also infiltrated the group and flown with them, while all five Cubans were also convicted of spying on American military installations.        

At his sentencing in 2001, Mr. Gonz&aacute;lez said he was not remorseful. He described his group as &ldquo;men of honor.&rdquo;        

Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a South Florida Republican who is chairwoman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said Mr. Gonz&aacute;lez deserved a longer sentence because he &ldquo;has American blood on his hands.&rdquo;        

But other Cuban-Americans have said he should be sent back to Cuba because they fear that if something happens to Mr. Gonz&aacute;lez, Cuban exiles will be blamed, rightly or wrongly. But regardless of whether Mr. Gonz&aacute;lez leaves, Cuban officials are unlikely to end their campaign to release what are now the Cuban Four. For the foreseeable future, experts and Cuban officials say, they will stand near the top of Cuba&rsquo;s long-running tally of American offenses.        

&ldquo;They are a symbol,&rdquo; Mr. Alarc&oacute;n said, &ldquo;of the essence of Cuban resistance.&rdquo;        
