
BERLIN &mdash; Poles are set to vote on Sunday in elections that could well determine whether the country continues its deepening cooperation with European Union allies under Prime Minister Donald Tusk or lurches back toward a more confrontational course under its former leader.        

The parliamentary elections on Sunday pit Mr. Tusk against his predecessor, Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the leader of the nationalist-conservative Law and Justice Party. A fight over anti-German comments by Mr. Kaczynski in the prelude to the elections served as a stark reminder of his years as prime minister, when he appeared to relish his role as the European Union&rsquo;s in-house troublemaker.        

In 2007, Mr. Kaczynski was defeated by Mr. Tusk, who steered Poland to closer ties with Germany and the rest of Europe. While relations with the United States remained warm, Mr. Tusk&rsquo;s government was less reflexively pro-American, removing the last of Poland&rsquo;s troops from Iraq in 2008.        

In his recently published book, &ldquo;The Poland of Our Dreams,&rdquo; Mr. Kaczynski claimed that the Stasi, the former East German secret police, had helped Angela Merkel, who was raised in East Germany, to gain power. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think that the awarding of the chancellorship to Angela Merkel was pure chance,&rdquo; Mr. Kaczynski wrote.        

The former prime minister, the twin brother of President Lech Kaczynski, who was killed along with many top members of his government last year in a plane crash in Smolensk, Russia, also wrote that Mrs. Merkel wanted to reinstate Germany&rsquo;s imperial power through a strategic axis with Russia. Bronislaw Komorowski, the Polish president, demanded that Mr. Kaczynski apologize.        

Poland has a dark history of being conquered and divided by larger powers, especially Russia and Germany. Many Poles remain mistrustful of both countries, and suspect a Russian conspiracy was behind the devastating plane crash that killed Mr. Kaczynski&rsquo;s brother.        

The near certainty of Vladimir V. Putin&rsquo;s return as Russia&rsquo;s president has stoked fears among Poles. And the European Union, which Mr. Tusk has so strongly supported, looks ever weaker and more fractured as the European debt crisis begins to boil over and the future of the euro currency is called into question.        

Mr. Tusk has had the benefit of leading a country that has mostly escaped the worst of the European financial crises. Poland is one of the few European countries that did not slide into recession during the global financial crisis of 2008-9. And because it is not a member of the euro zone group, it has remained largely insulated from any contagion from the woes of Greece and other deeply indebted big borrowers.        

Though analysts believe that the race is still too close to predict the outcome, Mr. Tusk&rsquo;s governing party, Civic Platform, holds a 10-percentage-point lead over Law and Justice in opinion polls.        

&ldquo;Foreign policy does not win votes,&rdquo; said Pawel Baginski, an analyst at the Stefan Batory Foundation in Warsaw. Mr. Baginski added: &ldquo;What is in the minds of so many people is the economy. The party that wins power after Sunday will have to deal with potential problems arising from the euro crisis.&rdquo;        

Instead of responding to Mr. Kaczynski&rsquo;s nationalist talk, Mr. Tusk has run a campaign that could represent a turning point in Poland&rsquo;s post-Communist era, said Pawel Swieboda, president of demosEuropa, an independent research group in Warsaw. Mr. Tusk has been crisscrossing Poland in his campaign bus. Rather than giving set speeches, he has mingled in crowds, asking people what they want and what they think.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a kind of listening campaign, and so far, it seems to be working,&rdquo; Mr. Swieboda said. If Mr. Tusk manages to win as a result, it will be the first time since Poland&rsquo;s first post-Communist elections that a leader will be elected to a second consecutive term.        

But Mr. Tusk may face new challenges as Poland&rsquo;s economic boom is expected to fade, according to the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, which forecast a slowing in growth over the coming year.        

The economy grew 4.3 percent during the second quarter of this year but is expected to slow in the coming months as a result of the slowdown across the European Union. Unemployment has increased to 11.6 percent for the month of August from around 10 percent last year.        

&ldquo;The message from Tusk&rsquo;s campaign is clear,&rdquo; Mr. Swieboda said. &ldquo;We are stepping into very difficult waters. At the moment we are doing fine. But the circumstances outside are becoming more difficult.&rdquo;        
