
MONROVIA, Liberia &mdash; The day began in this battered seaside capital with shouts and drumming for a leading Liberian politician &mdash; but not the one honored with a Nobel Peace Prize on Friday.        

President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the Nobel winner, is lionized by the outside world as the woman who calmed a country ravaged by years of brutal civil war. But she is viewed more skeptically at home by a population still mired in poverty and official corruption, and struggling with little electricity. Its attention is fixed on something much closer to home than the Nobel committee in Olso: a closely contested presidential campaign involving a popular former soccer star.        

While Liberians widely acknowledge that peace and security have improved markedly during her tenure, Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf&rsquo;s success in securing forgiveness for billions of dollars in Liberian debt and the transformation she has effected in the nation&rsquo;s once infamous international image are often less appreciated here than abroad.        

Indeed, as the world absorbed the news of her prize, Monrovia was virtually shut down by a previously scheduled rally&nbsp;to energize the opposition before the presidential election on Tuesday. The early-morning shouting reverberating through the city was for the former sports hero, George Weah, one of Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf&rsquo;s opponents.        

In Oslo, though, she was honored as a peacemaker, along with two women who share the prize with her this year, Leymah Gbowee of Liberia and Tawakkol Karman of Yemen.        

&ldquo;Three women receiving the Nobel Peace Prize is really overwhelming,&rdquo; Ms. Gbowee said.&nbsp; &ldquo;It&rsquo;s finally a recognition that we can&rsquo;t ignore the other half of the world&rsquo;s population.&rdquo;        

Ms. Gbowee led a grass-roots women&rsquo;s protest movement credited with helping to end the 14-year war in Liberia in 2003. She was at the forefront of mass open-air demonstrations at a Monrovia fish market in defiance of the warlords who ruled the country, shaming them into heeding the women&rsquo;s demands.        

About 250,000 people were killed in the war, and the country&rsquo;s infrastructure, institutions, and economy were ruined. With its accounts of mass killings, rape and cannibalism, Liberia &mdash; the first independent republic in Africa &mdash; had become a poster child for Africa&rsquo;s ills.        

The country has been at peace since then, roads have been built, children in uniform again attend classes, the country&rsquo;s $4.6 billion in foreign debt has been wiped out, and Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf is credited with presiding over the change. In 2005, she became the first woman elected as a head of state in Africa, and the Nobel committee, in highlighting the gender of this year&rsquo;s recipients, acknowledged the central role that the Liberian war&rsquo;s most brutalized victims &mdash; women &mdash; have played in healing the country.        

&ldquo;We are now going into our ninth year of peace, and every Liberian has contributed to it,&rdquo; Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf said Friday in Monrovia after the Nobel announcement. &ldquo;We particularly give this credit to Liberian women, who have consistently led the struggle for peace, even under conditions of neglect.&rdquo;        

But peace may not be enough to guarantee re-election. The gap between expectation and accomplishment, like that between international perceptions of Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf and domestic ones, is wide, especially in a nation that ranked 162nd out of 169 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index in 2010.        

The Nobel award was dropped into the midst of a heated re-election campaign in which Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf is given only an even chance. Her campaign billboards &mdash; &ldquo;Monkey Still Working, Let Baboon Wait Small&rdquo; &mdash; plead with voters in Liberian patois to let her finish the job. But a potent opposition slogan plastered through Monrovia &mdash; &ldquo;Too old to hold&rdquo; &mdash; sums up the counterview of the 72-year-old president: that she has not tackled the country&rsquo;s myriad problems with sufficient energy.        

&ldquo;She gave out a lot of promises, that she would bring water and light,&rdquo; said Napoleon Bloe, an unemployed man in a shack-lined waterfront slum of dirt streets in the capital. &ldquo;The people are suffering.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Sirleaf Johnson&rsquo;s opponents dismissed the prize and its potential impact on the race. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think there are many Liberians who pay attention to the pronouncements of the Nobel committee,&rdquo; said Robert Tubman, a spokesman for the nominal head of Mr. Weah&rsquo;s ticket, Winston Tubman.        
Emily Schmall contributed reporting from Monrovia, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
