
Ramiz Alia, a cult-of-personality enforcer who succeeded Albania&rsquo;s Communist dictator Enver Hoxha after his death in 1985 and presided over halting and often chaotic moves toward democracy before his own downfall in 1992, died Friday. He was 85.        

His death was announced by a spokeswoman for Albania&rsquo;s president, Bamir Topi, in Tirana, the capital. Further details were not released. Mr. Alia&rsquo;s whereabouts had remained unclear in recent years.        

Mr. Alia had carried out many of the crackdowns, purges and executions ordered by Mr. Hoxha &mdash; resorting even to the Stalinist horrors of burying enemies alive &mdash; over decades of repression and Albanian isolation from the outside world.        

But when he succeeded to the presidency, he responded to widespread discontent by introducing limited economic reforms, easing restrictions on religion and civil liberties, and cautiously seeking ties with Western Europe and the Balkan states.        

Nevertheless, his government began to crumble in 1989 and 1990 during the wider collapse of Soviet and Eastern European Communism. Mr. Alia managed to cling to power for two more years by granting amnesty to political prisoners, allowing multiparty elections and promising other democratic reforms &mdash; a complete about-face from his years as the provost of repression, censorship and internal controls.        

But it was too little, too late. Albania, then Europe&rsquo;s most backward and impoverished country, continued to lurch from crisis to crisis with a dying economy, violent protests and masses of citizens fleeing abroad. Albania&rsquo;s Communist government, the last in Europe, disintegrated in 1991, and Mr. Alia resigned as head of a coalition government in 1992. He was soon arrested.        

Convicted of corruption in 1994, he was sentenced to nine years in prison. He served only a year but was arrested again in 1996, this time on genocide charges. Before he could be tried, however, Albania descended into anarchy in 1997. Gangs looted army depots of weapons, 1,600 people were killed and civilians cowered in their homes. Food prices soared, supplies vanished, and thousands fled the country on foot and in boats.        

At the prison where Mr. Alia and other former Communists were being held pending trials, even the guards disappeared in the chaos, and he and 300 other prisoners simply walked away.        

One report said that Mr. Alia had fled to Greece. In court, where prosecutors dropped the charges against him and many co-defendants, his lawyer said he had gone to live with a daughter in Sweden. A 1998 letter to a newspaper in Tirana suggested that he had quietly returned to Albania. But no one knew for sure, and most reports in the years since suggested that his whereabouts remained unknown.        

Ramiz Alia (pronounced rah-MEEZ uh-LEE-yah) was born on Oct. 18, 1925, in Shkoder, in northern Albania, to working-class Muslim parents who moved to Tirana. He attended a French high school there and, like thousands of other students, joined a Fascist youth organization after Italy occupied and annexed the country in 1939.        

In World War II, he joined Communist guerrillas fighting the retreating German forces. When the war ended, he was a 19-year-old political commissar with the rank of lieutenant colonel. In the Communist postwar government of Mr. Hoxha, he joined the propaganda ministry and from 1955 to 1958 was minister of education and culture. He rose through the Workers Party and by the 1960s was in the ruling Politburo.        

Like Mr. Hoxha, he was a dedicated Marxist-Leninist, and he had the favor of Mr. Hoxha&rsquo;s wife, Nexhmije.        

As with many Communist dignitaries, little was known of Mr. Alia&rsquo;s personal life. He was married in the late 1940s to Semiramis Xhuvani. They had two daughters, Xana and Besa, and a son, Arben. All three survive him, The Associated Press reported. His wife died in 1986.        

Former acquaintances now in the West say that Mr. Alia was friendly, courteous, soft-spoken and, unlike Mr. Hoxha, at ease with Westerners. But historians say his chief trait was his political dexterity. He avoided purges himself and rose to power as Mr. Hoxha&rsquo;s closest associate in crackdowns on dissent, in the removal and even executions of cabinet ministers, and in carrying out his mercurial foreign policies. Mr. Alia also kept track of a kaleidoscope of changing enemies and alliances, and solidified the leader&rsquo;s grip with propaganda and censorship.        
Dan Bilefsky contributed reporting.
