
MOSCOW &mdash; The majority of Russians have &ldquo;grown weary&rdquo; of waiting for Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin to make positive changes in their lives, and many expect little new from him as he embarks on his second stint as president next year, according to a poll published Friday.        



Mr. Putin remains the most popular politician in the country, but his support has been increasingly defined by inertia among voters, as well as a lack of other alternatives, said experts from the Levada Center, the Moscow-based polling agency that released the survey.        

The survey, among the first since Mr. Putin&rsquo;s plan to return to the presidency was announced last month, quantified what many observers have been saying for a long time. Confronted with a series of stage-managed elections, airbrushed television coverage, and Mr. Putin&rsquo;s increasingly blatant publicity stunts, Russians have largely tuned out.        

&ldquo;People understand what political system they have and that they have no influence over it,&rdquo; said Denis Volkov, an analyst from the Levada Center.        

News of Mr. Putin&rsquo;s coming return to the presidency, after four years as prime minister, has provoked elation among his ardent supporters and despair among his detractors. But beyond these small pockets of Russian society, the most common reaction has been a shrug of the shoulders.        

Of 1,600 adults polled, 41 percent said Mr. Putin&rsquo;s decision to return to the presidency &ldquo;did not provoke any special feelings.&rdquo; And 52 percent said they were certain or mostly certain that their lives would not improve under his continued leadership.        

Meanwhile, 42 percent of respondents said they would vote for Mr. Putin if elections were held next Sunday, followed by 10 percent who said they would vote for the leader of the Communist Party, Gennadi A. Zyuganov. The face-to-face survey was conducted Sept. 30 to Oct. 3 and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.        

The presidential election will be held in March, and Mr. Putin&rsquo;s victory is all but guaranteed. But his return, for another 12 years if he stays for two terms, has prompted foreboding reminders of the era of stagnation under the long-serving Soviet leader, Leonid I. Brezhnev.        

When asked this week about another survey indicating public dissatisfaction, Mr. Putin acknowledged that many Russians were frustrated with the slow process of change, but, noting Russia&rsquo;s turbulent history, urged a cautious approach to reform.        

&ldquo;This hacking, chopping, and running without looking where, we must end this,&rdquo; he said at a meeting with investors. &ldquo;We must consider everything and carefully seek out the end point of our movement and confidently head in that direction. This is how we should proceed, and I am certain that in doing so the mood will change.&rdquo;        

He added, &ldquo;However, I want to ask directly: Do you all seriously believe those surveys?&rdquo;        
