
WASHINGTON        

PETER VAN BUREN, an American diplomat who speaks Japanese, Mandarin and &ldquo;some Korean,&rdquo; though no Arabic, did a very undiplomatic thing when the State Department sent him to Iraq for a year. He wrote a book.        

The result is one diplomat&rsquo;s darkly humorous and ultimately scathing assault on just about everything the military and the State Department have done &mdash; or tried to do &mdash; since the invasion of Iraq. The title says it all: &ldquo;We Meant Well: How I Helped Lose the Battle for the Hearts and Minds of the Iraqi People&rdquo; (Metropolitan Books/Henry Holt & Company).        

Ample ink has been expended on the war, defending it, attacking it or just trying to understand it. What makes Mr. Van Buren&rsquo;s account so striking is its gleeful violation of the spirit &mdash; and perhaps the letter &mdash; of the written and unwritten code of America&rsquo;s diplomatic corps.        

In anything but diplomatic language, he skewers the Army&rsquo;s commanders and the Iraqis, the embassy, its staff, and even its ambassador at the time, Christopher R. Hill, though not by name. He takes sarcastic aim at the ambassador&rsquo;s Sisyphean effort to grow a lawn in the sprawling embassy compound beside the Tigris River.        

&ldquo;No matter what Iraq and nature wanted, the American Embassy spent whatever it took to have green grass in the desert,&rdquo; he writes. &ldquo;Later full-grown palm trees were trucked in and planted to line the grassy square. We made things in Iraq look the way we wanted them to look, water shortages through the rest of the country be damned. The grass was the perfect allegory for the whole war.&rdquo;        

He is certainly not the first diplomat to harbor doubts about the efficacy of American diplomacy, but in the cautious culture of the State Department, where every public statement is carefully &ldquo;cleared,&rdquo; often all the way back in Washington, airing them so starkly is simply not done.        

&ldquo;What&rsquo;s in it is so important because while there are hundreds of books on the shelves today that give relatively colorful accounts of military life inside and outside the wire, there aren&rsquo;t any by State employees who take on the reconstruction part of the war so vividly,&rdquo; Kelley B. Vlahos wrote admiringly on antiwar.com.        

The book and the publicity surrounding it &mdash; including an Op-Ed article by him in this newspaper &mdash; have infuriated Mr. Van Buren&rsquo;s colleagues. To them, he has betrayed his loyalty to the well-traveled, multilingual, highly educated professional cadre that is the Foreign Service.        

&ldquo;If you feel that strongly about policies you feel are misguided and harmful, you do the honorable thing and resign before tearing your colleagues apart in public,&rdquo; said a diplomat who served in Iraq, speaking, as is more typically the case, on the condition of anonymity.        

Mr. Van Buren himself describes the project as &ldquo;career suicide,&rdquo; though, for now, he continues to work in human resources at the State Department&rsquo;s Foggy Bottom headquarters.        

NOW 51, married with two daughters and living in Virginia, he has been in the Foreign Service for 23 years, with postings around the world. According to his biography in the book, he was honored for his work after the 1995 earthquake in Kobe, Japan, and he worked extensively with the military in previous assignments in Asia and at Camp Lejeune in North Carolina, where he participated in a Marine Corps field exercise meant to simulate conditions in Iraq.        

In short, he hardly seemed the type of Foreign Service officer to go rogue, but he has an impish eye for the absurd and a common-sensical attitude that was deeply frustrated in the political-military bureaucracy that had evolved in Iraq by the time he arrived in 2009.        

He served in two of the State Department&rsquo;s provincial reconstruction teams, or P.R.T.&rsquo;s, in the alphabet soup parlance of the Global War on Terror (G-WOT). The P.R.T.&rsquo;s were created in 2006 to shift the focus of the American war effort at least in part beyond the barrel of a gun.        

The teams, embedded in bleak, sand-clogged military bases, consisted of diplomats, specialists from the Departments of Justice or Agriculture and contractors, all well paid if not always, in his view, necessarily qualified for the task at hand.        

&ldquo;Nobody seemed happy,&rdquo; he writes in a typical passage of Thanksgiving dinner inside the dining facility (D-FAC) at his base, one of two on the southern outskirts of Baghdad where he worked, &ldquo;but everyone did get a lot of food, though like our reports of success, much was ladled out while little was swallowed.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
The passage echoes his main complaint: The day-to-day reconstruction projects, he argues, were done as much to satisfy the bureaucratic need to demonstrate measurable progress as actually to make measurable progress.        

He describes clashing with his superiors for trying to cancel programs that were clearly failing, like one to give sheep to widows that instead went to a corrupt sheik. He derides the distribution of humanitarian assistance (H.A.) as little more than photo opportunities that allowed commanders to check a box on progress reports.        

&ldquo;P.R. would fire off hundreds of frames of the same shot, of a smiling Joe handing a Transformer toy to a beaming Iraqi kid,&rdquo; he writes. &ldquo;If the photographers had zoomed out a bit they&rsquo;d have seen the Iraqi faces grow more sullen the older the recipient. For every 3-year-old smiling over a Snickers bar, there was a gray-haired mother accepting a blanket without making eye contact.&rdquo;        

The Americans, he continues, were oblivious to the hostility the invasion caused among the Iraqis they were trying to help. When his team gave away tree seedlings, one farmer responded by spitting on the ground. &ldquo;You killed my son and now you are giving me a tree?&rdquo; he quotes the man as saying.        

Mr. Van Buren&rsquo;s most serious accusations involve the waste of money spent on the reconstruction, $63 billion and counting. The Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction (Sigir) has chronicled numerous abuses amounting to billions of dollars, but Mr. Van Buren&rsquo;s account abounds with the granularity of projects too small for Sigir to bother with.        

Among many examples, he cites the $3 million purchase of 25 mobile water purification units, only to find out that they were ill suited for the high salinity of Iraq&rsquo;s water. &ldquo;Local thugs&rdquo; stole one and charged for water until it broke down, &ldquo;and the people blamed the United States for sending them shoddy equipment.&rdquo;        

AS the Foreign Service requires, Mr. Van Buren submitted his manuscript for review in September 2010, shortly after he returned from Iraq. The rules state that the review must be completed within 30 days. When he heard nothing, he took that as assent.        

Last month, however, the State Department wrote to the publisher and objected, citing three brief passages it said contained classified information, though all are fairly well known, like the Central Intelligence Agency&rsquo;s budgetary support for the Iraqi intelligence agencies.        

In a statement, a spokeswoman for the publisher, Pat Eisemann, said the passages &ldquo;on their face clearly did not contain classified information.&rdquo; Anyway, copies of the book were already on their way to bookstores.        

A State Department official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the issue is a personnel matter, said the department had in fact begun discussions with Mr. Van Buren over the book&rsquo;s contents, though belatedly. Publishing without awaiting the required review amounted to a violation, the official said. It is not clear what further action, if any, the department intends to take.        

The last of the P.R.T.&rsquo;s, in the volatile province of Diyala, closed last month ahead of the final withdrawal of American troops this year. Some have disputed Mr. Van Buren&rsquo;s grim view of the provincial reconstruction teams&rsquo; success, but his account amounts to a coda for the history of the P.R.T.&rsquo;s and the war itself.        

&ldquo;When we invaded &mdash; intervened, dropped by &mdash; Iraq, we said we&rsquo;re going to rebuild this country,&rdquo; he said in an interview. &ldquo;The mission was to create a stable democracy in the Middle East that would be a partner for the United States, that would crank out oil, that would solve our petroleum fears. These were the goals, and they are what you have to measure this against.&rdquo;        
