
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Tens of thousands of people poured into the streets of a Syrian city on Saturday for the funeral of a celebrated Kurdish opposition leader whose assassination the day before unleashed fury in the country&rsquo;s Kurdish regions and threatened to open a new theater of opposition to President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s rule.        

The crowds attending the funeral of the Kurdish leader, Mashaal Tammo, a prominent figure who had escaped an attempt on his life only a month before, constituted some of the biggest gatherings in weeks in the nearly seven-month uprising against Mr. Assad.        

Activists said at least five people were killed when security forces opened fire on the funeral in Qamishli, a city in northeastern Syria, igniting anger among a long restive Kurdish community that the government had tried to avoid provoking.        

The government has demonstrated little political strategy in coping with the revolt so far, relying almost exclusively on violence since August, deepening opposition in virtually every region of the country, and provoking extended clans in eastern and southern Syria.        

Yet picking a full-fledged fight with the Kurdish minority would add a new, dangerous facet to a revolt that has ebbed but remained resilient despite a crackdown that, by a United Nations count, has killed more than 2,900.        

&ldquo;My father&rsquo;s assassination is the screw in the regime&rsquo;s coffin,&rdquo; said Fares Tammo, who spoke by telephone from the Kurdish city of Irbil in neighboring Iraq. &ldquo;They made a big mistake by killing my father.&rdquo;        

Mashaal Tammo, 53, was a respected activist who had been released last summer after spending more than three years in jail. Activists and relatives said he was killed by four masked gunmen who stormed his house on Friday, and they blamed government forces for his death.        

Founder of the liberal Kurdish Future Movement Party, Mr. Tammo had angered both the government and rivals in the Kurdish community with his outspoken support for a pluralistic democratic state, in which Kurds would be an essential component.        

Kurds make up about 10 percent of Syria&rsquo;s 20 million people, concentrated in the remote northeast, which borders Iraq and Turkey, but also in Damascus and Aleppo, the country&rsquo;s two largest cities. They have long faced harassment and discrimination, and for years many were denied Syrian citizenship. Though the community has sympathized with the uprising, its traditional leadership has yet to decisively enter the fray against Mr. Assad, and the government itself, veering between crackdown and concession, had appeared reluctant to provoke the Kurds.        

Early in the uprising, the government informally negotiated with Kurdish leaders, reaching what some had termed &ldquo;a gentleman&rsquo;s agreement&rdquo; to forestall mass unrest. Mr. Assad even promised to give tens of thousands citizenship in April, though activists say few have received it.        

The Syrian news agency blamed an &ldquo;armed terrorist group&rdquo; for Mr. Tammo&rsquo;s death, a phrase it often deploys to underline its view of the uprising as an armed insurgency led by militant Islamists.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a real potential for it getting out of hand,&rdquo; said Peter Harling, a Syria-based analyst and researcher with the International Crisis Group.        

He said the killing was a vivid illustration of the consequences of the government&rsquo;s shift toward what it calls the &ldquo;security solution,&rdquo; a decision that seems to have been made before the Muslim holy month of Ramadan began in August.        

&ldquo;The security solution essentially amounts to giving a free hand to the security services to dramatically raise the levels of violence in an attempt to restore the wall of fear,&rdquo; Mr. Harling said. &ldquo;In doing so, the regime has undermined its own ability to think and act politically. This is sheer violence, with no limits, a &lsquo;solution&rsquo; that has every chance of creating many new problems.&rdquo;        

Activists said Mr. Tammo&rsquo;s funeral quickly turned into a rally attended by as many as 50,000 people. Video broadcast on Al Jazeera showed his coffin draped in a Kurdish flag and covered in flowers. At the funeral, activists said, mourners shouted for the fall of Mr. Assad, who inherited power 11 years ago from his father, Hafez.        

&ldquo;Leave! Leave!&rdquo; went the cry.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.
