
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Near the white tent where an ousted Afghan lawmaker lay moaning in bed, slowly starving herself in political protest, her onetime colleagues in Parliament congratulated themselves Saturday on their decision to return to work.        

More than a month had passed since dozens of lawmakers walked off their jobs to protest the disputed results of last year&rsquo;s parliamentary elections, effectively paralyzing the fractured National Assembly by denying it a quorum. On Saturday, still seething at President Hamid Karzai and with no resolution to the deeper grievances crippling Afghanistan&rsquo;s government, the dissident members nevertheless ended their boycott and marched back into the assembly.        

&ldquo;We had to come back to work together, to pass laws,&rdquo; said Shekiba Hashimi, one of the more than 70 members of Parliament who had boycotted the sessions. &ldquo;The government could not do anything. Everything stopped.&rdquo;        

Not that much was accomplished during Saturday&rsquo;s session. Lawmakers made impassioned speeches and left after about an hour. Bitter divisions remained over a recent decision by the country&rsquo;s election commission to replace nine members of Parliament with losing candidates who had challenged the results of the fraud-plagued election.        

For the past week, the outrage over that decision has been on display just outside the main gates of Parliament, in the white tent occupied by Semin Barakzai, a lawmaker from the western province of Herat who was one of the nine to lose their seats.        

Writing letters and holding news conferences got her no traction, supporters said, so Ms. Barakzai decided to take a page from nonviolent protest methods more familiar in India than here: She would not eat or drink until she got her job back.        

&ldquo;No one heard my voice,&rdquo; she said Saturday morning, glassy-eyed and listless. &ldquo;I had no other option.&rdquo;        

Ms. Barakzai lay under a heap of blankets, her black head scarf askew. A women&rsquo;s rights advocate sat at her bedside, rubbing her wrists, and members of Parliament came to offer words of encouragement and concern. She waved away doctors who came to take her blood pressure and who urged her to drink water.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m not taking any medicine,&rdquo; she told the doctors.        

Outside, they said she did not seem to understand &mdash; or care about &mdash; the toll that severe dehydration could take on her kidneys. On Saturday night, the public health minister visited and persuaded Ms. Barakzai to drink a bit of water.        

With few powerful supporters to protect her, Ms. Barakzai became a casualty of political compromise as Afghan officials tried to resolve a yearlong dispute that had alienated Parliament from the president and pushed the country to the brink of a constitutional crisis.        

In June, a special court set up by Mr. Karzai to judge allegations of electoral fraud ruled that 62 seats in Parliament should be awarded to candidates who had challenged the outcome of the elections &mdash; many of them allies of the president. That decision undercut the election commission, which had earlier declared the results of the vote should stand, and set off angry protests from members of Parliament.        

Mr. Karzai, bowing to overwhelming pressure, scrapped the special court and publicly affirmed the election commission&rsquo;s final authority over the vote, but suggested that the commission take another look at the results. It did, and ruled in August that Ms. Barakzai and eight others should lose their seats.        

A majority of lawmakers, who had also protested the special court, vowed to fight the decision, but with most of them having retained their seats, those like Ms. Barakzai were largely left behind as the protest petered out. She told people close to her that she would continue her vigil, though it was impossible to say for how long. &ldquo;She told me the rules have been broken, the laws have been stepped on, and that she was ready to sacrifice her life,&rdquo; said her husband, Mohammed.        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting.
