
CAIRO &mdash; A demonstration by Christians angry about a recent attack on a church touched off a night of violent protests here against the military council now ruling Egypt, leaving 24 people dead and more than 200 wounded in the worst spasm of violence since the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak in February.        

The sectarian protest appeared to catch fire because it was aimed squarely at the military council that has ruled Egypt since the revolution, at a moment when the military&rsquo;s latest delay in turning over power has led to a spike in public distrust of its authority.        

When the clashes broke out, some Muslims ran into the streets to help defend the Christians against the police, while others said they had come out to help the army quell the protests in the name of stability, turning what started as a march about a church into a chaotic battle over military rule and Egypt&rsquo;s future.        

Nada el-Shazly, 27, who was wearing a surgical mask to deflect the tear gas, said she came out because she heard state television urge &ldquo;honest Egyptians&rdquo; to turn out to protect the soldiers from Christian protesters, even though she knew some of her fellow Muslims had marched with the Christians to protest the military&rsquo;s continued hold on power.        

&ldquo;Muslims get what is happening,&rdquo; she said. The military, she said, was &ldquo;trying to start a civil war.&rdquo;        

Thousands filled the streets of downtown, many armed with rocks, clubs or machetes. Witnesses said several protesters were crushed under military vehicles and the Health Ministry said that about 20 were undergoing surgery for bullet wounds.        

Protesters responding to the news reportedly took to the streets in Alexandria as well.        

The protest took place against a backdrop of escalating tensions between Muslims and Coptic Christians, who make up about 10 percent of the population. Christians had joined the pro-democracy protests in large numbers, hoping for the protections of a pluralistic, democratic state, but a surge in power of Islamists has raised fears of how much tolerance majority rule will allow.        

But the most common refrain of the protests on Sunday was, &ldquo;The people want to bring down the field marshal,&rdquo; adapting the signature chant of the revolution to call for the resignation of the military&rsquo;s top officer, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi.        

&ldquo;Muslims and Christians are one hand,&rdquo; some chanted.        

The military and riot police, on the other hand, appeared at some points to be working in tandem with Muslims who were lashing out at the Coptic Christians. As security forces cleared the streets around 10 p.m., police officers in riot gear marched back and forth through the streets of downtown alongside a swarm of hundreds of men armed with clubs and stones chanting, &ldquo;The people want to bring down the Christians,&rdquo; and, later, &ldquo;Islamic, Islamic.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Until when are we going to live in this terror?&rdquo; asked a Christian demonstrator who gave his name only as John. &ldquo;This is not the issue of Muslim and Christian, this is the issue of the freedom that we demanded and can&rsquo;t find.&rdquo;        

By the end of the night, as clouds of tear gas floated through the dark streets and the crosses carried by the original Christian demonstrators had disappeared, it became increasingly difficult to tell who was fighting whom.        

At one point, groups of riot police officers were seen beating Muslim protesters, who were shouting, in Arabic, &ldquo;God is Great!&rdquo; while a few yards away other Muslims were breaking pavement into rocks to hurl in the direction of a group of Christians.        

&ldquo;It is chaos,&rdquo; said Omar el-Shamy, a Muslim student who had spent much of the revolution in Cairo&rsquo;s Tahrir Square and returned again to help support the Christians against the military. &ldquo;I was standing with a group of people and suddenly they were chanting with the army! I don&rsquo;t know what is going on.&rdquo;        
Heba Afify contributed reporting.
