
RIO DE JANEIRO &mdash; Julio Mario Santo Domingo, the Colombian magnate whose $8.5 billion fortune made him one of Latin America&rsquo;s richest and most influential men, died on Friday in New York. He was 87.        

His death was announced in Colombia by Caracol, the television network he controlled. The cause was not disclosed.        

While Mr. Santo Domingo had lived since the 1980s in the famous apartment building at 740 Park Avenue in Manhattan that has also been home to Rockefellers, Guggenheims and Vanderbilts, his fortunes were always intertwined with those of Colombia.        

He assembled a web of enterprises in industries including energy, the media, brewing, tourism, shrimping and real estate. &ldquo;There are few countries in the world in which an individual came to have so many tentacles,&rdquo; Semana, a Colombian newsmagazine, said.        

Mr. Santo Domingo, who consolidated his holdings as Colombia was afflicted by some of Latin America&rsquo;s worst violence, sold big stakes in some of his companies in recent years as the waning of Colombia&rsquo;s long internal war lured foreign investors back.        

He sold a controlling interest in the airline Avianca in 2004 to the Brazilian entrepreneur Germ&aacute;n Efromovich, and the next year SABMiller, the South African brewing company, took control of Bavaria, a brewery acquired by Mr. Santo Domingo and his father, Mario, in the 1960s. The 2005 deal made the Santo Domingo family one of SABMiller&rsquo;s largest shareholders.        

This year, Forbes magazine estimated Mr. Santo Domingo&rsquo;s wealth to be $8.5 billion, ranking him 108th on its list of the world&rsquo;s billionaires. He ceded his place as Colombia&rsquo;s richest man this year to the banker Luis Carlos Sarmiento, whose fortune Forbes estimates to be $10.5 billion.        

Julio Mario Santo Domingo Pumarejo was born on Oct. 1, 1924, in Panama City, where some in the upper-class of Barranquilla, the trading city on Colombia&rsquo;s Caribbean coast where his parents lived, traveled for the birth of their children. His father was a banker, described as austere and disciplined, who made a fortune buying companies weakened during the Great Depression.        

Mr. Santo Domingo was cut from a different cloth. He was a playboy in his youth, said to date countesses and to resemble the American film actor Tyrone Power. He met his first wife, the Brazilian socialite Edyala Braga, in Paris. They had a turbulent union that ended in divorce. His son from that marriage, Julio Mario Santo Domingo Braga, died of cancer in 2009.        

Mr. Santo Domingo is survived by his second wife, Beatrice Davila, and two sons, Alejandro and Andr&eacute;s.        

By the time his father died in 1973, Mr. Santo Domingo, the eldest of four children, had become a fixture of Colombia&rsquo;s business and political establishment. He was Colombia&rsquo;s ambassador to China when Julio C&eacute;sar Turbay, president from 1978 to 1982, wanted diplomatic ties with Beijing.        

Even as nightmarish violence plagued Colombia through the 1980s and 1990s, with drug cartels, guerrillas and paramilitary armies committing numerous atrocities, Mr. Santo Domingo kept investing in Colombia. The violence inevitably affected his far-flung operations, with some employees abducted and killed by armed groups.        

When in Bogot&aacute;, Mr. Santo Domingo could be glimpsed on occasion at his seat in the Santamar&iacute;a Bullring, but he lived largely in New York in recent decades.        

Still, he attained prominence in Colombian culture and politics through his friendship with figures like the writer Gabriel Garc&iacute;a M&aacute;rquez, philanthropic donations, and his control of Caracol, the magazine Cromos and the newspaper El Espectador, which Mr. Santo Domingo saved from financial ruin in the 1990s.        

In an account published over the weekend in El Espectador, the writer H&eacute;ctor Abad Faciolince, a member of the newspaper&rsquo;s editorial board, described meeting Mr. Santo Domingo at his home in New York.        

Mr. Abad Faciolince learned that Mr. Santo Domingo got upset when luncheon guests showed up without a tie, so he bought one on a street corner.        

&ldquo;Don Julio Mario,&rdquo; he wrote, was &ldquo;elegant as ever, with a tie that seemed to come from another planet.&rdquo; But during lunch that day, Mr. Abad Faciolince said, Mr. Santo Domingo also expressed his pride in supporting El Espectador as one might support an orchestra, museum or library, seeing it as a beacon of &ldquo;democracy and free thinking.&rdquo;        
