
MONROVIA, Liberia &mdash; The Nobel Peace Prize is a high-voltage endorsement for a president seeking a second term to receive four days before the election. But analysts questioned whether it would have much impact in Liberia, a sweltering tropical nation where nearly half the population cannot read.        

The megaseal of approval for Liberia&rsquo;s president, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, at the climax of a hard-fought campaign was so unusual and unexpected that she and her flustered opponents still appeared to be trying to digest its meaning on Sunday, two days after it was announced. Yet the context &mdash; Liberia is one of the world&rsquo;s most underdeveloped countries, and is still recovering from a long and brutal civil war &mdash; may flatten its electoral impact.        

Mrs. Sirleaf defensively parried questions about the prize from foreign reporters as she campaigned on Sunday, the streets around her packed with people chanting and singing about her earlier campaign themes, not about the Nobel. She did not mention the prize in a brief speech to thousands of boisterous supporters in a broiling sports stadium here.        

The president&rsquo;s shining international image contrasts with the shaky condition of the Liberian economy, where fewer than one in five people have full-time employment, and with her early support for the warlord Charles Taylor, whom she later disavowed. Electoral rivals criticize her on both fronts. And though she is credited abroad with restoring peace in Liberia, about 8,000 United Nations peacekeeping troops are still deployed here.        

&ldquo;She thinks the recognition she receives internationally, this excuses her,&rdquo; said Winston Tubman, her leading opponent, in an interview two days before the prize was awarded.        

On Sunday, Mrs. Sirleaf embraced one of the women with whom she shared the Nobel Prize, the Liberian activist Leymah Gbowee, in the sandy field where Ms. Gbowee began her peace movement during the civil war. The two laureates wanted to talk about improving the conditions for women, but reporters kept asking about the prize&rsquo;s timing. &ldquo;It just happened to be a coincidence,&rdquo; Mrs. Sirleaf, sprightly and pugnacious at 72, said with some impatience.        

Wearing a dark green bush hat in the equatorial sun, Mrs. Sirleaf added that voters &ldquo;will not choose because of any Nobel Peace Prize,&rdquo; before getting into a battered white sports utility vehicle to drive to her next campaign stop.        

Her impromptu strategy of playing down the honor may be the most sensible one, according to experts who follow the country&rsquo;s politics. &ldquo;Most Liberians do not really know what that prize is about,&rdquo; said Jonathan Taylor, a dean at the University of Liberia. &ldquo;Most of our people are rural people.&rdquo; He said he doubted that the Peace Prize would confer any benefit in the voting on Tuesday.        

Still, while Mrs. Sirleaf has been minimizing the prize, her opponents have been crying foul. &ldquo;To suddenly throw this to her as a lifeline, we felt that this was unwittingly a provocative interference in our election&rdquo; by the Nobel committee, said Mr. Tubman, a lawyer and, like his opponent, Harvard-trained.        

There was little sign on the ground that news of the prize had changed the tenor of the campaign or swayed many voters. Even so, analysts questioned its timing, and the Western attitudes about African politics that the prize reveals.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a certain arrogance on the part of the Nobel committee, dismissing the political impact in this country, Liberia,&rdquo; said Michael Keating, a Liberia expert at the University of Massachusetts Boston.        

&ldquo;In the case of Liberia, I think it&rsquo;s just really inappropriate, a week before the election, to award this,&rdquo; Mr. Keating said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s condescension toward an African political process which is very fragile, and really needs a different kind of support.&rdquo; He criticized the credit that he said Mrs. Sirleaf had gotten &ldquo;for things that she hasn&rsquo;t accomplished.&rdquo;        

At the crowded Samuel Kanyon Doe Stadium &mdash; named for the military dictator who imprisoned Mrs. Sirleaf, an outspoken former finance minister and economist, in the 1980s &mdash; her supporters raced around the infield battering stuffed baboons, reprising the campaign slogan plastered around Monrovia and meant as mockery of Mr. Tubman&rsquo;s campaign: &ldquo;Monkey Still Working, Let Baboon Wait Small.&rdquo; Gospel singers swayed on the stage, and thousands of people burst small packets of mineral water in the air.        

The Nobel Prize is &ldquo;just a little step,&rdquo; said one supporter, Peter F. Korfeh, a maker of clay ovens. &ldquo;It proves that the international community loves her. But it&rsquo;s the people who elect her, not the Nobel Prize.&rdquo; Another man, Ansuma Kamara, added: &ldquo;It&rsquo;s just an individual achievement. It doesn&rsquo;t mean she will win.&rdquo;        
