
HONG KONG &mdash; China announced Monday that it was suspending passenger and cargo traffic in the headwaters of the Mekong River after the Thai border police heard gunfire on the river, found two Chinese cargo vessels adrift carrying 920,000 amphetamine pills and one body, and then discovered the floating bodies of 11 Chinese crewmen.        

Liu Weimin, a spokesman for China&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry, announced the suspension of river traffic and said that China&rsquo;s cabinet and the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party &ldquo;attached great importance to the matter.&rdquo;        

As postings on the Internet in China have become increasingly nationalistic, and increasingly critical of government agencies not perceived as taking a strong enough stand to defend the country, the Foreign Ministry and other agencies have become outspoken in response to the deaths of Chinese citizens abroad.        

But that sensitivity comes as drug-related violence continues along the Mekong River, which flows south from Yunnan Province in southwestern China.        

Maj. Gen. Songtham Allapach, the police chief in Chiang Rai, the northernmost province in Thailand, said in a telephone interview that the two Chinese vessels had probably been seized by drug traffickers from northern Myanmar. Drug gangs demand protection money from vessels using the river, and sometimes hijack them to carry illicit cargo.        

Thai soldiers periodically hear gunfire from the section of the river north of Thailand that runs along the border between Laos and Myanmar. That was the case again before the two Chinese cargo vessels floated down to Thailand, said Col. Popkorn Khuncharoensuk, a police investigator working on the case.        

The 11 crewmen had been shot or stabbed; one also had his hands tied behind his back with tape, and two others were blindfolded, General Songtham said. Relatives have identified the 11 crewmen, and Mr. Liu in Beijing said that two others were missing. The Thai police have been unable to identify the nationality or occupation of the person whose body was found aboard one of the vessels, although the body was not mutilated, Colonel Popkorn said.        

The Chinese move to suspend southbound passenger and cargo traffic on the Mekong from Yunnan Province is mainly a political symbol, as opposed to an economic sanction. The section of the river near Myanmar&rsquo;s border with China and along the border of Myanmar and Laos is in a remote, sparsely settled region.        

Few large vessels venture that far north on the Mekong because the river is hard to navigate and passes through an area between Laos and Myanmar with a history of drug-related violence and occasional resistance to the Laotian government by members of the Hmong ethnic minority.        

After flowing out of Yunnan Province, the Mekong runs southeast, forming the border between Myanmar and China for about 15 miles, and then, farther south, to form the border between Laos and Myanmar. It flows east along a short stretch of northernmost Thailand&rsquo;s border with Laos, where the two Chinese vessels were found, and then meanders back into Laos.        
Poypiti Amatatham contributed reporting from Bangkok.
