
BAGHDAD &mdash; For two years, an assistant dean at Iraq&rsquo;s largest university received threats from a police officer: sign a fraudulent document certifying that the officer had graduated from the university, the dean was told, or he would be arrested or even killed.        

The dean, Dr. Rahif al-Essawi, steadfastly refused, and on the last day of exams in June, the officer followed through on the threats and beat the dean and threw him in jail, Dr. Essawi said.        

In Iraq, the police have long intimidated or beaten civilians, whether under Saddam Hussein or during the years since the United States invaded in 2003.        

But the beating of the dean and similar episodes in recent months represent a growing problem that this weary nation has been forced to confront: rampant diploma fraud. Last year, an investigation by Parliament identified more than 5,000 government officials who had lied about their education, including government ministers and members of Parliament.        

Like many oil-rich countries in the Middle East, Iraq uses its oil revenue to employ people, often in jobs in government &mdash; the country&rsquo;s largest employer &mdash; that do not require a lot of effort. After the United States overthrew Mr. Hussein, tens of thousands of highly educated Iraqis who had run the government fled the country, and many who stayed were excluded from remaining in the government.        

Iraqis from the countryside flocked to Baghdad as the government was slowly rebuilt, hoping to become civil servants, jobs that come with significant salaries and perks like free land. The problem for these people, however, was that an Iraqi law that dates from before Mr. Hussein seized power requires government workers to have completed certain levels of education.        

Many people seeking jobs in the reformulated government lacked the appropriate diplomas, but they were able to exploit the fact that many public documents had been destroyed after the fall of the Hussein government. Without adequate records about who had graduated from which school, many Iraqis pressed school officials to sign documents that said they had graduated from schools that they had never even attended.        

Some school administrators resisted the pressure to issue phony diplomas and certificates, and like Dr. Essawi some were threatened. Meanwhile, the post-Hussein government began to fill with unqualified employees, many of whom had not finished elementary school.        

&ldquo;This is a big reason why Iraq hasn&rsquo;t progressed,&rdquo; said Alya Nusaif, a member of Parliament who serves on the integrity committee.        

Education fraud has become so widespread that Parliament is considering legislation that would send people to prison for 6 to 12 years if convicted of lying about their education. They would also be forced to return all of the money they had earned while employed as a result of phony education documents. The proposal would also provide amnesty for lower-level government workers who voluntarily admitted that they had used false certificates or diplomas.        

Dr. Essawi returned to Iraq from Libya in 2006. He began working at Baghdad University, and, he said, he quickly encountered rampant corruption.        

&ldquo;I discovered that the main registration logbook had been changed and forged, so I started looking into the problem and found so many counterfeiters,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There was a gang in the registration department who were helping people forge their graduation documents.&rdquo;        

On his own, Dr. Essawi tried to figure out who had received fake education documents. Just a few weeks into his investigation, he received his first threat in a text message.        

&ldquo;It said: &lsquo;We will separate your head from your body,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; he recalled. But the threats did not deter him, and over two years, he said, he discovered nearly 100 forged certificates that government officials and security officers had used. This year, someone removed his car&rsquo;s brake pads.        

Shakr Karim, the police officer accused of beating the dean, had needed to prove that he was a college graduate to qualify for a promotion; he wanted to become an intelligence officer in the Interior Ministry, Dr. Essawi said.        

As Dr. Essawi was being driven home from work in June, a police patrol stopped the car and told him to get out.        

He refused. Then Officer Karim appeared from behind the car. He leaned in and began to beat Dr. Essawi, as did several officers with him, the dean said.        

&ldquo;You are a terrorist,&rdquo; Dr. Essawi said the officers had yelled as they stomped on his head after taking him out of the car. &ldquo;You are the one who kills officers.&rdquo;        

The other officers tied Dr. Essawi&rsquo;s arms and legs, put him on the floor of a truck and carted him off to jail, he said.        

Two days later, after local newspapers published articles about the arrest, Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki ordered that Dr. Essawi be released from jail.        

Around the time Dr. Essawi was freed, the police arrested Officer Karim on the beating and fraud allegations. He was later released on bail and resumed working as a police officer.        

&ldquo;I knew that one day I would be assaulted or killed by the counterfeiters,&rdquo; Dr. Essawi said. &ldquo;I will keep checking all the registration logbooks. I just want the government to protect me. I care about my country more than I care about myself. I&rsquo;m not afraid of being killed. But I fear for my country. And education is the key to your country progressing.&rdquo;        
