
Three thousand striking customs officers disrupted oil shipments from Kuwait on Monday, escalating the labor unrest that has been gaining momentum in recent weeks in the emirate.        

Demanding higher wages and better working conditions, the workers refused to give customs clearance to as many as five tankers loaded with oil for export, and said their strike would continue indefinitely. The Kuwait Times reported that the state petroleum company was scrambling to find other port workers who were not taking part in the strike to complete the customs paperwork for oil shipments.        

Workers in Kuwait&rsquo;s oil industry went on strike last month and won wage increases from the cabinet. That set off a wave of other public-sector strikes that included bank, health care and industrial workers.        

Kuwait has not experienced the kind of unrest that has unsettled several other Middle East and North African countries over the last year. But there have been sporadic demonstrations protesting alleged government corruption and demanding the resignation of the prime minister, Sheik Nasser al-Mohammed al-Ahmed al-Sabah.        

The opposition is threatening to mount more demonstrations when Parliament reconvenes at the end of the month, in the hope of unseating the prime minister. In response, the government says it will submit an anti-corruption bill to Parliament.        

Social pressures have led the government to approve a four-year, $125 billion development plan to improve public utilities and transportation systems, along with measures to raise living standards. But conflicts between Parliament and the cabinet have slowed approval of some projects.        

The halting of oil shipments from Kuwait, OPEC&rsquo;s fourth most important exporter, helped push benchmark oil prices up by about 3 percent on Monday. Global supply concerns had been easing as Libyan exports gradually returned to the world market.        

Kuwait, which has the world&rsquo;s sixth-largest oil reserves, produces about 2.6 million barrels of crude a day, exported mainly to Asia. The country depends on oil for 95 percent of both its export earnings and its government revenue.        

Oil experts said that the Kuwaiti disruption was unlikely to have a lasting market impact because other OPEC producers had spare production capacity. &ldquo;The events are potentially more important psychologically than are the actual volumes of oil for influencing price volatility,&rdquo; said Lawrence J. Goldstein, a director of the Energy Policy Research Foundation.        

All shipping was blocked by the strike from either leaving or entering Kuwait&rsquo;s two commercial ports and two oil terminals. Customs operations were also disrupted at the country&rsquo;s international airport and at its land borders with Iraq and Saudi Arabia.        

The customs director asked the strikers to come back to work, promising to consider their demands.        
