
CAIRO &mdash; President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt struggled to maintain a tenuous hold on power on Saturday as the police withdrew from the major cities and the military did nothing to hold back tens of thousands of demonstrators defying a curfew to call for an end to his nearly 30 years of authoritarian rule.        

As street protests flared for a fifth day, Mr. Mubarak fired his cabinet and appointed Omar Suleiman, his right-hand man and the country&rsquo;s intelligence chief, as vice president. Mr. Mubarak, who was vice president himself when he took power after the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat, had until now steadfastly refused pressure to name any successor, so the move stirred speculation that he was planning to resign.        

That, in turn, raised the prospect of an unpredictable handover of power in a country that is a pivotal American ally &mdash; a fear that administration officials say factored into President Obama&rsquo;s calculus not to push for Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s resignation, at least for now.        

The appointments of two former generals &mdash; Mr. Suleiman and Ahmed Shafik, who was named prime minister &mdash; also signaled the central role the armed forces will play in shaping the outcome of the unrest. But even though the military is widely popular with the public, there was no sign that the government shakeup would placate protesters, who added anti-Suleiman slogans to their demands.        

On Saturday, Mohamed ElBaradei, the Noble laureate and a leading critic of the government, told Al Jazeera that Mr. Mubarak should step down immediately so that a new &ldquo;national unity government&rdquo; could take over, though he offered no details about its makeup.        

Control of the streets, meanwhile, cycled through a dizzying succession of stages.        

After an all-out war against hundreds of thousands of protesters who flooded the streets on Friday night, the legions of black-clad security police officers &mdash; a reviled paramilitary force focused on upholding the state &mdash; withdrew from the biggest cities.        

Looters smashed store windows and ravaged shopping malls as police stations and the national party headquarters burned through the night. Two mummies were destroyed in Cairo&rsquo;s Egyptian Museum, the country&rsquo;s chief antiquities official said.  Then thousands of army troops  stepped in late Friday to reinforce the police. By Saturday morning, a sense of celebration took over the central squares of the capital as at least some members of the military encouraged the protesters instead of cracking down on them.        

It was unclear whether the soldiers in the streets were operating without orders or in defiance of them. But their displays of support for the protesters were conspicuous throughout the capital. In the most striking example, four armored military vehicles moved at the front of a crowd of thousands of protesters in a pitched battle against the Egyptian security police defending the Interior Ministry.        

But the soldiers refused protesters&rsquo; pleas to open fire on the security police. And the police battered the protesters with tear gas, shotguns and rubber bullets. There were pools of blood in the streets, and protesters carried at least a dozen wounded from the front line of the clashes.        

Everywhere in Cairo, soldiers and protesters hugged or snapped pictures together on top of military tanks. With the soldiers&rsquo; consent, protesters scrawled graffiti denouncing Mr. Mubarak on many of the tanks. &ldquo;This is the revolution of all the people,&rdquo; read a common slogan. &ldquo;No, no, Mubarak&rdquo; was another.        

One camouflage-clad soldier shouted through a megaphone from the top of a tank: &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t care what happens, but you are the ones who are going to make the change!&rdquo;        

By Saturday night, informal brigades of mostly young men armed with bats, kitchen knives and other makeshift weapons had taken control, setting up checkpoints around the city.        

Some speculated that the sudden withdrawal of the police from the cities &mdash; even some museums and embassies in Cairo were left unguarded &mdash; was intended to create chaos that could justify a crackdown. And reports of widespread looting and violence did return late Saturday night, dominating the state-controlled news media.        

&ldquo;How come there is no security at all?&rdquo; asked Mohamed Salmawy, president of the Egyptian Writers Union. &ldquo;It is very fishy that the police had decided to leave the country completely to the thugs and angry mobs.&rdquo;        

The Mubarak government may have considered its security police more reliable than the military, where service is compulsory for all Egyptian men. While soldiers occupied central squares, a heavy deployment of security police officers remained guarding several closed-off blocks around Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s presidential palace.        
Kareem Fahim, Mona El-Naggar, Scott Nelson and Anthony Shadid contributed reporting from Cairo; Souad Mekhennet and Nicholas Kulish from Alexandria; and J. David Goodman from New York.
