
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Despite increased efforts to destroy fields of opium poppies and wean Afghan farmers off the country&rsquo;s biggest cash crop, poppy cultivation in Afghanistan rose in 2011 and spread into areas once declared &ldquo;poppy free,&rdquo; according to a United Nations survey released Tuesday.        

The United Nations drug control agency said that insecurity and soaring opium prices in Afghanistan &mdash; the world&rsquo;s largest opium producer &mdash; were the driving factors in a 7 percent increase in the amount of land sown with poppies. It was the second year in a row of rising poppy cultivation.        

The increase amounts to a troubling signal for Afghan and Western officials who have spent hundreds of millions of dollars trying to disrupt opium-smuggling operations and the insurgent networks that profit from them, while also cajoling poppy farmers to switch to legal crops like wheat, pomegranates or saffron.        

Their efforts have run headlong into the increasingly powerful economic incentives behind poppy growing, whereby one acre of land can produce more than $4,000 worth of opium. Officials are also confronting rising levels of drug addiction as more Afghans take advantage of relatively cheap, high-quality heroin and opium.        

The value of the opium produced in Afghanistan is set to more than double this year to $1.4 billion &mdash; equal to 9 percent of Afghanistan&rsquo;s entire economy &mdash; as prices continued to rise and fields rebounded from an infection that blighted last year&rsquo;s poppy harvest.        

&ldquo;It had a very serious effect on persuading farmers, drug smugglers and landlords to cultivate poppy,&rdquo; said Zarar Ahmad Muqbil, the Afghan counternarcotics minister.        

Counternarcotics officials say that much of the money from opium production and smuggling flows to insurgent groups, drug traders and warlords, as well as corrupt politicians and security forces, undermining the Afghan government&rsquo;s influence and the rule of law in wide swaths of the country.        

Troublingly, the footprint of poppy cultivation continued to expand across Afghanistan, as it spread outside the southern and western regions where the overwhelming majority of opium is produced. The northern provinces of Baghlan and Faryab and the eastern province of Kapisa, which is just north of Kabul, lost their status as &ldquo;poppy free&rdquo; areas this year.        

In all, 17 of Afghanistan&rsquo;s 34 provinces are now declared free of substantial poppy growth &mdash; a distinction that qualifies them for $1 million in funds from the American and Afghan governments.        

The expansion of poppy cultivation comes even as eradication efforts led by the Afghan government rose by 65 percent from last year. But the measures touched only the tiniest sliver of the farmlands where the brilliantly colored flowers bloom, and they increasingly put eradication teams in the cross hairs of militants and armed groups. The United Nations reported there were 48 attacks on eradication teams this year, compared with 12 attacks in 2010.        

In one bright spot, Afghan counternarcotics officials said they had reduced poppy cultivation in the southern Helmand Province, the epicenter of opium production, which accounts for about half of Afghanistan&rsquo;s 131,000 cultivated hectares of poppies.        

The United Nations drug control agency said that the acreage of poppy fields in Helmand shrank by 3 percent from last year, in large part because of cooperation from the local governor and targeted international aid.        

But the agency said it lacked the resources and political support to replicate that progress across the country. In Kandahar Province, adjacent to Helmand, cultivation went up 5 percent.        

At a news conference on Tuesday, Afghan officials ticked off the obstacles they face: corrupt police officers and commanders in various districts who support smugglers, a lack of counternarcotics police officers and dwindling time to confront the problem before international forces leave.        
