
When the Canadian police began connecting the dots in a series of child abductions and torture-murders in the summer of 1981, Clifford Olson, a career criminal with a history of sexual assaults, was placed on a list of potential suspects. It was a good hunch, as it turned out.        

But the police remain haunted by the fact that Mr. Olson, who died on Sept. 30 while serving a life sentence in Quebec, not only killed seven children before coming under suspicion; he also committed four more murders while supposedly under surveillance.        

His arrest in August 1981, in what was then Canada&rsquo;s worst serial murder case, led to the adoption of some of the nation&rsquo;s first victims&rsquo; rights laws and became the focus of political controversies. It set off a period of soul-searching about the competence of the nation&rsquo;s police agencies, including the storied Royal Canadian Mounted Police, especially in handling missing-children cases.        

The case revived the death penalty debate less than a decade after Parliament had abolished executions in 1976. And it caused a public uproar after the authorities admitted paying Mr. Olson $100,000 to reveal the locations of his victims&rsquo; bodies.        

Mr. Olson died of natural causes after a brief illness at a hospital near the federal penitentiary in Ste.-Anne-des-Plaines, a spokesman for the Correctional Service of Canada said. He was 71. He had been convicted of killing eight girls and three boys, ages 9 to 18, in southwestern British Columbia from November 1980 to July 1981.        

A sometime police informant who had spent most of his adult life serving prison sentences for burglary, theft, forgery, sexual assault and armed robbery, Mr. Olson had a grasp of the law enforcement system that helped him elude capture even after the federal police began tracking him, said Ian Mulgrew, a columnist for The Vancouver Sun and author of a book about the case, &ldquo;Final Payoff.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;He jumped from one jurisdiction to another&rdquo; in selecting his victims, Mr. Mulgrew said, taking advantage of what he described as a lack of communication between the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the municipal police departments whose jurisdictions overlap in British Columbia.        

Once he was caught, the same savvy helped Mr. Olson bargain for $100,000 in exchange for revealing the burial grounds. Prosecutors disclosed the bargain in 1982, after Mr. Olson had pleaded guilty to the murders. A civil court suit challenging the payment was rejected by British Columbia&rsquo;s highest court in 1986, and the money went to Mr. Olson&rsquo;s wife and son.        

Clifford Robert Olson was born Jan. 1, 1940, in Vancouver, British Columbia. He was arrested 83 times from the time he was 17 until his final arrest at age 41 in connection with the murders. Neither his mother nor his father, who worked as a milk truck driver, nor his two sisters and a brother &ldquo;could explain why Olson was the way he was,&rdquo; Mr. Mulgrew wrote in his book.        

Indignation over what was widely seen as a botched investigation and a $100,000 deal with the devil led many of the parents of Mr. Olson&rsquo;s victims to form a victims&rsquo; rights lobby that became instrumental in the adoption of federal crime-victim laws in the 1980s. The new laws gave victims a voice in the criminal court process for the first time and added victims&rsquo; services units to the rosters of most of the nation&rsquo;s police departments.        

Ray King, whose 15-year-old son, Ray King Jr., was killed by Mr. Olson on July 23, 1981, was among the parents who lobbied. His son had been looking for a part-time job when Mr. Olson lured him with a job offer, drove him to a secluded place, killed him with a rock and dumped his body from a cliff, the police said.        

&ldquo;My son wanted to help out because I&rsquo;d been out of work six months, having two cancer surgeries,&rdquo; said Mr. King, of Maple Ridge, British Columbia, in a telephone interview. Mr. King was back at work by then &mdash; his six-month sick leave was the year before &mdash; but money was tight.        

&ldquo;He was the kind of kid who wanted to help, and he had a lot of talent &mdash; played soccer, football. Good skier. Very artistic. He could have made a living as an artist,&rdquo; Mr. King said.        

In the 30 years after the murder rampage, Mr. Olson had been a frequent subject of news reports, some of which he initiated by sending letters to victims&rsquo; families, or calling reporters.        

&ldquo;He was in the news, it seemed sometimes, like every three months,&rdquo; Mr. King said. &ldquo;Hopefully, that&rsquo;s the end of that,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;Hopefully, I can deal with this now on my own terms.&rdquo;        
