
JERUSALEM &mdash; Israel and Hamas announced an agreement on Tuesday to exchange more than 1,000 Palestinian prisoners for an Israeli soldier held captive in Gaza for five years, a deal brokered by Egypt that seemed likely to shake up Middle East politics at a time when the region is immersed in turmoil.        

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel told his nation in a live address on television that the soldier, Staff Sgt. Gilad Shalit, who was captured in June 2006 at the age of 19, could be home &ldquo;within days,&rdquo; ending what has been widely seen in Israel as a national trauma.        

In Damascus, Syria, Khaled Meshal, the political leader of Hamas, said in a televised address that the negotiations had been &ldquo;very, very difficult&rdquo; and called the deal &ldquo;a national accomplishment&rdquo; that augured well for the Palestinians, who he said hoped to &ldquo;cleanse the land, and liberate Jerusalem, and unite the Palestinian ranks.&rdquo;        

It was unclear what drove the two to accept a deal that had been on the table for years. But both stand to benefit politically and had reasons to distract attention from the efforts of Mahmoud Abbas, president of the Palestinian Authority, as he circles the globe seeking votes for his bid to gain United Nations membership for a state of Palestine.        

Egypt played a central role in the deal, helping bolster its international standing at a time of growing internal political strife as well as strains with Israel, which has seen its relationship with Egypt deteriorate since President Hosni Mubarak was toppled in February. Just last month, an Egyptian mob attacked Israel&rsquo;s embassy and its diplomatic staff was evacuated.        

Mr. Netanyahu, whose cabinet voted 26 to 3 in favor of the prisoner swap, said he felt it important to move on the deal now, given what he called the &ldquo;storms&rdquo; in the Middle East.        

&ldquo;With everything that is happening in Egypt and the region, I don&rsquo;t know if the future would have allowed us to get a better deal &mdash; or any deal at all for that matter,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;This is a window of opportunity that might have been missed.&rdquo;        

An Israeli official said on Tuesday that Israel had sent a letter of apology to Egypt for the deaths of several of its troops by Israeli forces chasing Palestinian militants into Sinai in August.        

Many aspects of the agreement were not revealed, including the names of important Palestinian prisoners expected to be released. But Israeli journalists said after an intelligence briefing that Marwan Barghouti, a top leader of the Fatah group sentenced to five life terms and seen as a possible successor to Mr. Abbas, would not be freed. Mr. Meshal said that the total would be 1,027, among them 315 prisoners serving life sentences and 27 women.        

According to Israeli television, Israel would first release 450 prisoners as Sergeant Shalit is sent to Egypt, possibly in a week. Two months later, the television said, the remaining prisoners would be released. None of the details could be confirmed officially.        

Sergeant Shalit was seized in a cross-border raid by Hamas and other Palestinian militant groups in June 2006 and taken into the Gaza Strip.        

Hamas, which rejects Israel&rsquo;s existence, is regarded by much of the West as a terrorist organization. It won Palestinian parliamentary elections in 2006 and took full control of Gaza in 2007, routing the Palestinian Authority forces loyal to President Abbas of Fatah, Hamas&rsquo;s rival. Since then, Israel has maintained a blockade on Gaza to isolate Hamas, although it has eased many restrictions on imports.        

A prisoner exchange deal for Sergeant Shalit had seemed close in late 2009, but the talks collapsed. Israel and Hamas each blamed the other. Israel had balked at releasing some of the prisoners demanded by Hamas, including those convicted as planners and perpetrators of some of the deadliest terrorist attacks in recent years.        

Another stumbling block was Israel&rsquo;s fear of letting some of the prisoners back into the West Bank where they might engage again in violence. Previous intelligence chiefs lobbied strongly against such a move.        

But the chiefs of all three Israeli intelligence agencies &mdash; Mossad, Shin Bet and Military Intelligence &mdash; have been replaced in the past year and those objections were partly overcome, according to Israeli officials and analysts. In the current deal, only some prisoners were expected to be permitted into the West Bank.        

Amnon Zichroni, an Israeli lawyer who has worked on such issues, told Israel Radio that one reason for the shift was that violence was a less popular form of protest against Israel in the West Bank today, and, he said, &ldquo;there are increasing efforts to minimize any form of terrorism as a form of resistance.&rdquo;        
Anthony Shadid contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon; Stephen Farrell from Gaza; and David D. Kirkpatrick from Cairo.
