
MONROVIA, Liberia &mdash; Liberians lined up in the rain Tuesday to choose between a petite but tough Nobel Peace Prize laureate and a hulking former soccer star in this battered country&rsquo;s second presidential election since the end of a bloody civil war.        

President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, 72, who received an unexpected boost from the Nobel committee last week, was seeking a more domestic affirmation against a man who was once one of Europe&rsquo;s premier soccer players, George Weah, the vice-presidential candidate on the leading opposition ticket.        

Mr. Weah, 45, a towering giant of a man, may have the second slot on his ticket, but even his running mate, Winston Tubman &mdash; a member of the country&rsquo;s American-descended ruling elite &mdash; concedes that the popular former sports star is the real draw, speaking of Mr. Weah as &ldquo;choosing&rdquo; him. Adoring youths swarm Mr. Weah wherever he goes.        

At stake, potentially, are millions more dollars in aid sorely needed by one of the world&rsquo;s poorest nations, where direct overseas aid accounts for some 16 percent of the national budget. Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf, who secured forgiveness for billions of dollars in Liberian debt, is the favored candidate of the international community, as her Nobel last week attested &mdash; the crowning honor after years of overseas adulation. Western officials here do not hide their admiration.        

Six years ago, she handily defeated Mr. Weah in a runoff election, by 19 percentage points, after trailing him in a first round. But it may not be so easy this time, even after nearly a decade of calm following the 14-year bloodbath in which about 250,000 people died in a nation of under four million. Bullet holes still pock the upper stories in the few tall buildings downtown, and here and there are charred hulks as reminders of the war. Hardly a structure in the dilapidated city center is not scarred or streaked.        

Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf has promoted long-running peace, jumpstarting investment and paying government salaries on time as her accomplishments, but in many ways she is also running against persistent poverty &mdash; only one in five adults have regular employment, and Liberia ranks near the global bottom of the United Nations Human Development index &mdash; and Mr. Weah&rsquo;s populist appeal as a poor boy made good.        

The Tubman-Weah ticket has barely staked out any differences on policy with Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf. &ldquo;Much of what she has done I would try to do,&rdquo; Mr. Tubman said in an interview last week. Her opponents focus instead on her self-assurance and popularity abroad. &ldquo;She knows the answer better than anybody,&rdquo; Mr. Tubman complained last week.        

A runoff seems likely this time as well, with 16 candidates competing, including a notorious former warlord, Prince Johnson, who presided over the videotaped mutilation and murder of the former military dictator, Samuel K. Doe. Mr. Johnson is now a senator. Preliminary results are expected in the coming days, but with remote polling places difficult to reach in a country with bad roads and minimal infrastructure, some ballot boxes are likely to be delayed.        

The turnout Tuesday appeared dampened by a steady drizzle in Monrovia, one of Africa&rsquo;s wettest capitals. Yet voters seemed conscious and proud of the historic moment, in a free election organized by Liberians; its predecessor in 2005 was largely managed by the United Nations.        

During the long years that former American slaves controlled the country after its formation in the 19th century &mdash; before Mr. Doe&rsquo;s 1980 coup and the ensuing quarter-century of disorder &mdash; the voting rights of indigenous peoples were restricted.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s going to help move the country forward,&rdquo; said Hawa Zayzay, 26, a student, waiting to vote in the rain at a school in the Kendeja District. In the lines Tuesday, young people predominated in a place where youth unemployment is the most pressing issue. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve been through 15 years of civil war. Only we Liberians can make this place a better place,&rdquo; Ms. Zayzay said.        
(Page 2 of 2)
In Kendeja, the crowd parted for the imposing white-clad figure of Mr. Weah, who once played for Europe&rsquo;s leading teams. In an interview after casting his ballots in the legislative and presidential races, he hit a populist theme, using the rough-and-ready diction that Johnson Sirleaf supporters say reveals his lack of education.        

&ldquo;When we makes promises, that promise will be fulfilled,&rdquo; Mr. Weah said, sitting in his leather-upholstered S.U.V. &ldquo;Liberia for all, not for a few. Liberia don&rsquo;t have a middle class.&rdquo;        

Mr. Weah, praised in the 1990s for his work with former child soldiers, emphasized Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf&rsquo;s early support for the warlord Charles Taylor. Still, his own partner once served as Mr. Doe&rsquo;s justice minister.        

&ldquo;When Ellen and all these other people brought war, I participated in refugee camps,&rdquo; Mr. Weah said. &ldquo;Liberians, they don&rsquo;t even know what is the Nobel Peace Prize. The bags of rice are expensive. These people want to eat.&rdquo;        

In a sampling of voters at four polling places around Monrovia, sentiment appeared to be with Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf. Several expressed gratitude that she had helped improve the country&rsquo;s reputation.        

&ldquo;The continuity of her sound leadership is vital,&rdquo; said Titus Morlu, a bank comptroller, waiting at William V. S. Tubman High School. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s going to put Liberia on the map, of practicing what the wider world does, showing a maturity as a sovereign state.&rdquo;        

Small boys were selling eggs and plantain chips outside G. W. Gibson High School as voters squeezed through a narrow door.        

&ldquo;Over the years, we&rsquo;ve been seeing war in this country,&rdquo; said Segakepwo M. Markwet, a 26-year-old student. &ldquo;Since 2003&rdquo; &mdash; the end of the civil war &mdash; &ldquo;there&rsquo;s been free movement, and no harassment,&rdquo; Mr. Markwet said, announcing his intention to stick with the incumbent.        

&ldquo;Liberia is retaking its place within the comity of nations,&rdquo; said Losine Sanyon, a civil servant. &ldquo;Depending on how we vote, we will continue in peace and stability.&rdquo;        
