
David H. Petraeus sometimes tells the story about the time when the chief of Iran&rsquo;s Quds Force of the Revolutionary Guards sent him a message about the bloody insurgency ripping Iraq apart.        

The leader of that shadowy force, Qassim Suleimani, wanted to point out to Mr. Petraeus, then the Army general in charge of the United States military&rsquo;s Central Command, that they were equals since Mr. Suleimani controlled Iran&rsquo;s policy toward Iraq, Lebanon, Gaza and Afghanistan. Mr. Suleimani even bragged that two ambassadors to Baghdad in a row were from the Quds Force, recalled Mr. Petraeus, who is now the director of the Central Intelligence Agency.        

&ldquo;Now, that makes diplomacy difficult, if you think that you&rsquo;re going to do the traditional means of diplomacy by dealing with another country&rsquo;s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, because in this case it is not the ministry,&rdquo; Mr. Petraeus said during an appearance last year at the Institute for the Study of War. &ldquo;It is, again, a security apparatus, the Quds Force, which is also carrying out other activities.&rdquo;        

Those &ldquo;other activities&rdquo; often tend to be violent in nature, and sensational new charges were leveled against the Quds Force on Tuesday, with the United States accusing it of plotting to assassinate Adel al-Jubeir, the Saudi ambassador to the United States, and to blow up the Saudi Embassy in Washington.        

Iran, which is a center of the Shiite branch of Islam, and Saudi Arabia, the heartland for Sunni Muslims, have competed since the 1979 Islamic Revolution for influence in the Muslim world, despite occasional periods of d&eacute;tente. With the advent of the Arab Spring, they have been tussling over the future of virtually every country where each has a stake &mdash; Bahrain; Syria; and by extension, Lebanon; as well as Iraq.        

&ldquo;The Arab Spring has raised the stakes between them considerably,&rdquo; said Vali Nasr, a professor of international diplomacy at Tufts University&rsquo;s Fletcher School.        

Still, experts found it baffling and uncharacteristic that the Quds Force would risk linking itself so publicly to plotting a terrorist attack on American soil, particularly at a time when Iran faces a high degree of international scrutiny and pressure over its nuclear program.        

The force, an elite international operations unit within Iran&rsquo;s Revolutionary Guards Corps, has traditionally stuck closely to its main concern, the Middle East, and has almost always worked through proxies, making its own fingerprints difficult to trace.        

Some of its more infamous proxies include Hezbollah in Lebanon, the Palestinian group Hamas, the Mahdi Army in Iraq and some elements of the Taliban in Afghanistan. Any Iranian dealings with Al Qaeda would have been done through the Quds Force.        

&ldquo;Their primary modus operandi is that they don&rsquo;t do things themselves, they liaise with others,&rdquo; said Afshon P. Ostovar, a senior analyst at C.N.A. in Alexandria, Va., who is writing a book about the Revolutionary Guards. &ldquo;This would be fairly unprecedented, at least in the last decade,&rdquo; for the Revolutionary Guards, he said, &ldquo;even for the Islamic republic.&rdquo;        

The Quds Force &mdash; its name is the Arabic word for Jerusalem &mdash; was born out of the Office of Liberation Movements, which was formed right after the Iranian revolution to help radical movements, especially in the Middle East. It is now one of the five branches of the Revolutionary Guards and the most independent &mdash; its commander reports directly to Iran&rsquo;s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. It is believed to be a bastion of revolutionary fervor, with anywhere from 5,000 to 14,000 troops drawn from the elite of the other branches.        

Ahmad Vahedi, the current minister of defense, was a commander of the Quds Force. He is being sought through Interpol based on allegations about Iran&rsquo;s role in plotting the 1994 bombing of a Jewish cultural center in Argentina that killed 85 people.        

Notorious attacks believed to be the work of the Quds Force include the Khobar Towers bombing in Saudi Arabia in 1996 and the assassinations of Iranian opposition figures in Europe. But President Mohammad Khatami was said to have reined in such outlaw operations when he came to power in 1997, not least because even the hint of Iranian involvement increased its isolation.        

The Iranian government has vigorously denied the latest charges by the American government, calling them part of a long smear campaign.        

Analysts wonder whether it was possibly a rogue operation launched by zealots within the group, saying much of the case would hinge on what was revealed by the suspect under arrest, Mansour J. Arbabsiar. He is said to be related to the other suspect, Gholam Shakuri, a member of the Quds Force. &ldquo;It is sensational, it is odd, and if it is true it is very provocative on Iran&rsquo;s part,&rdquo; said Alireza Nader of the RAND Corporation.        

New differences rooted in the future of the Arab world have again frayed relations between Tehran and Riyadh. Iran seems to have prevailed in Iraq and Lebanon, where former solidly Sunni governments have been supplanted. In Bahrain, Saudi Arabia intervened to put down a popular uprising by the majority Shiite population.        

Syria is still up for grabs. The Quds Force stands accused of training Syrian forces to put down protests violently. Still, experts found it bizarre that in one fell swoop the Iranians would transfer their proxy wars to American soil. &ldquo;It is a high-risk, low-yield maneuver, and doing it on U.S. soil would be even more baffling,&rdquo; Mr. Nasr said.        
