
WARSAW &mdash; Europe&rsquo;s efforts to stem the sovereign debt crisis suffered an embarrassing and potentially costly setback on Tuesday night when Slovakia&rsquo;s Parliament failed to approve the expansion of the euro rescue fund, a development that brought down the government.        

With 55 lawmakers voting for the measure, 9 against it and 60 abstaining, the Slovak governing coalition failed to muster the necessary votes to pass the plan that would have required Slovakia to contribute roughly $10 billion in debt guarantees.        

But the country&rsquo;s leading opposition party said after the government fell that it would be willing to discuss support for the fund, pointing to the eventual approval of the deal. European officials in Brussels were counting on a political solution, but also weighing the possibility of some kind of messy workaround if Slovakia failed to pass the measure.        

In a news conference after the vote, the leader of the opposition Smer party, Robert Fico, said that the &ldquo;government failed in its responsibility for governing and ruling, and the prime minister bears the blame for this international shame and scandal.&rdquo; Mr. Fico said that his party was ready to discuss forming a new coalition government now that the prime minister&rsquo;s party had lost the vote of confidence.        

&ldquo;We are waiting for proposals and initiatives from the coalitions, meetings, their ideas and their proposals,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We wait for proposals from their side.&rdquo;        

The prime minister, Iveta Radicova, called on her coalition partners to reach a deal with Mr. Fico&rsquo;s party, which has the most lawmakers in Parliament. &ldquo;We are a small and export-oriented economy, and we need partners around us,&rdquo; Ms. Radicova said. &ldquo;I am convinced this government was and is a responsible, competent and reliable one.&rdquo;        

If nothing else, the unwieldy process underscored how the entire $590 billion euro stability fund, approved by the 16 other European Union countries that use the euro, could be held hostage to the domestic politics of one tiny country, in this case Slovakia. It showed as well how a measure intended to increase confidence in the euro zone could instead emerge as a telling example of the shortcomings of a system that relies on a diverse group of nations to make and execute difficult decisions.        

The vote on expanding the size and powers of the fund, known as the European Financial Stability Facility, followed a day of speeches, recesses and hastily organized meetings intended to find consensus. The free-market Freedom and Solidarity Party, one of the four parties in the coalition, had refused to back it, even after Prime Minister Radicova risked her position by connecting the bailout fund to a confidence vote in her government.        

Politicians in capitals across Europe watched the developments in Slovakia closely. An agreement to expand the fund was reached in July by the leaders of the 17 European Union countries that use the euro. Malta approved the plan on Monday, leaving Slovakia as the last to take up the accord for formal consideration. The possibility that Slovakia, a former Communist country with a population of just 5.5 million, could scuttle an agreement endorsed and passed by European powers like Germany, France and Italy had seemed inconceivable.        

One European official speaking anonymously because of the fluidity of the situation, said that it would probably be possible to go ahead with the bailout without Slovakia, if necessary.        

The rules of the E.F.S.F. were laid down in a &ldquo;framework agreement,&rdquo; rather than being written into the bloc&rsquo;s governing treaty. That allows &ldquo;a certain flexibility,&rdquo; said the official, adding that &ldquo;in these sorts of cases, where there&rsquo;s a will, there&rsquo;s a way.&rdquo;        

Carving Slovakia out of the financial stability fund would be technically messy and would send a terrible signal about the readiness of all 17 nations to participate in the permanent bailout fund the European Union wants to set up after 2013.        

Officials in Brussels say they believe that the vote could be reversed with Mr. Fico&rsquo;s support as early as the end of the week. But &ldquo;the political damage of a repeated &lsquo;no&rsquo; would be horrendous,&rdquo; said the official.        
Nicholas Kulish reported from Warsaw, and Stephen Castle from Brussels. Adriana Lajdova contributed reporting from Bratislava, Slovakia.
