
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti &mdash; The remains of the cells at Fort Dimanche, where political prisoners were once crowded in their own excrement, are now being used as a school, though without electricity or running water, much less books.        

Women sell mud cakes &mdash; a staple for the many Haitians who cannot afford to fill their bellies any other way &mdash; on the pavement out front, where detainees were forced to stand naked under the scorching sun until they collapsed.        

And in the field where guards once dumped prisoners who had been hacked and beaten to death, the families of a nearby slum now bury their own loved ones.        

The havoc that Jean-Claude Duvalier, the former dictator known as Baby Doc, wrought on this country has never been overcome. Old misery is simply layered over by new misery.        

Whatever infrastructure had not succumbed to neglect in the 25 years since riots forced Mr. Duvalier to flee was destroyed by last year&rsquo;s earthquake. Much of the nation&rsquo;s focus has shifted to surviving newer tragedies, like cholera and mass homelessness.        

Still, there has been a deafening silence among those who intimately remember places like Fort Dimanche: the number of the cell where they were held, the way they ate grits off the floor. In the two weeks since Mr. Duvalier&rsquo;s surprise return from exile, only a handful of the tens of thousands of people who human rights groups say were illegally detained and tortured by his regime have come forward to press charges.        

To Mr. Duvalier, the fact that so few people are clamoring against him is proof that this country is ready to move forward, a process he claims he wants to help.        

&ldquo;Haiti is in my blood,&rdquo; Mr. Duvalier said in a brief meeting with The New York Times on Monday. &ldquo;I cannot be indifferent to its suffering.&rdquo;        

But those who have brought charges against him &mdash; a journalist, a doctor, an agronomist, a historian and a soccer coach &mdash; worry that the absence of an uproar shows that Haitians are still afraid.        

&ldquo;That&rsquo;s the strength of the stigma that Duvalier left on this country,&rdquo; said Robert Duval, a soccer coach who spent 17 months in Mr. Duvalier&rsquo;s dungeons until he was released in 1977, after the Carter administration intervened on his behalf and on that of 105 other prisoners. &ldquo;He may not have been on our minds, but now that he&rsquo;s back, we see that the fear of him is still in our hearts.&rdquo; He added, &ldquo;I struggle against it every day.&rdquo;        

A bear of a man whose voice rises to a growl, Mr. Duval does not seem easily flustered. Yet now that he is again sharing the same streets with Mr. Duvalier, who faces charges of corruption and crimes against humanity but is not being detained, he is tense and experiences radical mood swings. At one moment Mr. Duval riffed triumphantly about finally seeking charges against the ousted leader. And then, he suddenly collapsed into heaving sobs over the effect his time as a political prisoner had on his mother.        

Mr. Duval said he lost more than half his weight and a little of his humanity as he watched 180 people die in cell No. 10 at Fort Dimanche. The cell, he said, was 13 feet by 14 feet. It held as many as 40 men at a time.        

&ldquo;I counted the ones who died, because usually it meant more space to sleep for the rest of us,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And sometimes we didn&rsquo;t tell the guards a person died until their body started to stink because we wanted the extra food.&rdquo;        

The son of a businessman, Mr. Duval still does not know why he was detained. He said that he had just returned to Haiti from studying business in Canada, and that he was helping his father run a tire retread factory.        

At the end of 1975, a soldier dressed in civilian clothes and sunglasses arrived to say that military officials wanted to see him. Mr. Duval had known the soldier since childhood, so he was not afraid, until he got in the back seat of the officer&rsquo;s car  and found two other officers  with guns in their laps.        

&ldquo;I thought it was all a joke until they sent me to Fort Dimanche.&rdquo;        
Alice Speri contributed reporting.
