
KAMPALA, Uganda &mdash; Three senior Ugandan government officials resigned Wednesday, and the president addressed the nation over several mounting corruption scandals, particularly in the country&rsquo;s nascent oil sector.        

Parliament met in an emergency session late on Tuesday and called for the country&rsquo;s prime minister, foreign minister and internal affairs minister to step down while it investigated allegations that millions of dollars in bribes were paid to various officials by Tullow Oil, a British company. Parliament also voted to halt new oil ventures in the country.        

Tullow Oil denied the allegations, calling them &ldquo;outrageous&rdquo; and &ldquo;defamatory&rdquo; in a letter to Parliament, and the officials under scrutiny denied wrongdoing.        

Even so, the foreign minister, Sam Kutesa, who has been implicated in another scandal involving the use of public money to renovate a private hotel, resigned Wednesday, along with two others connected to the hotel matter, the governing party&rsquo;s chief whip in Parliament and a junior labor minister. On Tuesday night, the internal affairs minister, Hilary Onek, said he too was willing to resign, according to local media reports. But the prime minister, Amama Mbabazi, has refused to resign.        

Uganda is estimated to have substantial oil reserves &mdash; at least 2.5 billion barrels &mdash; that it has only recently begun to develop. The government has generally been tight-lipped over the production-sharing agreements it has struck with oil companies. On Wednesday, President Yoweri K. Museveni spoke to the nation in a televised news conference, defending the government&rsquo;s oil policy.        

&ldquo;This is like a war; you don&rsquo;t discuss your war plans in public,&rdquo; Mr. Museveni said. He added that he would study the bribery allegations.        

In the same news conference, an Energy Ministry official said that under its current agreements, the government was to receive roughly 33 percent of revenue from oil production until the oil companies recovered their investments in the fields, and about 80 percent after that.        
