
HONG KONG &mdash; China and Vietnam announced an agreement on Wednesday on a series of steps to reduce tensions in the South China Sea, where rival claims to islands and undersea minerals have been a source of frequent friction.        

The two sides agreed to hold discussions twice a year to resolve their differences, and to set up a hot line between the countries to address any disagreements more promptly.        

The agreement was signed in Beijing on Tuesday by Zhang Zhijun, a vice foreign minister of China, and his Vietnamese counterpart, Ho Xuan Son. It calls for the two sides to seek &ldquo;basic and long-term solutions for sea-related issues, in the spirit of mutual respect, equal and mutually beneficial treatment,&rdquo; according to an English translation of the text released by the Vietnamese government.        

Tensions between China and Vietnam escalated sharply this year because of nonmilitary skirmishes involving vessels in the South China Sea, which China calls the South Sea and Vietnam the East Sea.        

China has opposed efforts by the United States to become further involved in a range of maritime disputes in the region. Some American officials have become concerned over what they see as growing Chinese assertiveness in the sovereignty disputes and competing claims to natural resources. China has said it wants to settle those disputes in a series of separate, bilateral discussions with Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Vietnam, but at least some of those nations want to negotiate with the regional giant in a multilateral setting.        

China&rsquo;s territorial claims in the South China Sea (some Chinese maps show it extending south nearly to the coast of Indonesia) became a popular subject for Chinese ultranationalists in Internet postings, which might have the effect of limiting the negotiating options for Beijing officials. In recent months, Chinese Foreign Ministry officials have said that China&rsquo;s territorial claims are to the land formations in the sea and the immediate surrounding waters, not necessarily the entire sea.        

On June 9, Chinese vessels cut the seismic survey cables of an oil exploration vessel that was conducting a study in disputed waters under a contract from Vietnam. That alarmed Southeast Asian nations. But foreign ministers from around the South China Sea reached an agreement in Bali, Indonesia, on July 21 to tamp down tensions and start holding more regular talks.        
Edward Wong contributed reporting from Beijing.
