
CAIRO &mdash; Under mounting criticism at home and abroad over clashes with troops that killed two dozen Coptic Christians on Sunday, Egypt&rsquo;s military rulers issued an extraordinary plea for sympathy on Wednesday, urging Egyptians to understand that soldiers in riot gear and armored trucks had been terrified of an angry crowd of demonstrators.        

The military council, which has governed Egypt since the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak in February, broke its silence after senior diplomats from the United States and the European Union had expressed growing alarm at the military&rsquo;s aloof response to the bloodshed its troops inflicted on unarmed civilians. Their appeals came a day after television coverage of the victims of the battles appeared to galvanize public outrage, most notably around a young woman whose fianc&eacute; had pushed her out of the way of a military truck just before it ran him down.        

In a news conference that ran for more than two hours, two generals in the military council asked Egyptians to see the clashes from the perspective of their frightened troops. The generals said that 300 soldiers with no live ammunition had faced an unexpectedly large and threatening crowd of 6,000 Coptic Christian demonstrators, a few of whom, they said, were armed with swords, sticks, stones and Molotov cocktails. The generals&rsquo; earnest, beseeching tone seemed highly incongruous from the leaders of a professional fighting force, and it may have been intended to counter assertions here that the violence reflected a new and deliberate assertion of the military&rsquo;s power as Egypt&rsquo;s promised transition to democracy drags on.        

&ldquo;I want you all to imagine, as parents would, the soldier in his vehicle now who sees the scene and wants to run for his life,&rdquo; Gen. Adel Emara said. &ldquo;He sees a car burning, and if people jump out, the crowd beats him up severely, so this is not safe either. What can he do, other than try to drive his car out of this hell to safety?&rdquo;        

He added, &ldquo;He wanted to get away with his car; he must&rsquo;ve been traumatized.&rdquo;        

Witnesses, videos and autopsies have confirmed that many of the two dozen people killed were crushed to death by military vehicles. Without confirming or denying those reports, the generals insisted that any such episodes were unintentional.        

&ldquo;What I confirm is that it is not purposeful, and it&rsquo;s a shame for an Egyptian to say that another Egyptian from the army could be trained to run over protesters,&rdquo; General Emara said. &ldquo;I want to ask, what would be the feeling of these soldiers? They were put in an unprecedented emotional situation, and in this situation people lose control over themselves.&rdquo;        

The generals displayed television video of a march to the demonstration in which Coptic priests in black robes and long beards threatened the top military officer, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi. They also showed footage of protesters hitting an armored vehicle with a wooden cross; a protester hurling a rock into an armored personnel carrier; cars set on fire; military police officers carrying a wounded soldier on a stretcher; and a military vehicle veering through a crowd.        

Witnesses and autopsies have also confirmed that several other protesters died of bullet wounds, and the Health Ministry said more than 20 people were wounded by bullets as well.        

The generals insisted that the bullet wounds could not have come from shots fired by soldiers. They said the soldiers had carried no live ammunition in their guns, following a pledge the military had made during the revolution that it would not use force on civilians. &ldquo;The armed forces would never fire arms on the people,&rdquo; General Emara said. &ldquo;If we allowed that, the results would have been catastrophic.&rdquo;        

The generals showed photographs of bullet holes in telephone poles that they said indicated gunfire coming from the direction of the protesters; they blamed an unnamed &ldquo;third party&rdquo; or &ldquo;foreign hands&rdquo; seeking to undermine the Egyptian revolution.        

Many Egyptians said Wednesday that they felt sympathy not for the soldiers but for Vivianne Magdy, a Coptic Christian woman who is emerging as the face of the bloodshed on Sunday night.        

Ms. Magdy, who was interviewed on two popular television programs Tuesday night, said she had marched to the protest from the neighborhood of Shubra with her fianc&eacute;, Michael Mosaad. When they reached the demonstration and heard gunshots, he had refused to leave, she said, and she would not leave him.        

&ldquo;He said, &lsquo;There are people who fell; we have to stand with them,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; she said in one of the television interviews.        

Moments later, they saw a military truck careering &ldquo;barbarically&rdquo; through the street, she said, veering on and off the sidewalk, and, reversing themselves, the couple decided to flee. &ldquo;He held my hand and said, &lsquo;Don&rsquo;t let me go, stay with me, don&rsquo;t be scared,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; she said.        

&ldquo;Suddenly, I felt myself pushed away,&rdquo; she said. When she looked back she saw him crushed under the truck&rsquo;s wheels, his skull fractured and his leg nearly severed.        

Even then, she said, soldiers began beating Mr. Mosaad&rsquo;s unconscious body, eventually hitting her as well. One hit her with a baton and called her a &ldquo;nonbeliever.&rdquo;        

Finally, a soldier intervened to stop them, enlisting four others to help load the body in a car.        

On Wednesday, photographs circulated on the Internet of Ms. Magdy holding Mr. Mosaad&rsquo;s hand in a pile of bodies on the floor of a hospital. Another photograph paired it with a shot from their engagement party two months before.        
Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Washington.
