
BAGHDAD &mdash;&nbsp; Insurgents mounted attacks on Iraqi security forces in Baghdad on Wednesday, killing at least 23 people and wounding more than 70, including several children, in the latest reminder of the country&rsquo;s tenuous security situation as the United States prepares to withdraw its troops by the end of the year.        

&nbsp;According to security officials, there were five explosions in Baghdad, including two suicide car bomb attacks on police stations, and gunmen attacked one police check point. Children at a school close to one of the police stations were injured by shattered glass.        

&nbsp;In one of the more brazen attempts in recent months, insurgents placed a roadside bomb at an entrance to the Interior Ministry, the officials said. Security officers discovered the device before it went off.        

&nbsp;The violence occurred as the United States military is moving ahead with its plan to withdraw all of its 40,000 troops still in Iraq by the end of year. Both countries, however, are discussing plans to keep a small contingent of American forces here to train the fledgling Iraqi military.&nbsp;        

The attacks, which bore similarities to those carried out by the insurgent group Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, were not as lethal as the group's last spate of attacks on Aug. 15. On that day, the group killed more than 80 people and wounded hundreds in a series of explosions across the country.        

&nbsp;Although the group still poses one of the most significant threats to the Iraqi government, its ability to conduct large attacks has been hampered by Iraqi security forces, according to United States military officials.        

&nbsp;Last year, the insurgents from the group launched a large scale attacks about every two weeks, the officials said. But in recent months, they have mounted such attacks about every six weeks, a sign that the operations against the insurgents have had some success.        

Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia typically aims its attacks at Iraqi security forces, government officials and civilians in an effort to reignite the sectarian tensions that crippled the country just a few years ago.        

&nbsp;An officer at one of the police headquarters that was attacked on Wednesday said that a suicide bomber appeared at the headquarters&rsquo; gate wearing a police uniform.        

&nbsp;&ldquo;He was let into the first gate,&rdquo; said the officer at the headquarters in the Karada neighborhood, who did not want his name revealed. &ldquo;He then stopped at the second gate and he tried to drive his car through the check point. They wouldn&rsquo;t let him through so he detonated the bomb.&rdquo;        

&nbsp;&ldquo;The explosion created a big hole in the ground and many surrounding buildings and cars were damaged,&rdquo; the officer said.        

&nbsp;Despite the fact that 14 people died in that attack, a spokesman for the Minister of Interior said the insurgents had failed.        

&nbsp;&ldquo;The enemy was planning something and failed to achieve it,&rdquo; said the spokesman, Adel Daham. &ldquo;They were trying to get inside the police station in twisted ways. The security forces acted honorably and did a heroic job by stopping them.&rdquo;        

&nbsp;Elsewhere in Baghdad, two car bombs were discovered and disarmed. A bomb that had been attached to the car of an employee of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki was detonated, wounding the employee.        

&nbsp;At the check point, in western Baghdad, gunmen attacked with silencer weapons, killing one officer and wounding another.        
Yasir Ghazi contributed reporting. 
