
MOSCOW &mdash; Russian authorities on Saturday announced that they had identified a 20-year-old native of the North Caucasus region as the suicide bomber who killed 35 people at Domodedovo Airport&rsquo;s international arrivals hall &mdash; a location chosen specifically because it gave the opportunity to kill foreigners.        

They did not announce the man&rsquo;s name, saying that the authorities were seeking to detain &ldquo;organizers and accomplices&rdquo; who were involved in the attack.        

Concentrating on foreigners would be a departure for the insurgency &mdash; though foreigners have previously been caught in mass attacks.        

But militants in the North Caucasus have already made it clear they are changing their tactics to include high-profile attacks on civilians. The vast majority of insurgent attacks still target the police and other state officials in the tumultuous southern region. But the militant leader Doku Umarov last year warned the residents of central Russia that &ldquo;the war come to your streets.&rdquo;        

The vow was borne up by a November 2009 bombing on a luxury train on its way to St. Petersburg and a double suicide bombing last March in the Moscow subway. The airport bombing &mdash; at a glittering showcase facility on the eve of President Dmitri A. Medvedev&rsquo;s speech at the World Economic Forum &mdash; appears specifically geared to attract global attention.        

The announcement also put to rest speculation that Monday&rsquo;s bombing was connected with an incident that occurred Dec. 31, when a building rented from a Moscow hotel blew up in what appeared to be a botched suicide attack. Searching the premises the police found traces of a store of explosives, a woman&rsquo;s body and a suicide bomber&rsquo;s belt.        

Investigators believe a separate cell was planning a separate attack in downtown Moscow that night, the statement says.        

&ldquo;The terrorist attack at Domodedovo and the explosion in the hotel complex were carried out by unrelated armed groups, existing in different republics of the North Caucasus,&rdquo; the statement said.        
