
MISURATA, Libya &mdash; Anti-Qaddafi fighters said they had edged closer to capturing the coastal city of Surt on Wednesday, and commanders and journalists inside the city said the fighting appeared to be confined to just two areas of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s hometown.        

There were also unconfirmed reports that the former rebels had captured one of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons, Muatassim, who served as Libya&rsquo;s national security adviser.        

Agence France-Presse said that Abdelkarim Bezema, an adviser to Libya&rsquo;s provisional government, the Transitional National Council, reported that the son was captured in Surt on Wednesday and transferred to the eastern city of Benghazi. There was no immediate confirmation of the arrest from the council or its chairman, Mustafa Abdel-Jalil.        

In the past, officials with the provisional government have been embarrassed after making incorrect or premature statements about the capture of Qaddafi family members.        

For weeks, the former rebels have said they believed that Muatassim was hiding in Surt. On Wednesday, security officials in Misurata said they had received confirmation from a captured Qaddafi official that the son had been seen in the city in recent days, with his hair cropped close to try to avoid detection.        

The whereabouts of Colonel Qaddafi and another of his sons, Seif al-Islam, are still unknown, though the former rebels have said they believe the son is hiding in Bani Walid, another remaining loyalist stronghold.        

In recent days, anti-Qaddafi fighters &mdash; impatient with the bloody battle for Surt that has stalled political life in the country &mdash; have closed in on the center of the city from several fronts. Libya&rsquo;s provisional rulers have said they will declare the conflict over and announce a new government only after Surt is captured.        

On Wednesday, anti-Qaddafi fighters in the city found the bodies of 25 people who appeared to have been executed, Reuters reported. The victims, with gunshot wounds to the head, wore civilian clothes and had their hands tied behind their backs.        
