
BANGKOK &mdash; Myanmar began freeing some political prisoners as part of a broader amnesty on Wednesday, but the initial numbers disappointed many people who had hoped for a more significant gesture of liberalization.        

A complete count was not immediately available, but it appeared that the authorities had released only a small fraction of the 2,000 or so political prisoners that Amnesty International estimates to be behind bars.        

The freeing of political prisoners has been an important demand of the United States and other countries as they have sought ways to engage with Myanmar, which has been ostracized with economic and political sanctions.        

Officials in Washington said that they would be watching closely to see who was released under an amnesty that Myanmar&rsquo;s government said this week would include 6,300 prisoners of all types.        

The pro-democracy leader Daw Aung San Suu Kyi told a gathering of supporters in Myanmar&rsquo;s main city, Yangon, that about 100 political prisoners had been freed and that &ldquo;we hope many more will be released.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;As I have often said, the independence of everybody is priceless,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m really thankful for the release of political prisoners.&rdquo;        

Amnesty International estimated that 120 political prisoners had been released by late afternoon and called it a minimum first step toward the unconditional release of all such prisoners.        

One of those released on Wednesday was a popular comedian named Zarganar, whose arrest in 2008 for criticizing the government drew an international outcry. &ldquo;I will be happy and I will thank the government only when all my friends are freed,&rdquo; he told reporters in Myanmar.        

Bo Kyi, co-founder of the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners, a group based in Thailand that tracks the plight of jailed dissidents in Myanmar, also said that while the numbers might rise, he, too, was disappointed with the initial releases.        

&ldquo;What they have given us is the same as previous governments,&rdquo; he said, referring to the releases of a few political prisoners at moments in the past when the junta wanted to placate or impress foreign governments.        

But taken together with a broad range of steps in what was until recently a monolithic and inflexible system, the releases pointed to changes, however deep or cosmetic, unlike any that have been seen for decades.        

An election last year that was clearly engineered to favor pro-military parties produced a national Parliament and 14 regional parliaments that represent an array of agendas, some of which seem to be gaining attention now, said David I. Steinberg, a professor of Asian studies at the School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s the most open setup since 1962,&rdquo; Mr. Steinberg said, referring to a coup that ushered in a half century of military rule. &ldquo;This is the first election where they have actually got people in government in opposition. So we are seeing something important happening.&rdquo;        

Priscilla A. Clapp, who was the top American diplomat in Myanmar a decade ago and is an expert on the country, said she was amazed by the changes in just the last few months.        

&ldquo;I think we are set back on our heels at the speed at which things are happening,&rdquo; Ms. Clapp said.        
