
RASON, North Korea &mdash; A seaside casino resort developed by a Hong Kong company chauffeurs Chinese officials and businesspeople from the nearby border in a red Humvee.        

A Chinese construction company is expanding a bazaar where North Korean entrepreneurs sell Chinese-made goods to their compatriots at market prices, a sign of nascent capitalism. Trucks bring coal from mines in northeast China to a pier leased by the Chinese where the coal is shipped to Shanghai. A Russian company is leasing another pier.        

Those are some of the seeds of foreign enterprise in this remote northern port town that North Korean officials are seeking to nurture. Grappling with an economy that has stagnated from decades of communist central planning, North Korean leaders are slowly opening their isolated nation to foreign investment.        

A thrust of their strategy is to develop previously created &ldquo;free trade and economic zones&rdquo; on the borders that have languished. Here, about 30 miles from China, the combined towns of Rajin and Sonbong, called Rason, are central to the new push.        

Since designating Rason a special zone in 1991, North Korean officials have tried on occasion to attract investment here, with poor results. Some foreign analysts and businesspeople are skeptical, saying the country&rsquo;s investment climate remains too unstable, but others argue that North Korea could be establishing here the kind of laboratory that the Chinese Communist Party set up in the fishing village of Shenzhen in 1980 to help move China forward.        

Foreign journalists got a glimpse of Rason when they accompanied Chinese businesspeople on a recent tour. On the surface, Rason is an unlikely site for a boomtown. It is a three-hour drive on a rutted dirt road from the Chinese border. In the surrounding countryside, green with cornfields and pine trees, men ride horses and ox carts while women dry cuttlefish on rooftops. The area, home to 200,000, suffers from blackouts. In the town center, bicyclists navigate dirt tracks. There are few cars, stores or restaurants.        

But Rason&rsquo;s port remains ice-free, a rarity in Northeast Asia, and officials here see shipping as a pillar of economic growth, along with seafood processing and tourism. The say they also want foreign-run assembly plants and high-technology factories. As inducements, they say they would offer tax breaks, full foreign control and minimum monthly wages set at $80 per worker, lower than in China.        

&ldquo;The Rason government will do our best to provide favorable conditions for investment,&rdquo; said Hwang Chol-nam, the vice mayor in charge of economic development. &ldquo;Please tell the world.&rdquo;        

The central question is whether the ideologies of the current leader, Kim Jong-il, and senior officials in the Korean Workers&rsquo; Party will allow for long-term reforms to spur economic growth. Some analysts say Mr. Kim&rsquo;s visit to Rason in December 2009 was a signal that this town, at least, should embrace experimentation.        

More than any other country, North Korea runs on a command economy that has limited influence from market forces. Blunders and misjudgments led to mass starvation in the 1990s, and a currency revaluation in 2009 wiped out savings. The nation&rsquo;s per-capita gross domestic product is one of the lowest.        

The country has also been hit by United Nations sanctions aimed at forcing Mr. Kim to abandon his nuclear weapons program. And South Korea, an important aid provider and trading partner throughout much of the last decade, has toughened its position on North Korea since 2008, because of domestic politics and conflicts with the North Korean military.        

So North Korean leaders are casting about for new investment. The powerful National Defense Commission recently created both the State Development Bank and the Taepung International Investment Group, which is charged with bringing in foreign investment. Park Chol-su, an ethnic Korean with Chinese citizenship, has top positions in both organizations. Mr. Park has an office in Beijing and led the recent tour to Rason, as well as a cruise aboard a dilapidated ship to the nature park of Mount Kumgang. Forbes reported last month that Mr. Park is even negotiating with American businesspeople  to start production of Coca-Cola  in North Korea.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s the market that directs national development,&rdquo; Mr. Park said in an interview. &ldquo;We operate according to market economic principles.&rdquo;        

Mr. Park said North Korea welcomed investment from all countries, including the United States, but was looking closely at China, a critical ally, because &ldquo;China has successfully opened and reformed. At this point, China has ample experience, so it&rsquo;s easier for Chinese enterprises to participate in the North Korean market.&rdquo;        

Some analysts ask how much the development will help the people of Rason and how much of it will replenish the coffers of Pyongyang. Bradley Babson, a former World Bank consultant who studies North Korea, said the leaders were putting &ldquo;a high priority and a high profile&rdquo; on the economic zones next to China to &ldquo;re-establish central control over the significant potential for trade with China.&rdquo;        
Edy Yin contributed research from Rason, and Jonathan Ansfield from Beijing.
