
LONDON &mdash; A 29-year-old Ugandan woman who says she is a lesbian won a last-minute stay of deportation on Friday night from a British High Court judge who heard her lawyers plead that her life would be at risk if she was forced to return to her homeland.        

The judge&rsquo;s ruling came after Brenda Namigadde, who came to Britain as a student in 2003, had been taken from an immigration detention center outside London to Heathrow Airport ahead of a flight to Kampala, the Ugandan capital. Her lawyer said she had already boarded the flight when immigration officials were notified of the judge&rsquo;s ruling and then escorted Ms. Namigadde off the aircraft and returned her to the detention center.        

Appeals and protests on Ms. Namigadde&rsquo;s behalf intensified in the past 48 hours after the most outspoken gay rights advocate in Uganda, David Kato, was beaten to death on Wednesday with a hammer at his home outside Kampala. In October, a Kampala tabloid newspaper, Rolling Stone, ran an angry diatribe identifying 100 individuals it described as &ldquo;Uganda&rsquo;s top homos.&rdquo; The article was accompanied by a front-page picture of Mr. Kato and a banner saying, &ldquo;Hang Them.&rdquo;        

The Ugandan police, who have arrested one man in the killing and are pursuing another, said to have been living with Mr. Kato, have said that the motive for the killing was robbery and that it was not prompted by his campaign on behalf of homosexuals.        

Long before the killing of Mr. Kato, Ms. Namigadde had become an icon for a global network of human rights activists and campaigners for gay and lesbian rights. In the years that her case has been before British courts, they have depicted it as a landmark in the fight to secure the rights of homosexuals around the world, including the right of asylum outside their homelands for citizens of countries that persecute homosexuals.        

The campaign has attracted strong backing from the Obama administration, but has been condemned by some African and Arab countries and by conservative religious groups, especially in the Muslim world.        

Ms. Namigadde&rsquo;s case will now go to a process called judicial review, under which a judge will decide whether an earlier court ruling approving her deportation was lawful. Legal experts said the review would not involve a finding on the substance of the case &mdash; whether Ms. Namigadde is lesbian, as she has said, and whether that exposes her to unacceptable risk in Uganda &mdash; but on the narrower issue of whether the court ruling upholding her deportation followed the required legal processes.        

Homosexual acts are illegal in Uganda, with punishments up to 14 years in prison. A bill currently before the Ugandan Parliament would impose life imprisonment for consenting adults who have gay sex, and the death penalty for people with H.I.V., for &ldquo;serial&rdquo; homosexuals and those who have sex with children younger than 18. The politician sponsoring the bill, David Bahati, told the Guardian newspaper last week that Ms. Namigadde was &ldquo;welcome in Uganda if she will abandon or repent her behavior. Here in Uganda, homosexuality is not a human right. It is behavior that is learned, and it can be unlearned.&rdquo;        

If the new British court review finds in Ms. Namigadde&rsquo;s favor, the government could resume its efforts to deport her following the review&rsquo;s legal guidelines, or it could drop the case. Under two governments, that of Prime Minister Gordon Brown, and the current coalition government of Prime Minister David Cameron, the Home Office has rejected appeals to drop the case, noting that an immigration court has ruled that Ms. Namigadde was &ldquo;not homosexual&rdquo; and therefore had no genuine claim to asylum. She has claimed that she fled Uganda when she was persecuted for having a lesbian relationship.        

Ms. Namigadde&rsquo;s lawyer, Abdulrahman Jafar, said he would  argue that she should be allowed to remain in Britain, regardless of her sexuality, because she has declared herself to be a lesbian. The argument would invoke a British Supreme Court ruling last year that directed lower courts to consider in their rulings on deportation cases not only whether a litigant was actually gay but whether they were &ldquo;someone who would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in the country of origin.&rdquo;        
