
SYDNEY &mdash; Prime Minister Julia Gillard of Australia announced Thursday that she was abandoning her government&rsquo;s controversial plans to ship asylum seekers to Malaysia as part of a refugee swap deal &mdash; a humiliating about-face for the beleaguered leader that leaves her immigration policy in turmoil.        

The government said it would now process asylum seekers on Australian soil.        

Australia&rsquo;s highest court had already struck down the deal, under which 800 migrants who had arrived in Australia by boat would have been sent to Malaysia, where their refugee claims would have been processed by the United Nations. The court ruled the deal invalid because Malaysia was not party to the U.N. refugee convention.        

Meanwhile, the Australian government had already begun implementing its part of that deal, under which 4,000 refugees who had already been certified by the United Nations in Malaysia would be resettled in Australia.        

But Ms. Gillard had been seeking to amend existing immigration law to allow the deal to proceed, a plan she said she was abandoning after it became clear that the votes to push the deal through the country&rsquo;s deeply divided Parliament were not there. Her Labor Party heads a minority government that relies on support from three independent legislators and one legislator from the Greens party. The Greens have always been opposed to the deal, however, and the government was unable to swing any opposition legislators to the cause.        

&ldquo;We are not in a position to implement the arrangement with Malaysia,&rdquo; Ms. Gillard said in the capital, Canberra. &ldquo;It is apparent the legislation will not pass the Parliament.&rdquo;        

The announcement was made all the more bitter for its timing, just one day after Ms. Gillard ushered the country&rsquo;s most significant environmental legislation in a generation &mdash; an emissions trading plan that would become the second-largest in the world, after that of the European Union &mdash; through the lower house of Parliament. That legislation is expected to pass easily through the upper house with the backing of the Greens.        

Ms. Gillard, the country&rsquo;s first female leader, has suffered a series of policy stumbles since replacing former prime minister, Kevin Rudd, now the foreign minister, in a party coup in 2010. Her failure to settle the country&rsquo;s immigration policy, a thorny political issue that has bedeviled Australian leaders going back to Prime Minister John Howard, has proved a major political thorn in her side.        

In the most recent Newspoll opinion survey, Ms. Gillard&rsquo;s satisfaction ratings came in significantly lower than those of Mr. Rudd when he was forced out as prime minister.        

The opposition was quick to pounce on the policy reversal to renew its claims that her government lacked a mandate and should dissolve Parliament ahead of national elections scheduled for 2013.        

&ldquo;This is a disgraceful government. They should resign, and there should be an election,&rdquo; an opposition spokesman, Scott Morrison, told Reuters.        

Australia has struggled in recent years to deter asylum seekers flocking to its shores in often dangerous and rickety boats, and the government&rsquo;s policy was designed to discourage them from trying.        

Mr. Howard&rsquo;s &ldquo;Pacific Solution&rdquo; &mdash; of transporting asylum seekers to nearby island nations for lengthy processing &mdash; drew some criticism and was suspended when Mr. Rudd became prime minister in 2007. Mr. Rudd tried to streamline the processing procedures, only to see an explosion in the number of people arriving by boat to 6,535 in 2010 from 161 in 2008.        

Graham Thom, a refugee spokesman for Amnesty International, said the decision to abandon the Malaysia deal was &ldquo;very significant&rdquo; but warned that Australia still had a long way to go in solving its immigration problem.        

&ldquo;I think we need to remember that this just brings Australia back into line with most Western democratic countries,&rdquo; he said in an interview, referring to processing asylum claims in the country. &ldquo;So, it&rsquo;s only a first step; an important step, but a first step that brings us into line with other like-minded countries.&rdquo;        

Meanwhile, Ms. Gillard warned that the failure to institute her policy would place more pressure on onshore detention centers, while encouraging more people to brave the perilous boat journey.        
