
CAIRO &mdash; The Egyptian government pledged on Thursday to investigate all disputes over the building of churches around the country as hundreds of people gathered in Cairo to mourn the two dozen Coptic Christians who were killed on Sunday night in clashes with the military at a demonstration over one such conflict.        

The interim government sought to move beyond the uproar over the deaths, in what was the worst outbreak of sectarian violence here in more than 60 years.        

After resigning on Tuesday in protest over the government&rsquo;s handling of the demonstration, Hazem el-Beblawi, the finance minister, was back at work, because the country&rsquo;s ruling military council convinced him that his departure would damage the Egyptian economy. The council also turned down a pro forma offer to resign from interim Prime Minister Essam Sharaf, despite growing calls for him to quit, and on Thursday he met with the Coptic pope, Shenouda III, to offer condolences. Copts make up about 10 percent of Egypt&rsquo;s population of 85 million.        

Tensions remained high, however, over the role of the military, which took power in February after the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak, with a pledge over to oversee a transition to democracy. At the memorial gathering in downtown Cairo, candles lighted in mourning quickly gave way to people with bullhorns leading calls for the overthrow of the military&rsquo;s top officer, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi.        

&ldquo;Muslims, Christians, Get out Field Marshal,&rdquo; they chanted, marching to Tahrir Square. &ldquo;Tantawi is a killer.&rdquo;        

A day after members of the military council pleaded for sympathy for their soldiers &mdash; contending that those involved in the clashes on Sunday had been terrified of the thousands of Coptic Christian demonstrators &mdash; a group of liberal political groups accused the military of lying about the violence, which they view as a massacre.        

They demanded the criminal prosecution of the commander of the military police involved in the clashes. But they also took aim at the state-run television channels and newspapers of Egypt&rsquo;s media ministry.        

They accused state television of baiting &ldquo;honorable Egyptians&rdquo; to come to the defense of soldiers who announcers claimed were under attack by a mob of Coptic Christians. They also criticized other state news outlets, accusing them of misleading the public after the fact, and they demanded the prosecution of the media minister, Osama Heikal, as well as the break-up of the ministry and the easing of media licensing rules.        

The political groups also called for overhauling the laws restricting the construction of houses of worship. Egyptian laws impose more onerous requirements on the building of churches than on mosques, and attempts to get around the process to build new churches have often set off sectarian clashes. The government has pledged to make such changes within weeks.        
