
CAIRO &mdash; Egyptian Interior Ministry officials acknowledged on Thursday that they had arrested five small groups of smugglers transporting weapons from Libya, including antiaircraft missile launchers, across Egypt toward its border with Israel, raising new concerns about security in the Sinai Peninsula.        

The disclosure of the arrests, made over the last several months, underscored the potential threat to security as far away as the Israeli border from the disorder following the revolutions across North Africa in Egypt, Libya and Tunisia.        

Israeli government officials said as early as July that troves of Libyan antiaircraft missiles, rocket-propelled grenades and other weapons were being smuggled by land across Egypt into the neighboring Gaza Strip, the Palestinian territory that is under the control of the militant group Hamas. On Thursday, The Washington Post reported that Egyptian military officials were raising alarms after finding the same kinds of Libyan weapons in the Sinai Peninsula, on the Egyptian side of the border.        

Although Kalashnikov assault rifles are relatively ubiquitous on both sides of the Sinai border, the presence of antiaircraft missiles and other heavier weapons is a worrisome development to the Israelis because they can be fired on the aircraft Israel relies on to patrol Gaza and conduct airstrikes.        

&ldquo;We are definitely concerned by reports of Libyan arms entering Gaza, especially antiaircraft and antiarmor weapons,&rdquo; a senior Israeli official said, speaking on the condition of anonymity to address a security issue. &ldquo;We know that Hamas wants them and can pay for them.&rdquo;        

The Sinai Peninsula is dominated by Bedouin tribes who have long bridled at Cairo&rsquo;s authority and often relied for income on smuggling. After the revolution that overthrew President Hosni Mubarak in February, however, law enforcement in the area collapsed almost completely, resulting in a boom in the volume of smuggled goods, which included a steady flow of cars, as well as weapons.        

Terrorists capitalized on the lawlessness to carry off a series of bombings along a pipeline carrying Egyptian natural gas to Israel. In July, armed men attacked a police station in the town of Arish in north Sinai in a prolonged shootout that left one officer dead but that allowed the assailants to escape. In August, gunmen crossed the border to attack an Israeli tour bus, killing eight Israelis; during the response Israeli soldiers in an aircraft chased suspects near the border and killed several Egyptian troops, including three who died immediately and three others who later died of their injuries.        

For the last 30 years, the Camp David accord has limited the presence of Egyptian military troops in the border area, and in August Egypt sought permission from Israel to conduct a military operation to try to crack down on criminal activity there. But Bedouin tribes involved in the smuggling business said that the military&rsquo;s raids did little to disrupt their trade.        

Libya, meanwhile, is awash with weapons, many coming from stockpiles uncovered since Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s fall. The onetime rebels who unseated Colonel Qaddafi from Tripoli have not yet established control of the whole country or formed a new government. But their fighters have raided Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s plentiful armories everywhere. The streets of Libyan cities teem with young men carrying Kalashnikovs over their arms or spinning artillery mounted on the back of pickup trucks.        

And during the six-month insurrection, the rebels also received weapons from foreign supporters, reportedly including the governments of France and Qatar. Because of the smuggling trade, some of those weapons may now end up in Sinai or Gaza, aimed at Israel.        
Ethan Bronner contributed reporting from Jerusalem
