
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; Somali gunmen struck again inside Kenya, abducting two European aid workers on Thursday afternoon from a sprawling refugee camp near the Kenya-Somalia border, officials said.        



It is the fourth time in the past five weeks that heavily armed kidnappers believed to be from Somalia have successfully infiltrated Kenya. Kenyan security services immediately said Thursday&rsquo;s attack was the work of the Shabab, a ruthless Islamist insurgent group that has been terrorizing Somalia for years and has pledged allegiance to Al Qaeda.        

&ldquo;Unfortunately, these people and our own people don&rsquo;t look too different,&rdquo; said Eric Kiraithe, a Kenyan police spokesman, explaining how Somali militants could operate in Kenya. &ldquo;But we are pursuing them, and we should be able to stop this madness once and for all.&rdquo;        

According to Kenyan officials, around 1 p.m. the gunmen attacked a truck carrying two female European aid workers of the private aid agency Doctors Without Borders. The women were traveling through the Dadaab refugee camp, a vast complex in the middle of the desert that houses hundreds of thousands of Somalis who have fled conflict and famine in their country. The gunmen shot and wounded the agency&rsquo;s Kenyan driver before speeding off toward the Somali border with the two women, Kenyan officials said.        

Most aid agencies working in Dadaab insist that all aid workers travel with armed security, because there have been a number of kidnappings and carjackings in Dadaab in recent years. However, the Doctors Without Borders team did not have armed guards on Thursday.        

Doctors Without Borders says hiring armed guards conflicts with its humanitarian work and its policy of being independent and neutral. According to one Doctors Without Borders official on Thursday, the only place in the world the organization uses armed guards is in Somalia.        

The Kenyan police said that they were chasing the kidnappers through the desert with police jeeps and helicopters and that they suspected that the culprits were members of the Shabab, which killed scores of civilians, many of them students, last week in a suicide bombing in Somalia&rsquo;s capital, Mogadishu.        

&ldquo;There is no other criminal group in this area that could do this,&rdquo; Mr. Kiraithe said.        

He said that the motive was probably money and that in previous kidnappings the assailants had asked for a ransom. Many Somalia analysts have said that the Shabab have been depleted by Somalia&rsquo;s famine and desperately need money.        

On Sept. 11, a boatload of Somali gunmen attacked a fancy beachside resort in Kenya near the Somali border, killing a British man and kidnapping his wife. A week and a half later, gunmen abducted a Kenyan driver in Dadaab who was working for a Western aid organization. On Oct. 1, Somali gunmen attacked another beachside resort, dragging away a disabled French woman and then outrunning a Kenyan Navy patrol.        

All the hostages remain in captivity, and many analysts believe that the Shabab have been involved to some degree because the militants control most of the areas along the Kenya-Somalia border. However, Somali pirate gangs may have recently struck up an opportunistic alliance with the Shabab, analysts say, helping out with the kidnappings and then splitting the ransoms.        

Over the past several years, Somali pirates have hijacked dozens of ships, trading the crews for ransoms worth millions of dollars. But the prospect of Somali pirate gangs striking on land &mdash; and inside Kenya &mdash; is unnerving to many people across this region, and it seems that members of the Kenyan security forces, who are widely known for being underequipped and corrupt, have been unable to stop the kidnappings.        
