
BAGHDAD &mdash; Militants trained and financed by Iran&rsquo;s Quds Force attacked United States forces in Iraq on Wednesday, American officials said, continuing a role they have played in recent years in a proxy war between the United States and Iran.        

The attack came a day after the Obama administration announced that it had foiled an alleged plot by the Iranian group to assassinate Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s ambassador to the United States and to bomb Saudi and Israeli embassies.        

The militants fired rockets at American forces at Contingency Operating Station Garry Owen in the southern province of Maysan, which borders Iran. The military said three soldiers were wounded in the assault at the station, which has been hit by rockets repeatedly this year as militants have increased attacks. The military provided few other details of the attack.        

The Quds Force, little known in the United States until the assassination plot was revealed, is all too familiar to the military, American military officials here say.        

The Shiite militias aligned with the group have killed many Iraqi civilians and security forces this year. And they have also proved to be the United States&rsquo; most lethal enemy in Iraq since the American &ldquo;surge&rdquo; diminished the capacity of Sunni militants.        

The Shiite militias &mdash; which often employ rocket attacks and roadside bombings &mdash; were responsible for the deaths of 13 of the 15 soldiers killed in June, the most deadly month for the United States in Iraq in the past three years. They are also responsible for a quarter of the assassinations of Iraqi government and military officials this year, according to American officials.        

The Quds Force has one goal, according to the officials and analysts: weakening Iraq so it is even more dependent on Iran. Among the first steps in that process, they say, is severing the United States&rsquo; relationship with the Iraqi government and keeping Iraq isolated from its neighbors.        

&ldquo;Anything they can do to cause separation between us and Iraq helps achieve their greater aims,&rdquo; said Maj. Gen. Jeffrey Buchanan, the United States military&rsquo;s spokesman in Iraq. &ldquo;Anything they can do to cause dissent or attack our forces and cause us to leave.&rdquo;        

Over the summer, these militias increased their operations as the United States and the Iraqi government began discussing whether to keep American troops after the end of the year. The discussions have not been completed.        

The attacks dropped off after the Shiite-led Iraqi government cracked down on the militias under American pressure.        

The Quds Force hopes that the Iranians will have an even freer hand to influence economic and political matters in Iraq and create a model similar to that of Hezbollah, the powerful Iranian-financed organization in Lebanon, United States military officials and analysts said.        

&ldquo;The Quds Force is the Iranian government&rsquo;s arm that deals directly with Iraq,&rdquo; said Kenneth M. Pollack, an expert on national security issues at the Brookings Institution in Washington. &ldquo;Since 2006, all of Iran&rsquo;s relations and operations in Iraq have been in the Quds Force&rsquo;s portfolio.&rdquo;        

The Iranian ambassador to Iraq is a Quds Force officer, as was his predecessor. And this year, Quds Force officers have operated in Iraq, according to American officials, although few have been arrested or killed.        

According to a senior American official, one of the top Quds Force officials the United States named in the latest assassination plot, Abdul Reza Shahlai, &ldquo;has a notorious past as one of the central architects of Iran&rsquo;s strategy in Iraq.&rdquo; (Some specialists on Iran have been skeptical of&nbsp;the administration&rsquo;s assertions on the planned attack, saying it seemed unlikely that Iran would back a brazen murder and bombing on American soil.)        

The senior official said Mr. Shahlai was involved in plotting several attacks linked to the militant groups, including one tied to the anti-American cleric Moktada al-Sadr, whose party controls many seats in Iraq&rsquo;s Parliament.        

To generate money to finance the militias, the Quds Force has many businesses in Iraq, including restaurants, hotels and construction companies.        

Training by the Quds Force typically occurs in Iran, where officers offer intelligence support and pass orders to the leaders of the militias, many of whom live in Iran, American officials said.        
Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington.
