
Philo Dibble, a career Foreign Service officer who played a central role in the release of two American hikers who had been held in an Iranian prison for more than two years, died at his home in McLean, Va., on Oct. 1, 10 days after the hikers were freed. He was 60.        

The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Elizabeth Link Dibble, who is also a State Department official. Both worked in the Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, where he was deputy assistant secretary of state for Iran and she is the bureau&rsquo;s principal deputy secretary.        

&ldquo;Philo really was the lead in the State Department for coordinating all U.S. government efforts regarding the release of the hikers,&rdquo; Jeffrey D. Feltman, the Near Eastern bureau&rsquo;s assistant secretary, said Thursday.        

While explaining that he could not provide details because &ldquo;it&rsquo;s pretty sensitive,&rdquo; Mr. Feltman said Mr. Dibble had coordinated efforts with diplomats from other nations, including Oman and Switzerland, in trying to free the hikers. (Switzerland has represented American interests in Iran since the hostage crisis of 1979-81.)        

The two men, Shane M. Bauer and Joshua F. Fattal, and their friend Sarah E. Shourd were hiking in a mountainous region of Turkey near Iran in June 2009 when they were seized by Iranian border guards. Although Iranian officials said they were spies, the hikers insisted that they had no connection to the American government. If they had stepped over the unmarked border into Iran, they said, it had been by accident.        

Ms. Shourd, who became engaged to Mr. Bauer while they were in the notorious Evin prison in Tehran, was released in September 2009. In August of this year, Mr. Bauer and Mr. Fattal were sentenced to eight years in prison. Then, on Sept. 21, after a series of reversals by Iranian officials, they were freed. Like Ms. Shourd, they were released on $500,000 bail each, according to the Iranian government.        

Mr. Feltman was attending the United Nations General Assembly in New York when he spoke with Mr. Dibble that day. &ldquo;I called him and asked, &lsquo;Philo, is this really happening?&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; he recalled, &ldquo;and he said, &lsquo;It looks like the real deal this time.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

Several hundred State Department officials, including Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, attended Mr. Dibble&rsquo;s funeral on Oct. 6, during which a letter from President Obama was read. His &ldquo;leadership proved indispensable&rdquo; in American dealings with Iran, the president said.        

Philo Louis Dibble was born on Sept. 10, 1951, in Egypt, where his father, Philo Tolman Dibble, was an American diplomat. After graduating from St. John&rsquo;s College in Annapolis, Md., in 1976, Mr. Dibble earned a master&rsquo;s degree in international studies at Johns Hopkins in 1980, joining the Foreign Service soon afterward.        

Besides his wife, he is survived by three daughters, Kate, Sarah and Caroline; a sister, Sandra Dibble; a brother, Charles; and his mother, Cleopatra Bolens Dibble.        

Mr. Dibble left the State Department in 2006, only to come out of retirement last year because of his expertise in Iranian affairs. He served in Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, Pakistan, Syria and Lebanon.        

He arrived in Beirut, Lebanon, on April 18, 1983, the day a suicide bomber killed more than 60 people in the American Embassy. No one met him at the airport. &ldquo;He grabbed a cab,&rdquo; his wife said. &ldquo;He had a carton of Marlboros &mdash; paid the fare in Marlboros.&rdquo;        

When he arrived at the embassy, &ldquo;it was just smoldering,&rdquo; Ms. Dibble said. &ldquo;He got out with his suitcases and people said: &lsquo;You must be the new vice consul. We need you.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        
