
OBSERVATION POST TWINS, Afghanistan &mdash; Much of what the Pentagon hopes to accomplish in Afghanistan before withdrawing most of its forces by 2014 is visible from this small, sandbagged mountaintop, where the risks and ambitions guiding the latest effort to reshape a foreign nation are equally clear.        

More Photos &#x00bb;


The outpost was built about six months ago. Perched on a ridge near Pakistan and inhabited by side-by-side American and Afghan infantry platoons, it looks down on several villages under the control of the Taliban and the Haqqani insurgent network.        

Steep mountains all but close off the basin below, known as the Naka bowl, helping to make it one of the fighters&rsquo; many havens. The ruins of a government center and police station, built by the United States and destroyed by those who hold the real sway in Naka, lie abandoned near the base of a facing slope.        

After ousting the Taliban from power in 2001, the United States brought multiple ambitions to Afghanistan: establishing democracy, developing a strong central government and security forces to keep it alive, reducing the country&rsquo;s role in the heroin trade, building infrastructure, and promoting education and women&rsquo;s rights. All of these have been frustrated to varying degrees.        

Where once there were lofty plans, more pragmatic voices reign. American military officers now brief from a shorter list. A top item reads &ldquo;transition,&rdquo; the label for an endgame: turning over Afghanistan to American-financed Afghan forces in ways that, in theory, should allow most of the Pentagon&rsquo;s troops an exit and leave behind a partner for future counterterrorism efforts.        

But transition, too, is freighted with questions and diminished expectations &mdash; as is evident in the now-hurried contest for the Naka bowl, which provides a microcosm of the larger plan.        

Observation Post Twins, in northern Paktika Province, stands about 8,500 feet above sea level. It was built for a single purpose: to allow American troops to introduce an Afghan security presence in the valley. During the next few weeks, ahead of the winter freeze, the close-out will begin as American soldiers expect to increase the Afghan force level and decrease their own numbers.        

First, said Capt. Craig A. Halstead, the commander of Company B, Second Battalion, 28th Infantry Regiment, his platoons will turn over several bunkers to Afghan National Army soldiers. Many American soldiers will return to the company&rsquo;s larger outpost in nearby Zerok.        

Some time later, the Americans will build, once again, a police station and government center and help dozens of Afghan police officers and a subgovernor move in.        

One recent day, while Captain Halstead discussed the transition with Lt. Bismillah, the executive officer of an Afghan infantry company, Shahidullah, the Afghan interpreter assisting the conversation, reprised local history. It was a chronicle of thwarted plans.        

&ldquo;This is the third plan that we are making,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Two times before when the police came to Naka, the Haqqani guys stopped them.&rdquo;        

The last time, he said, the station was destroyed before the police arrived. Guerrillas threatened to kill the villagers building the station. Then, after the workers fled, the guerrillas laced the structure with explosives and leveled it.        

This time, Captain Halstead said, before building anything, this fortified observation post was established. And the new police station will not be by the far ridge, which is out of heavy-machine gun range. It will be closer to the post, from where Afghan soldiers should be able, at least theoretically, to protect police officers below.        

Once the station is built, said First Lt. Sidney E. Talley, an American platoon leader, the Afghan police will start patrolling, trying to develop relationships in the villages.        

For now, after a unilateral cease-fire on the part of the insurgents that allowed pine-cone harvesters to work on the mountains, the outpost is often under rocket or mortar fire. The Naka bowl is considered to be brimming with danger, so much so that American platoons rotate through the post only at night, to avoid ambushes in the ravine they must cross to reach it.        

The sense of imminent threat could be seen on a recent day when an American Black Hawk helicopter flew past. The aircraft held three sergeants-major. As it made a U-turn over a nearby ridge from where the local fighters often fire, American troops here jeered.        
(Page 2 of 2)
They said that one of the Haqqani mortar crews, expecting the aircraft to land, might fire on the post&rsquo;s landing zone, putting the soldiers on the ground in danger. &ldquo;Are you high?&rdquo; one of them shouted. &ldquo;You trying to blow me up?&rdquo;        

Another yelled, &ldquo;They&rsquo;re smoking rock!&rdquo;        

In this climate, officers speak of &ldquo;tactical patience&rdquo; &mdash; not pushing out too often or too aggressively, which could set off gunfights near civilians, encourage local men to line trails with bombs, and lose lives in clashes that could be avoided and replaced with more culturally attuned Afghan-on-Afghan efforts.        

&ldquo;We have a plan for deliberate transition,&rdquo; Captain Halstead said. &ldquo;By next year we will leave the bowl, and it will be the Afghans&rsquo; to secure.&rdquo;        

By then the remaining Americans, he said, freed from duties here, plan to build another outpost on another ridge overlooking another nearby Haqqani haven, and to establish an Afghan toehold there, too.        

Lieutenant Bismillah, the Afghan officer, was upbeat. &ldquo;If we build a police station, the people will come,&rdquo; he said.        

But there is a wild card: No one yet knows how the local guerrillas will react.        

One common theory is that without American soldiers, the violence will subside, and Afghan forces and their foes will broker local arrangements.        

An opposite theory predicts that Taliban and Haqqani fighters will press harder and Afghan troops, without American protection, will desert or be overrun.        

At the outpost, Lieutenant Bismillah&rsquo;s optimism was tempered by worries that his forces lack firepower.        

The Americans&rsquo; uneasy presence here is made possible with sophisticated communications and fire support: a combination of radars that detect incoming rounds and locate their sources, and the radios and satellite links that organize artillery, mortar and aircraft crews that fire back.        

Afghan units do not have these weapons and communications systems, much less the skills to integrate them.        

&ldquo;If you do leave tomorrow, and you leave heavy weapons for us, we will bring security here in a week,&rdquo; Lieutenant Bismillah said. &ldquo;But what can we do with rocket-propelled grenades and our machine guns?&rdquo;        

There are also questions as to whether Afghan forces will be able to sustain themselves in a more basic sense.        

Observation Post Twins is supplied almost solely by helicopters that carry in water, ammunition, batteries and food. Overland routes from Orgun, the nearest city, to the larger outpost in Zerok are plagued by roadside bombs and ambushes. And the last leg, from Zerok to the mountain where the outpost stands, is a three-hour hike on a dirt trail through a winding river bed.        

Without helicopters, it is not clear whether Afghan troops can keep themselves fed and equipped, evacuate their wounded or rotate troops.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think they&rsquo;ll make it through the first winter,&rdquo; said one American noncommissioned officer, who asked that his name be withheld.        

Lt. Col. John V. Meyer, the battalion commander, said the Afghans would be forced to adapt. &ldquo;I do think they will figure out how to do basic resupply,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But that&rsquo;s the challenge: everything we build has to be Afghan-sustainable.&rdquo;        

He also said the route to the Naka bowl would be secured in part by village guards, known as Afghan local police officers, who work with American Special Forces. Then he added what could pass as a summary of the uncertainties that accompany the Pentagon&rsquo;s plan.        

&ldquo;When I am up there in force, I am up there and we can have security,&rdquo; Colonel Meyer said. &ldquo;But what happens when we leave?&rdquo;        
