
BERLIN &mdash; Slovakia on Thursday became the final country to ratify the expansion of a European rescue fund, giving the bloc a critical tool to address the sovereign debt crisis and bolster the euro, but one few expect will solve Europe&rsquo;s debt problems.        

The vote in Parliament supporting the ratification brought to a close a nearly three-month process that underscored the complexity and difficulty of decision making in the 17-nation bloc.        

Internal domestic tensions in Slovakia, one of Europe&rsquo;s smallest economies, had delayed the measure, which required the approval of all 17 European Union countries that use the euro. A similar vote in the Slovak Parliament failed Tuesday night, bringing down the government after one of the four parties in the governing coalition refused to support the deal.        

Lawmakers in the capital, Bratislava, also voted on Thursday to hold early elections next year, a condition that Robert Fico, the opposition leader and former prime minister, had made for his party&rsquo;s support.        

The measure passed Parliament by a vote of 114 to 30, with three abstentions. Slovakia agreed to contribute roughly $10 billion in debt guarantees, out of a total of roughly $590 billion.        

European leaders welcomed the news. In a joint statement, Jos&eacute; Manuel Barroso, the president of the European Commission, and Herman Van Rompuy, the president of the European Council, said the rescue fund, known as the European Financial Stability Facility, was now &ldquo;fully operational.&rdquo;        

The fund &ldquo;provides us with a stronger, more flexible tool to defend the financial stability of the euro area,&rdquo; the statement said. &ldquo;This is in the clear interest of every one of the 17 member states directly concerned, as well as for the wider European Union.&rdquo;        

European leaders will have little time to celebrate. The expansion of the fund&rsquo;s size and powers was considered only a stopgap rescue plan when it was agreed to by the leaders of the euro currency zone on July 21.        

&ldquo;Most believe that what was agreed to in July is probably at best half of what&rsquo;s necessary,&rdquo; said Cornelius Adebahr, a Europe expert at the German Council on Foreign Relations in Berlin. It is not just a question of money, however, Mr. Adebahr said.        

&ldquo;There is a crisis of political confidence, confidence that the countries of the euro zone can solve their problems and in the medium and long run deal with the economic inequality between the nations,&rdquo; he said.        

For Slovakia, the successful passage of the rescue fund was just the beginning of a new political drama after Prime Minister Iveta Radicova lost a vote of confidence on Tuesday, cutting her term in half and setting the stage for the elections in March.        

Mr. Fico&rsquo;s party, Smer-Social Democracy, already held the most seats in Parliament and was leading in opinion polls. The leftist former prime minister hopes that after this week&rsquo;s debacle for Ms. Radicova&rsquo;s center-right government, voters will be ready to return him to power.        
