
AUCKLAND &mdash; The authorities closed 22 kilometers of beaches along New Zealand&rsquo;s east coast to the public on Thursday as hundreds of workers began cleaning up debris and oil spilled from a stranded cargo ship.        

For the first time since abandoning work on the Rena on Monday night because of stormy weather, salvage crews boarded the vessel and spent more than four hours assessing it. The ship has been grounded since Oct. 5 in the Bay of Plenty region of the country&rsquo;s North Island.        

Officials had feared that a large crack in the ship&rsquo;s hull indicated it was about to split in two but said at a news briefing on Thursday that a breakup was not considered imminent, although it remained a dangerous possibility.        

Maritime New Zealand, the government agency coordinating the disaster response, estimated that 350 tons of heavy fuel oil had leaked into the ocean by Thursday, creating what the government has described as the nation&rsquo;s worst marine environmental disaster.        

&ldquo;No one should underestimate the significance of the challenges that we face,&rdquo; Prime Minister John Key said at a briefing on Wednesday.        

A chemical dispersant that had been sprayed on the oil over several days would no longer be used after it was deemed ineffectual, officials said.        

Of the ship&rsquo;s 1,368 containers, 88 had fallen into the sea and at least 20 had washed up on beaches by Thursday evening. Many had broken open and the contents &mdash; including timber, animal hides, butter and meat &mdash; were floating in the water and littering shorelines. The area closed stretched almost 14 miles.        

Kilometers of beaches are marred by clumps of thick, black oil and, in addition to closing beach areas to the public, officials issued public health warnings about fumes, advising nearby residents to keep their windows closed.        

At least 500 birds had been found dead by Thursday, and dozens were being treated and cleaned. Maritime New Zealand said it expected the number of bird deaths to increase &ldquo;significantly.&rdquo;        

The ship&rsquo;s captain, a 44-year-old Filipino man, was arrested Wednesday. He appeared in court charged under New Zealand maritime law with &ldquo;operating a vessel in a manner causing unnecessary danger or risk.&rdquo; The second officer was arrested on the same charge on Thursday; the authorities said both were likely to face further charges.        

The men were released on bail to confidential locations, and the judge in the Tauranga District Court ordered that their identities not be disclosed, citing fear for their physical safety.        

The registered owner of the Rena, a Greek firm called Costamare Shipping, posted a video statement online from its managing director, Diamantis Manos, on Thursday in which he apologized for the disaster and promised to cooperate with investigations.        

&ldquo;Our captain is an experienced master and has an exemplary record,&rdquo; Mr. Manos said. &ldquo;The ship was fully certified and had recently been inspected by the Flag State and New Zealand Port State Control, in August and September 2011 respectively. They found no problems; obviously something went very wrong.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;For us, one drop of oil in the water is one drop too much,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It is therefore a matter of great regret that a ship associated with us should be the cause of so much anguish.&rdquo;        
