
YAUTEPEC, Mexico &mdash; When her twin girls were born seven weeks early, Azucena Mora D&iacute;az did not have to worry about how she would pay for expensive hospital care, even though her husband has only a low-wage job as a construction worker&rsquo;s assistant.        

Under a government insurance plan for the poor, the girls were treated at the Women&rsquo;s Hospital here and continue to receive follow-up care to monitor their development. The couple pays nothing.        

&ldquo;We owe everything to this,&rdquo; Ms. Mora said as one of the twins, now 13 months old, squirmed in her arms, wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with a single word: &ldquo;Smile.&rdquo;        

A decade ago, half of all Mexicans had no health insurance at all. Then the country&rsquo;s Congress passed a bill to ensure health care for every Mexican without access to it. The goal was explicit: universal coverage.        

By September, the government expects to have enrolled about 51 million people in the insurance plan it created six years ago &mdash; effectively reaching the target, at least on paper.        

The big question, critics contend, is whether all those people actually get the health care the government has promised.        

Under the plan, children with leukemia have been cured, women receive breast cancer treatment, elderly people get cataract operations and people with H.I.V. are assured their drugs. Usually at no cost.        

Even critics who argue that the government is failing to live up to the promise of universal health coverage acknowledge that Mexico&rsquo;s program saves lives and protects families from falling into poverty in many cases of catastrophic illness.        

But the task of covering so many people&rsquo;s care, with a budget of about $12 billion this year, is enormous. Still, Salom&oacute;n Chertorivski, who is in charge of the government&rsquo;s system of social protection for health, believes it is possible.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s an ideal moment for the transformation that we&rsquo;re carrying out,&rdquo; he said, arguing that because only 9 percent of Mexicans are over 60, health costs for the country&rsquo;s relatively youthful population are low. &ldquo;Easy it isn&rsquo;t. And it shouldn&rsquo;t just be sufficient, but it should also have the quality that you would expect.&rdquo;        

In Mexico&rsquo;s poorer states and among its most destitute, that quality is still lacking. A study by Mexico&rsquo;s National Institute for Public Health questioned how well the plan was being carried out at the state and local levels, saying their contributions and lack of transparency &ldquo;leave much to be desired.&rdquo;        

This month, Mexico&rsquo;s health minister, Jos&eacute; &Aacute;ngel C&oacute;rdova, acknowledged the gaps, noting that 8 percent of the country&rsquo;s municipalities still lacked any kind of health facility. &ldquo;There is still first-, second- and third-class medicine,&rdquo; he said in a speech.        

While the undertaking is relatively young, the Health Ministry&rsquo;s own statistics show that it is behind its own targets in reducing infant and maternal mortality &mdash; key health indicators &mdash; in the poorest states.        

But 10 years ago, only about half the population was covered by insurance. A small sliver at the top have private insurance, and most salaried workers are treated in a giant, but fraying, public health system known as the Mexican Social Security Institute.        

Because that system links coverage to employment, much like in the United States, it leaves out tens of millions of people: workers getting by on odd jobs, farmers, the self-employed, street vendors.        

A health safety net for those people did exist, with clinics and hospitals run by state governments. Treatment often came with a fee, and once patients were discharged from the hospital, they had to buy their own medication. Unable to afford it, many simply gave up.        

This rickety infrastructure served as the base of the new Seguro Popular, or popular insurance, which was begun in 2004. Any Mexican can sign up. A broad package of basic medical services is guaranteed, along with medicine and coverage for some catastrophic illnesses. The program was designed to charge a yearly fee based on income, but in practice hardly anybody pays because, the government argues, most of the participants are too poor.        

Dr. Julio Frenk, the former health minister who designed the effort, says it ties government spending directly to how many people enroll. &ldquo;We changed the budgeting logic,&rdquo; said Dr. Frenk, now dean of the faculty at the Harvard School of Public Health.        

In that respect, the program has met one of its basic goals, increasing public health spending &mdash; by an additional 1.5 percent of gross domestic product, Mr. Chertorivski said.        

But that still leaves it  below developed nations and some other Latin American countries, like Chile and Costa Rica, according to figures from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the Pan American Health Organization.        

Analysts question how the government came up with a budget of about $200 per patient, arguing that it is too low, and they ask how efficiently the money is being spent.        

&ldquo;It is probably true that the Seguro Popular has increased people&rsquo;s access to health care,&rdquo; said Jason Lakin, an expert at the International Budget Partnership in Washington.        

But &ldquo;the system was not efficient before,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s unclear whether the Seguro Popular has made it more efficient.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
The money goes from the federal government to state governments, depending on how many people each state enrolls. From there, it is up to state governments to spend the money properly so that patients get the promised care.        

That, critics say, is the plan&rsquo;s biggest weakness. State governments have every incentive to register large numbers, but they do not face any accountability for how they spend the money.        

&ldquo;You have people signed up on paper, but there are no doctors, no medicine, no hospital beds,&rdquo; said Miguel Pulido, the executive director of Fundar, a Mexican watchdog group that has studied the poor southern states of Guerrero and Chiapas.        

Mr. Chertorivski acknowledges that getting some states to do their work properly is a problem. &ldquo;You can&rsquo;t do a hostile takeover,&rdquo; he said.        

The result is that how Mexicans are treated is very much a function of where they live. Lucila Rivera D&iacute;az, 36, comes from one of the poorest regions in Guerrero. She said doctors there told her to take her mother, who they suspected had liver cancer, for tests in the neighboring state of Morelos.        

Ms. Rivera&rsquo;s mother has been admitted to the main public hospital in the Morelos state capital, Cuernavaca. Meanwhile, Ms. Rivera has been living in the waiting room for two weeks with her 13-month-old son, sleeping on blankets stretched out over metal chairs and guarding a few possessions crammed into plastic bags.        

Her case suggests the contradictions of the new plan. Better access to doctors led the family to seek treatment, but they received none in their own state. And while the overstretched hospital in Cuernavaca has gotten new money and hired more doctors, it is also receiving patients who might never have turned up before.        

Morelos State officials point out the successes, like the women&rsquo;s hospital where Ms. Mora&rsquo;s twins were born. Opened three years ago, it handles high-risk pregnancies, treats breast cancer and offers birthing classes and neonatal intensive care for premature babies.        

&ldquo;The Seguro Popular was really a watershed for us because with it came resources,&rdquo; said Dr. Ludmila Vite Torres, the hospital&rsquo;s director.        

But the standards seem to fall at local clinics. &ldquo;There is hardly any medicine there,&rdquo; said Ms. Mora, the mother of the twins. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s just good for vaccinations.&rdquo;        

The lack of medicine is a complaint that pops up frequently, and has been confirmed by government reports. &Aacute;ngela Casarrubias Crespo, 69, says she often buys her diabetes medicine herself because there is none in the local clinic, leading her husband, Roque Nava, 77, a farmer, to view the Seguro Popular program with skepticism. &ldquo;They are just trying to grab more votes for the elections,&rdquo; he said.        

But that did not stop the couple from coming to a diagnostic center the state health service set up for a week to offer free mammograms and pap smears, along with tests for glucose and cholesterol, advice on depression and addiction, and testing for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.        

Mobile centers like that are at the center of Mr. Chertorivski&rsquo;s plans for 2011, to focus on prevention and patients&rsquo; rights. But he acknowledged that ambitions and reality sometimes diverged.        

&ldquo;Well,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;I&rsquo;m telling the story of what should be.&rdquo;        
