
PARIS &mdash; For the second time this year, legal officials chose on Thursday not to prosecute Dominique Strauss-Kahn on charges of attempted rape, despite what investigators here said was evidence of sexual assault, ending months of scandal that have tarnished a political career that once seemed destined to lead to the French presidency.        

There was evidence from Mr. Strauss-Kahn&rsquo;s own testimony of sexual assault in a 2003 encounter with a French writer and novelist, Tristane Banon, the prosecutor said in a statement, but given a three-year statute of limitations on that charge, no case would be brought.        

&ldquo;Facts that could be qualified as sexual assault have been acknowledged,&rdquo; the statement said. It did not offer any further details.        

Given the age of the case and the difficulty of finding physical evidence so long after the event, it appeared that prosecutors had little choice.        

The decision provoked some controversy here, particularly in feminist circles, but nothing like the storms that surrounded this summer&rsquo;s case in New York involving Mr. Strauss-Kahn and a hotel housekeeper. In the New York case, criminal charges of attempted rape were dropped in August because of doubts about the credibility of his accuser, Nafissatou Diallo, who had lied to prosecutors about aspects of her background and personal life.        

Mr. Strauss-Kahn had no immediate comment. One of his lawyers, Henri Leclerc, said in an interview that while Mr. Strauss-Kahn did admit to making advances toward Ms. Banon and kissing her without consent, &ldquo;no violence was acknowledged.&rdquo; Another of his lawyers, Fr&eacute;d&eacute;rique Beaulieu, said on television that her client had been &ldquo;totally cleared.&rdquo;        

Ms. Banon&rsquo;s lawyer, David Koubbi, issued a statement calling Mr. Strauss-Kahn an &ldquo;untried sexual aggressor.&rdquo; The prosecutors established &ldquo;without reserve that the case is not empty and what she denounced is not imaginary,&rdquo; Mr. Koubbi said. The finding of the prosecutors &ldquo;will allow him to escape criminal conviction, but not a legitimate suspicion about his behavior towards women.&rdquo;        

In a nationally televised interview on Sept. 18, Mr. Strauss-Kahn accused Ms. Diallo of lying about their encounter, which he said was consensual. He accused Ms. Banon of lying, too, when she said that he forcefully kissed her, stripped off her top and bra, undid her jeans and shoved his hand into her underwear. He called Ms. Banon&rsquo;s charges &ldquo;imaginary&rdquo; and said he would sue her for defamation.        

But later, he told the police that he had made advances toward Ms. Banon and tried to kiss her, but said he had let her go when she rejected him. His lawyers said that such an admission did not qualify as sexual assault.        

In some sense, Mr. Strauss-Kahn, 62, appears to be lucky. But he has been personally chastened and humiliated in a very public fashion, and his political career has been derailed by the charges.        

Arriving in New York last May, then the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, highly respected for his handling of the early stages of the euro crisis, Mr. Strauss-Kahn was considered nearly a shoo-in as the Socialist Party&rsquo;s presidential candidate in next spring&rsquo;s race against the incumbent, Nicolas Sarkozy. Mr. Strauss-Kahn was about to announce his well-planned candidacy, and he was considered very likely to become the next president of France.        

But on Sunday, an unshaven Mr. Strauss-Kahn, looking tired and old, cast his vote in the first round of the Socialist Party primary for his ally, Martine Aubry, who is running only because he could not.        

Since his return to France in August, after the New York charges were dropped, Mr. Strauss-Kahn has largely kept out of sight, except for the television interview, when he was questioned by a journalist who is a close friend of his wife, Anne Sinclair. Then, he admitted to an &ldquo;error&rdquo; and &ldquo;a moral failing&rdquo; in the hotel room encounter with the housekeeper, Ms. Diallo, but insisted that no force had been used.        

&ldquo;I think it was a moral failing, and I&rsquo;m not proud of it,&rdquo; he said then. &ldquo;It was a failing, a failing vis-&agrave;-vis my wife, my children and my friends, but also a failing vis-&agrave;-vis the French people, who had vested their hopes for change in me.&rdquo;        

He said: &ldquo;I am not proud of it. I regret it infinitely. I have regretted it every day for the past four months, and I think I&rsquo;m not done regretting it.&rdquo;        

But in a strange choice of words, Mr. Strauss-Kahn also said that he had lost forever his &ldquo;l&eacute;g&egrave;ret&eacute;&rdquo; in his relations with women and toward life itself. The word, which can mean &ldquo;lightness,&rdquo; also means flippancy and irresponsibility.        
William K. Rashbaum contributed reporting from New York.
