
WASHINGTON &mdash; When an Iranian scientist was shot and killed in front of his home in Tehran on July 23, he was the third researcher with supposed ties to Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program to be assassinated in less than two years.        

A week later, $49,960 was wired from a foreign bank account linked to Iran&rsquo;s Quds Force to a man posing as a Mexican drug hit man, the down payment on an alleged Iranian scheme to murder the Saudi ambassador to the United States.        

The simultaneous unfolding of assassination plots in two countries might well be a coincidence. But if the Obama administration is right that the outlandish contract scheme to murder the ambassador was the work of Iranian officials, it is only the latest episode in a covert struggle that has played out for years involving Iran, the United States and an American ally, Israel.        

&ldquo;The Iranians absolutely believe the U.S. and Israel have been carrying out a covert campaign against them,&rdquo; said Gary Sick, an Iran expert at Columbia University. &ldquo;And clearly they are right.&rdquo;        

Mr. Sick, like many specialists, said he had trouble fully accepting the administration&rsquo;s interpretation of the suspected plot to kill the Saudi ambassador. The man prosecutors say was at the center of the scheme, a whiskey-drinking used-car dealer named Mansour J. Arbabsiar, seems an unlikely agent for the sophisticated Quds Force, the external arm of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, he said.        

But he said the Guards, who oversee Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program and had ties to the murdered scientists, would be looking for ways to avenge or deter such attacks. &ldquo;A mysterious killing in Washington might well look like payback for the scientists,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the incompetence of this plot that&rsquo;s so hard to believe.&rdquo;        

Speaking at Friday Prayer in January 2010, a hard-line cleric, Ayatollah Ahmad Alamolhoda, described the murder of scientists as &ldquo;a sign of the all-out, multifront war that the enemy is fighting against us.&rdquo; He added, &ldquo;We must know that to the extent there are attacks against us, it is necessary to defend ourselves to the same extent.&rdquo;        

The killings, thought by most Western analysts to be the work of Israel, with tolerance from the United States, were far from the only bloody episodes in what has been largely a cold war.        

Iran stands accused of providing powerful explosive devices to insurgents fighting American troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. The use of such surrogates dates virtually from the Islamic Revolution in 1979; American officials believe Iran was behind the bombings of the United States Embassy and Marine barracks in Lebanon in 1983 and the strike against Air Force personnel at Khobar, Saudi Arabia, in 1996.        

In recent years, Israel and the United States have worked assiduously to slow Iran&rsquo;s progress toward nuclear weapons. The C.I.A. has operated a &ldquo;brain drain&rdquo; project to lure Iranian nuclear researchers to the West, an effort glimpsed last year when a defecting scientist, Shahram Amiri, suddenly returned to Iran. (After a hero&rsquo;s welcome, he was imprisoned on treason charges, according to reports from Iran.)        

Both countries are believed to have worked in recent years to sabotage Iran&rsquo;s program to enrich uranium, smuggling damaged components into Iran&rsquo;s supply chain and destroying centrifuges by planting the so-called Stuxnet computer worm.        

That varied assault plays directly into the worldview of Iran&rsquo;s clerical leaders, said Reuel Marc Gerecht, who worked against Iran as a C.I.A. officer from 1985 to 1994.        

The covert skirmishes, he said, &ldquo;are part of what the Iranians call a titanic struggle between the faithful and the unbelievers, between Iran and the United States, the great Satan, with Israel as the little Satan.&rdquo; The Iranian view of the United States as an enemy &ldquo;is paranoid, but it&rsquo;s not inaccurate,&rdquo; said Mr. Gerecht, now with the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, a conservative research group.        

Since the appointment in 2007 of Mohammad Ali Jafari as commander of the Revolutionary Guards, Iranian officials have promoted the idea of &ldquo;soft war&rdquo; between Iran and the West, suggesting that an insidious cultural invasion could undermine the theocracy. The Guards and the Basij, or volunteer militia, have been trained to combat such influences, seeking to filter them from the media and Internet.        

Officials saw the opposition Green Movement that blossomed in 2009 as just such a threat, portraying young opponents of the government as tools of the United States. Likewise, Iranian leaders today see an American hand behind some developments in the Arab Spring, particularly the undermining of Iran&rsquo;s allies in Syria. The rivalry between Saudi Arabia, the Sunni Arab power in the region, and Iran, the Persian bastion of Shiite Islam, is an old story, but some of the American diplomatic cables obtained by WikiLeaks showed Saudi hostility in especially raw form. In a now-famous 2008 cable from Riyadh, the Saudi ambassador to the United States, Adel al-Jubeir, reminded the Americans that King Abdullah, the Saudi monarch, had urged the United States to attack Iran and destroy its nuclear program.        

&ldquo;He told you to cut off the head of the snake,&rdquo; Mr. Jubeir is quoted as saying.        

Whether that statement put him in Iran&rsquo;s sights in the plot revealed this week is uncertain. The Washington Post reported Friday that Iran&rsquo;s Quds Force is believed by American and Saudi intelligence to be behind the killing in May of a Saudi diplomat in Karachi, Pakistan.        

But plotting the murder of a Saudi diplomat on American soil would be an act aimed at the United States as much as at Saudi Arabia, said Reza Aslan, an Iran expert at the University of California, Riverside.        

Mr. Gerecht said he was inclined to accept the administration&rsquo;s account of the Washington murder plot, which he sees as a bold escalation of hostilities in the covert conflict. &ldquo;The only thing that has kept the Iranians from hitting in the United States is the fear that it will rouse the beast,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;If the Justice Department is right about this plot, that&rsquo;s very bad news.&rdquo;        
Scott Shane reported from Washington, and Artin Afkhami from Boston.
