
WASHINGTON &mdash; President Obama said Friday that he had ordered the deployment of 100 armed military advisers to central Africa to help regional forces combat the Lord&rsquo;s Resistance Army, a notorious renegade group that has terrorized villagers in at least four countries with marauding bands that kill, rape, maim and kidnap with impunity.        

The deployment represents a muscular escalation of American military efforts to help fight the Lord&rsquo;s Resistance Army, which originated as a Ugandan rebel force in the 1980s and morphed into a fearsome cultlike group of fighters. It is led by Joseph Kony, a self-proclaimed prophet known for ordering village massacres, recruiting prepubescent soldiers, keeping harems of child brides and mutilating opponents.        

&ldquo;For more than two decades, the Lord&rsquo;s Resistance Army (LRA) has murdered, raped and kidnapped tens of thousands of men, women and children in central Africa,&rdquo; Mr. Obama wrote in a letter to Congress announcing the military deployment. &ldquo;The LRA continues to commit atrocities across the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan that have a disproportionate impact on regional security.&rdquo;        

The decision by Mr. Obama to deploy armed military advisers into the region was welcomed by human rights advocates who have chronicled the atrocities committed by Mr. Kony and his subordinates. But it also raises the risk of putting American military personnel in harm&rsquo;s way in another region while the United States is winding down the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.        

Mr. Obama wrote that he had decided to act because it was &ldquo;in the national security and foreign policy interests of the United States.&rdquo; He also wrote that the deployment was justified by a law passed by Congress in May 2010, the Lord&rsquo;s Resistance Army Disarmament and Northern Uganda Recovery Act, which favored &ldquo;increased, comprehensive U.S. efforts to help mitigate and eliminate the threat posed by the LRA to civilians and regional stability.&rdquo;        

American efforts to combat the group also took place during the administration of President George W. Bush, which authorized the Pentagon to send a team of 17 counterterrorism advisers to train Ugandan troops and provided millions of dollars worth of aid, including fuel trucks, satellite phones and night-vision goggles, to the Ugandan Army. Those efforts scattered segments of the Lord&rsquo;s Resistance Army in recent years; its remnants dispersed and regrouped in Uganda&rsquo;s neighbors. In spring 2010, apparently desperate for new conscripts, Mr. Kony&rsquo;s forces killed hundreds of villagers in the Congolese jungle and kidnapped hundreds more, according to witnesses interviewed at the time. Unlike the earlier effort, the 100 military advisers sent by Mr. Obama will be armed. They will be providing assistance and advice to their African hosts, Mr. Obama said, and &ldquo;will not themselves engage LRA forces unless necessary for self-defense.&rdquo;        

The initial deployment will be in Uganda, the president said, and the advisers will operate in South Sudan, Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of Congo &ldquo;subject to the approval of each respective host nation.&rdquo;        

A senior Pentagon official underscored that the American military personnel would not be operating independently nor carrying out unilateral operations.        

The official also said the United States had provided about $33 million in support to regional efforts to battle the Lord&rsquo;s Resistance Army since 2008, an effort that has not been sufficient to guarantee that local security forces dismantle the group.        

One effort has trained a light infantry battalion of the Democratic Republic of Congo&rsquo;s military, with that unit now deployed in the Dungu region of northeastern Congo, where the Lord&rsquo;s Resistance Army is operating.        

The Special Operations forces assigned to the new mission &ldquo;bring the experience and technical capability to train, advise and assist partner security forces in support of programs designed to support internal security,&rdquo; the Pentagon official said.        

&ldquo;Our intention is to provide the right balance of strategic and tactical experience to supplement host nation military efforts,&rdquo; the official said. &ldquo;Ultimately, Africans are responsible for African security, but we remain committed to our partners to enable their efforts to provide for their own security.&rdquo;        

Tom Malinowski, the Washington director of Human Rights Watch, said his group had been advocating for such a deployment. Putting more skilled advisers in the field with the armed forces of these countries would be a significant improvement over the previous level of assistance, he said. &ldquo;I would not suggest that U.S. forces should be fighting the L.R.A. themselves,&rdquo; he said, but &ldquo;there are lot of things they can do with this kind of deployment that they weren&rsquo;t able to do previously.&rdquo;        

Mr. Malinowski also said the Lord&rsquo;s Resistance Army probably has only a few hundred fighters, &ldquo;but they are incredibly vicious and have committed numerous massacres. It&rsquo;s a group that seems to exist for no other purpose than to kill.&rdquo;        
