
ROME &mdash; In his narrowest escape yet, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi barely survived a confidence vote on Friday, saving his government from collapse but leaving it all but incapable of legislating effectively.        

With 316 votes for and 301 votes against, Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s center-right coalition won the vote. But it failed to secure a solid majority, making it increasingly difficult for him to pass legislation aimed at protecting Italy from Europe&rsquo;s sovereign debt crisis. Had he lost, Mr. Berlusconi would have had to resign, marking the end of an 18-year political era in which the billionaire businessman shaped Italian politics in his own image, entwining the country&rsquo;s fate with his own.        

In what the daily Corriere della Sera called &ldquo;an atmosphere of interminable agony,&rdquo; analysts said the Berlusconi government was now hanging by a thread and could fall at the next bump in the road &mdash; when enough disgruntled lawmakers from within Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s coalition calculate that they would be safer jumping off a sinking ship rather than staying aboard and risking drowning.        

Mr. Berlusconi called the confidence vote after failing to pass a routine measure this week. Addressing lawmakers on Thursday, the prime minister said he was the only &ldquo;credible alternative&rdquo; able to govern Italy through the economic crisis, and refused to step down.        

Since 2009, the European debt crisis has felled governments in Ireland, Portugal and Slovakia, led to early elections in Spain and a cabinet reshuffle in Greece. So far, Mr. Berlusconi has proven to be a tough outlier &mdash; not least because the European Central Bank in August agreed to buy Italian debt. But the bank did this in exchange for promised structural changes that the government has not yet carried out, a mix of tax increases and changes to the pension system. The results of Friday&rsquo;s vote promise to make that even more difficult.        

This week, opposition leaders &mdash; and the president of Italy, in an unusually strong statement &mdash; told Mr. Berlusconi that surviving a confidence vote was not the same as governing. In the statement, President Giorgio Napolitano said the prime minister had to show the &ldquo;necessary cohesion&rdquo; to tackle Italy&rsquo;s budget deficits and to propose &ldquo;adequate solutions to the urgent problems of the country, including in meeting its European obligations.&rdquo;        

Despite deep divisions over economic policy, the center-left opposition has repeatedly called on Mr. Berlusconi to step down.        

&ldquo;This government will die from confidence,&rdquo; the leader of the center-left opposition, Pierluigi Bersani, said after Friday&rsquo;s vote, the ANSA news agency reported. &ldquo;Starting tomorrow, the political problems will be even more evident,&rdquo; he added, reiterating his calls for Mr. Berlusconi to step down. Another leading opposition politician, Antonio Di Pietro of the Italy of Values Party, has repeatedly accused Mr. Berlusconi of buying the votes of would-be dissidents within his own center-right coalition.        

On Friday, Mr. Berlusconi was saved by loyalists who prefer to have the government limp along rather than fall and potentially be replaced by a group of nonpolitical technocrats with a mandate to carry out the structural changes including tax increases, changes to the pension system and a growth stimulus bill now deadlocked in Parliament.        

Foreign investors and many of Italy&rsquo;s business leaders hope for such a technical government, but lawmakers have resisted out of fears of losing power.        

Friday&rsquo;s vote made clear that Italy had been living with the shadow of Mr. Berlusconi.        

&ldquo;In this interminable twilight, the man who was Berlusconi remains true to his salesman&rsquo;s essence,&rdquo; the satirist and political commentator Massimo Gramellini wrote recently in the Turin daily La Stampa. He will continue to survive, Mr. Gramellini added, until his supporters &ldquo;start to deny that a man like that, capable of selling us nothing for 20 years, ever really existed.&rdquo;        
