
LONDON &mdash; A coroner has agreed to open a full inquest into the radiation poisoning of the former K.G.B. officer Alexander V. Litvinenko, potentially bringing the case before a British legal forum for the first time, opening new seams of information about his death and possibly stirring new tensions with Moscow.        

The decision by the coroner, Andrew Reid, on Thursday came almost exactly five years since Mr. Litvinenko died after ingesting a rare radioactive isotope, polonium 210, believed by the police to have been slipped into a teapot at an upscale hotel in Grosvenor Square on Nov. 1, 2006, just weeks after he had acquired British citizenship by naturalization.        

His death 22 days later caused widespread alarm that such highly toxic material could be brought into the British capital apparently with impunity. Britain subsequently brought murder charges against Andrei K. Lugovoi, a former K.G.B. bodyguard and business associate who is now a member of the Russian Parliament. But Russia refused to extradite him, saying its Constitution did not permit such measures. Mr. Lugovoi denies murdering Mr. Litvinenko.        

The standoff led to a chill in British-Russian relations redolent of the cold war, with tit-for-tat expulsions and reprisals against British officials in Russia. Only last month, when Prime Minister David Cameron visited Moscow, did the two countries seem to agree, in Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s words, to &ldquo;work together to advance our mutual interests&rdquo; in trade, investment, energy and other areas.        

Word of a public inquest could well end the thaw, however, particularly since the coroner, Mr. Reid, offered support for a &ldquo;preliminary view that there should be further investigations into the wider circumstances&rdquo; surrounding Mr. Litvinenko&rsquo;s death. That would raise the question &mdash; unresolved so far &mdash; of whether the Russian authorities had a hand in the killing.        

Mr. Reid also ordered the British police and security services to make further inquiries into the death, according to the newspaper The Evening Standard, which reported that the coroner had agreed in principle to an inquiry comparable in its scope to the inquest into the London subway and bus bombings of July 2005. The coroner did not say when the inquest would formally open.        

Mr. Litvinenko, 43 at the time of his death, was a critic of Vladimir V. Putin, who was then president, and had sought to expose what he called wrongdoing within the F.S.B. security service, the K.G.B.&rsquo;s domestic successor. Mr. Litvinenko had worked for the K.G.B. and the F.S.B. before he fled Russia in 2000. On his deathbed, Mr. Litvinenko blamed Mr. Putin for his demise.        

&ldquo;Did Russia murder Litvinenko is a question that this inquest, if it is going to do anything in the public interest, has got to be in a position to answer,&rdquo; Ben Emmerson, a lawyer for the Litvinenko family, told the coroner.        

A former head of Britain&rsquo;s Crown Prosecution Service, Lord Ken Macdonald, said recently that he had the &ldquo;gravest suspicions&rdquo; of Moscow&rsquo;s involvement.        

The timing of the coroner&rsquo;s decision seemed to reflect the growing frustration of the Litvinenko family with the absence of any other legal moves to investigate the case. An inquiry was &ldquo;not going to happen in Russia, and it never will,&rdquo; Mr. Emmerson said.        

The Russian authorities say they are prepared to investigate the killing, and accuse the British authorities of failing to cooperate by handing over their findings.        

The British authorities had sought a narrow inquiry focusing more on technical issues, apparently to prevent the emergence of broader issues that could damage relations with Moscow.        

The British police said on Thursday that they had delivered further evidence to prosecutors, and Mr. Reid indicated that he would await their response before proceeding.        

In Britain a coroner&rsquo;s court can establish the circumstances and causes of death, but criminal courts are responsible for the prosecution of suspects.        

Mr. Lugovoi, the accused killer, was also represented at Thursday&rsquo;s hearing by a lawyer, Jessica Simor, who said the inquest should investigate &ldquo;all other possibilities including death by misadventure and suicide,&rdquo; British news reports said on Friday.        

&ldquo;We do not accept that there is an indisputable verdict of unlawful killing in this case,&rdquo; she said, echoing assertions by Mr. Lugovoi that Mr. Litvinenko had acquired the polonium and ended up poisoning himself.        

Marina Litvinenko, Mr. Litvinenko&rsquo;s widow, said the inquiry would include &ldquo;an investigation into the involvement of the Russian state in his murder, which is exactly what I want.&rdquo;        
