
LONDON &mdash; Britain&rsquo;s defense minister, Liam Fox, resigned abruptly on Friday after more than a week of damaging newspaper headlines about his personal and professional relationship with a 33-year-old man who accompanied him on numerous official trips abroad and appeared to have brokered access for wealthy people who shared Mr. Fox&rsquo;s interest in fostering still closer ties with the United States and Israel.        

The resignation of Mr. Fox, one of the most senior figures in the British cabinet, was a major blow for Prime Minister David Cameron&rsquo;s 17-month-old government and Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s Conservative Party, which counts Mr. Fox as the effective standard-bearer in the cabinet for the party&rsquo;s right wing. A desire to avoid alienating the powerful right-wing bloc of Conservative backbenchers appeared to have been one reason Mr. Cameron had not already ousted Mr. Fox.        

Mr. Cameron quickly replaced him with Philip Hammond, the transportation secretary. Mr. Hammond, in turn, was replaced by Justine Greening, formerly a junior treasury minister, an appointment that should soften criticism that Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s cabinet has few women in powerful posts.        

Mr. Fox revealed his decision to quit in a letter to Mr. Cameron, effectively pre-empting an internal inquiry the prime minister had ordered into his relationship with his close friend, Adam Werritty. The official charged with the inquiry, Britain&rsquo;s top civil servant, Gus O&rsquo;Donnell, had been expected to submit his findings next week, and there was a widespread expectation that it would be harshly critical and force Mr. Fox out.        

Mr. Fox&rsquo;s resignation letter made no mention of Mr. Werritty, his companion on 18 trips abroad while Mr. Fox was defense minister. According to Defense Ministry records, Mr. Werritty was also at a number of meetings Mr. Fox held with senior foreign officials, including a dinner in Tampa, Fla., in July 2010 with American military officials, including Gen. John R. Allen, now the NATO commander in Afghanistan.        

Official records made public in recent days showed that Mr. Werritty, born in Scotland, like Mr. Fox, and best man at his wedding in 2005, had also visited him 22 times in the Defense Ministry headquarters since the May 2010 elections that put the Cameron government in office. At one point in the Conservatives&rsquo; years in opposition, the two were London roommates, in a property whose mortgage was paid out of Mr. Fox&rsquo;s parliamentary expenses.        

&ldquo;As you know, I have always placed a great deal of importance on accountability and responsibility,&rdquo; Mr. Fox said in his resignation letter, which was released by his aides. &ldquo;As I said in the House of Commons on Monday, I mistakenly allowed the distinction between my personal interest and my government activities to become blurred. The consequences of this have become clearer in recent days. I am very sorry for this.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;I have also repeatedly said that the national interest must always come before personal interest. I now have to hold myself to my own standard. I have therefore decided, and with great sadness, to resign from my post as secretary of state for defense &mdash; a position which I am immensely proud and honored to have held.&rdquo;        

Mr. Cameron responded with a letter that said he was &ldquo;very sorry&rdquo; to see Mr. Fox go and lauded his performance in the defense post, which included overseeing Britain&rsquo;s participation in the conflicts in Afghanistan and Libya, as well as the harshest cuts in Britain&rsquo;s defense budget in decades. Those were part of broad and painful spending reductions as the Cameron government grappled with a debt and deficit crisis.        

&ldquo;You have done a superb job in the 17 months since the election, and as shadow defense secretary before that,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said, calling Mr. Fox&rsquo;s tenure a time of &ldquo;fundamental changes in the Ministry of Defense and in our armed forces&rdquo; as they modernized.        

&ldquo;On Libya, you played a key role in the campaign to stop people being massacred by the Qaddafi regime and instead win their freedom,&rdquo; he said, adding, &ldquo;I appreciate your commitment to the work of this government, particularly highlighting the need to tackle the deficit, and the relationship between Britain&rsquo;s economic strength and our national security.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
Mr. Werritty has at no time held any official position on the Defense Ministry staff or in Mr. Fox&rsquo;s personal office. In Mr. Fox&rsquo;s public statements before his resignation, he said that the relationship was a personal one and that he had rebuked Mr. Werritty for using business cards carrying the House of Commons logo that identified him as an &ldquo;adviser&rdquo; to Mr. Fox. Mr. Fox also said that Mr. Werritty&rsquo;s income did not depend on any &ldquo;transactional&rdquo; activity during the foreign trips they made together or in contacts with those Mr. Werritty introduced to Mr. Fox in his role as a self-styled defense consultant.        

In recent days, articles in major British newspapers have suggested that the two men may have had an intimate relationship, and reporters have asked Mr. Fox, 50, whether it was sexual. Mr. Fox has answered obliquely, while other Conservative politicians have said that he is happily married to his wife, Jesme. On Monday, he used a 75-minute confrontation with opposition Labour politicians in the Commons to denounce the &ldquo;innuendo&rdquo; and &ldquo;undermining&rdquo; he said he had endured.        

After an initial inquiry by a senior Defense Ministry official concluded last weekend that there was no evidence of any security breach, Mr. Cameron deferred any decision on Mr. Fox pending the conclusion of the O&rsquo;Donnell inquiry. But the torrent of damaging headlines continued to build, even as Mr. Fox went to Paris on Thursday to meet with his French counterpart.        

On Friday, Mr. Fox returned to a report in The Times of London that a not-for-profit company established by Mr. Werritty, Pagav Ltd., had received payments of about $230,000 from people with interests in promoting closer British ties with Israel, the United States and Sri Lanka. The newspaper said that some of the money was used by Mr. Werritty to pay for his overseas journeys with Mr. Fox.        

Jim Murphy, the Labour Party&rsquo;s shadow defense minister, demanded a public inquiry into what he called &ldquo;the off-the-books, shady sort of arrangement&rdquo; that he said had allowed Mr. Fox, with Mr. Werritty&rsquo;s help, to promote foreign policy interests that were favored by the right wing of the Conservative Party. But there was no mention of any of this in the correspondence between Mr. Fox and Mr. Cameron on Friday.        

Mr. Cameron has also faced criticism for what some opponents have described as a lack of decisiveness in handling troubling personnel issues. This year, many Conservatives voiced dismay at his failure to heed warnings about his former Downing Street media chief, Andy Coulson. Mr. Coulson was hired by Mr. Cameron for the Conservatives in 2007 after Mr. Coulson resigned as editor of The News of the World, now defunct. He stepped down from his government job in January as the police stepped up their investigation of phone-hacking and other accusations of newsroom wrongdoings at the tabloid, and was among the 16 people arrested this summer in the inquiry.        

Mr. Fox has been an outspoken proponent of close relations with the United States and Israel at a time when many British politicians, especially on the left, have become increasingly skeptical of alliances that tie those countries too closely.        

While still in opposition before the Conservatives&rsquo; victory last year, he established a foundation, Atlantic Bridge, as a forum for fostering closer ties with the United States, and appointed Mr. Werritty as its executive director. The organization drew financial backing from wealthy individuals on both sides of the Atlantic, but was closed last year after questions were raised about its tax-free status as a charity.        
