
WASHINGTON &mdash; For years, Adel al-Jubeir was the playboy Saudi envoy and man about town, hosting parties on the diplomatic circuit, hobnobbing with this city&rsquo;s political elite and appearing at events with media celebrities like Campbell Brown, then the White House correspondent for NBC News.        

Then in 2007, amid tales of palace intrigue and feuding Saudi princes, Mr. Jubeir became the first commoner to be named the Saudi ambassador to the United States. And the youngish-by-Saudi-standards &mdash; he was 44 at the time; his predecessor was 61 &mdash; envoy for King Abdullah virtually disappeared. From the gossip columns, that is.        

The Obama administration&rsquo;s charge this week that an Iranian-American car salesman backed by Iranian officials hatched a plot to assassinate Mr. Jubeir using a Mexican drug cartel has, by itself, made for riveting reading. But what it has also done is to push the soft-spoken Mr. Jubeir, who had been quietly managing his own reinvention as his king&rsquo;s most trusted adviser on Saudi-American relations, back into the media glare.        

Mr. Jubeir has not been too thrilled with the spotlight. &ldquo;No, he&rsquo;s not granting any requests for interviews,&rdquo; one press aide at the Saudi Embassy said on Thursday. &ldquo;People keep calling and calling &mdash; he doesn&rsquo;t want to talk.&rdquo;        

He learned that he was the target of the alleged murder-for-hire scheme a month or so ago, while American investigators were still picking it apart. An associate said the unflappable Mr. Jubeir did not show any emotion.        

Instead, he stuck to his routine, working 14-hour days, huddling with aides, talking on the phone with members of the royal family back in Riyadh. The king prefers face-to-face meetings with Mr. Jubeir, who often flies to Saudi Arabia twice a week, the associate said. But as news of the plot broke this week, he remained in Washington.        

There was a time, during the 1990s and culminating with the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, when Mr. Jubeir was synonymous with the high-octane diplo circuit. A graduate of Georgetown University, he worked as the embassy&rsquo;s Congressional and media liaison and appeared regularly on the Sunday talk shows, his flawless English put to use in damage control after the Sept. 11 attacks.        

In 2002, when Saudi officials admitted that money from a princess and the wife of the Saudi ambassador might have been diverted to two of the Sept. 11 hijackers, it was Mr. Jubeir, in handmade Western suits, who took to the airwaves to assure American television viewers that the princess had been the victim of a terrible scam. Riyadh, he said dismissively then, would be crazy to finance &ldquo;people who are trying to murder us.&rdquo;        

When American critics of the royal family urged the Bush administration to get tough on the kingdom&rsquo;s leaders, it was Mr. Jubeir who offered a detailed accounting of his nation&rsquo;s enforcement actions.        

Outside work, he spent his time lifting weights, frequenting his favorite cigar bar, lounging poolside with friends and making the rounds at parties and dinners. Known simply as Adel, he seemed a more toned-down version of his boss, the flamboyant Prince Bandar bin Sultan, whose 22-year reign as the flashy, gift-giving ambassador is still the stuff of legend here.        

&ldquo;On Capitol Hill, Adel was the Saudi liberal face to the Western world, and he was very effective with it,&rdquo; said Marwan al-Muasher, the former Jordanian ambassador to the United States. &ldquo;He was smooth.&rdquo;        

Steve Clemons, a foreign policy blogger and analyst who is an acquaintance of Mr. Jubeir, said, &ldquo;Adel was considered by some to be a playboy of sorts, a guy who was not only a man about town but a bachelor who knew how to use Washington.&rdquo;        

Then as Mr. Jubeir came to be regarded as an astute political strategist, things changed.        

Prince Bandar, son of one of the powerful seven sons born to the favorite wife of the founding king of Saudi Arabia, grew somewhat estranged from his uncle, King Abdullah, Arab diplomats say. The distance led to mixed messages, American officials said, with Bush administration officials, in particular, complaining that Prince Bandar sometimes made assurances to them that the king later retracted.        

Mr. Jubeir is not a member of the royal family. But he was initially viewed, Arab diplomats said, as Prince Bandar&rsquo;s man in Washington. Then King Abdullah &mdash; still the crown prince then &mdash; ordered Mr. Jubeir back to Riyadh in 2000 and began grooming him to be his point person in Washington, the diplomats said.        

&ldquo;Abdullah knew he needed someone who understood America,&rdquo; said one diplomat, speaking only on the condition of anonymity. &ldquo;And the last thing he wanted was another Bandar.&rdquo;        

When Prince Bandar&rsquo;s replacement, Prince Turki al-Faisal, quit after only 18 months, King Abdullah appointed Mr. Jubeir.        

In recent months, as tensions grew between the United States and Saudi Arabia over how to respond to the upheaval in the Middle East, Mr. Jubeir has been the man in the middle. The Saudis were unhappy that the United States withdrew its support for President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt; the Americans were unhappy that the Saudis sent troops to crush an uprising in Bahrain.        

When Mr. Jubeir returned to Washington after his years in Riyadh, he was a very different man. Married with three children, he cut a sober figure in his traditional robes.        

And one thing is now clear, Saudi and American diplomats all say: Any attack on Mr. Jubeir, now a trusted adviser of King Abdullah, will be viewed by Saudi officials as an attack on the king.        
