
GAZA CITY &mdash; As soon as the minarets fell silent after the noon prayers, the noise of drills, hammers and saws rose from the center of Gaza City on Friday as workmen hurled planks and scaffolding poles into place in a huge stage that is being built to greet released prisoners.        

The Hamas-led government in Gaza is organizing a homecoming at Brigades Park, one of the largest open green spaces in the densely populated gray cinder-block sprawl of Gaza City, for some of the Palestinian detainees to be released next week in exchange for an Israeli soldier, Staff Sgt. Gilad Shalit.        

Ismail Haniya, the Hamas prime minister, delivered a sermon at the Sheik Zayed mosque beside the park on Friday, inviting Palestinians to celebrate across Gaza and the West Bank. The prisoners heading to Gaza would, he said, be handed over by Israel at the southern Rafah crossing point on Tuesday.        

&ldquo;We are living through huge happiness and an historic victory, despite the fact that we are still under occupation and under siege and that thousands of our prisoners are still inside occupation Zionist jails,&rdquo; Mr. Haniya said from the pulpit.        

Palestinian prisoners in Israel jails have a highly elevated status within Palestinian society because of the sacrifices they are seen to have made, as evidenced by Mr. Haniya&rsquo;s reference to them as &ldquo;heroes&rdquo; who &ldquo;raised the name of Palestine high.&rdquo;        

It is likely that some of the Hamas figures being released will be elevated to senior positions in the movement, and perhaps in the government in Gaza.        

A few miles north of where Mr. Haniya was speaking, in the Jabaliya refugee camp in northern Gaza, the members of one Palestinian household were more sure than most that their family would be reunited within days.        

Even though the names of those to be released have not been officially confirmed, news reports have indicated that all the women among the Palestinian prisoners will be freed, which has the Biss family preparing a room for Wafa al-Biss.        

In June 2005, Ms. Biss, then 21, was arrested at the Erez crossing between Israel and Gaza as she tried to carry an explosives belt into Israel while on a visit to an Israeli hospital for treatment for a severe burn.        

Israeli security officials said that she had been sent by Fatah&rsquo;s Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades; when she aroused the suspicion of border guards, she tried to set off the explosives.        

&ldquo;This is my daughter&rsquo;s room,&rdquo; said her father, Samir Ibrahim al-Biss, 55, as he showed visitors around a second-floor room in his home that he had prepared for her homecoming.        

Inside it were half a dozen portraits and posters of his daughter, pictures of Yasir Arafat, soft animal toys and a pink doll.        

&ldquo;The room was empty, and it was destroyed when they bombed our neighbor,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I rebuilt it, and it cost me a lot of money because Gaza was under siege. The material was very expensive, but not more expensive than my daughter. And now her room is waiting for her.&rdquo;        

Mr. Biss was uncomfortable when asked about his daughter&rsquo;s actions, saying defensively, &ldquo;I was surprised when she was arrested, and I didn&rsquo;t know anything about it.&rdquo;        

He said that the families of other prisoners were less certain than he was about the release of a loved one, with many anxious because of conflicting lists of names and numbers circulating in the Palestinian media.        

&ldquo;Today, the wife of one life prisoner was told that her husband would not be coming out,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;She was emotional and crying, so I comforted her and told her that the deal was in two stages and that nobody knows the names of those in the second stage.&rdquo;        

He said that the room was dark because of power blackouts that began in June 2006, when Israel attacked Gaza&rsquo;s main power station after Sergeant Shalit&rsquo;s capture.        

&ldquo;The Israelis don&rsquo;t have any sympathy for the Palestinians, not even a millionth of a part,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They consider all Palestinians people to be terrorists, and that is why they are punishing the whole Gaza Strip.&rdquo;        

In central Gaza, near the former Israeli settlement of Netzarim, the Ghoul family of a village called Mughraga said they had been told by Hamas officials that one of their imprisoned family members would be released.        

Omar al-Ghoul, known as Abu Imran, has, according to his family, served 24 years after receiving three life sentences for what Israel said was his role in attacks on Israeli targets in Gaza before the outbreak of the first Palestinian intifada in 1987, and for being part of a secret cell of fighters.        

His family said that for five years, they had been hearing news of an imminent prisoner swap, only to see the prospect of release fade away. &ldquo;I will not believe anything until I see Abu Imran in the flesh,&rdquo; said Suhair al-Ghoul of her husband, now 49 years old.        

Dressed in a plain black gown and a long white scarf covering her head and most of her body, she said that she now had 18 grandchildren, and that their jailed grandfather &ldquo;has seen none of them.&rdquo;        

The family said that a local Hamas representative in the neighborhood had told them that Hamas would sponsor all the welcoming ceremonies at a central tent in Mughraga.        

But even if Mr. Ghoul is released, the family does not believe that his son, Mahmoud, will be as lucky. Mahmoud al-Ghoul, now 26, was arrested in an Israeli raid on the family home in 2003; during the raid, family members say, another son and a cousin were killed.        

&ldquo;Though I&rsquo;m very happy and excited, I&rsquo;m sad because my son, Mahmoud, will remain in prison,&rdquo; Mrs. Ghoul said.        
