
BEIJING &mdash; It seems a mundane enough photograph: on July 14, the front page of People&rsquo;s Daily, the Communist Party&rsquo;s official newspaper, showed President Hu Jintao shaking hands with military scholars. Mr. Hu&rsquo;s heir apparent, Vice President Xi Jinping, was close behind.        

But at least some China analysts saw something more. Third in the handshake line was Liu Yandong, a leader in the powerful State Council, one of the few women in the top party ranks and &mdash; some speculate &mdash; a future member of the nine-person oligarchy that actually rules this country.        

The Communist Party&rsquo;s Central Committee holds its annual plenum this weekend in Beijing, and the formal agenda involves promoting Chinese culture to bolster the nation&rsquo;s soft power. But the topic certain to be on everyone&rsquo;s lips is that oligarchy, the Standing Committee of the Politburo, and who will rise to join it when its membership turns over.        

The answer, like almost everything about the Standing Committee, is tantamount to a state secret. So political junkies grasp at straws like the People&rsquo;s Daily photograph, with its unstated pecking order, to divine who might run China after Mr. Hu and Premier Wen Jiabao step down in 2012.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a one-party system, so all the politicking takes place internally,&rdquo; Alice Miller, a visiting professor at Stanford and a leading expert on China&rsquo;s leadership, said in a telephone interview. &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t have to campaign for public approval. But you do have to politick all the internal constituencies to get approval.&rdquo;        

Ultimate authority in China resides with the Communist Party, a ruling strata above the government, the military, the courts and the national legislature. Many senior officials have both party and government titles, but major policy and personnel decisions are made by the party&rsquo;s Central Committee, the Politburo and ultimately the nine-member Politburo Standing Committee, often in secretive sessions like the one taking place this weekend.        

Most analysts believe that the Standing Committee governs by consensus. Mr. Hu&rsquo;s role as general secretary of the party makes him a first among equals. But his authority rests in large part on his ability to cultivate supporters, to fill vacancies with new ones and to broker compromises among bickering factions.        

So every turnover in the committee&rsquo;s membership is seen as a barometer of China&rsquo;s future course. And next year&rsquo;s turnover will be huge.        

Of the nine Standing Committee members, Mr. Hu and Mr. Wen are among seven who are expected to depart as they pass the party&rsquo;s unofficial retirement age, 68. Mr. Xi is all but certain to take Mr. Hu&rsquo;s slot as president and general secretary, and a vice premier versed in economic matters, Li Keqiang, is likely to succeed Mr. Wen as premier and Standing Committee member.        

But that leaves seven more vacancies on a body that, arguably, is second only to the White House in global influence. Who they might be is a matter of intense speculation, but little certainty.        

There are no public qualifications for the Standing Committee. There was a time when being anointed to the leadership was a matter of connections. But Professor Miller, who has followed the body for four decades, says China&rsquo;s leaders have increasingly sought to set rules for the group, selecting members whose connections or expertise plug perceived holes in their abilities.        

Standing Committee members now run so-called leading groups on various topics like foreign affairs that sometimes correspond to American cabinet agencies.        

Collegiality is another must. &ldquo;You need to bring special talents to the table that will not only address policy challenges, but also not disrupt the consensus that the party so desperately needs these days to get policy done,&rdquo; said Russell Leigh Moses, a Beijing scholar. &ldquo;You have to bring a sense that you can sit at a table and not walk out of a room and oppose decisions already agreed to.&rdquo;        

This week&rsquo;s plenum, analysts say, informally signals the official beginning of the selection process. While the top party leaders ultimately decide who should succeed them, the route will be long, convoluted and completely opaque before the appointments are announced in fall 2012.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s like having a waiter serve every participant this big dish. It&rsquo;s a preselected name list,&rdquo; said Jin Zhong, the editor of Kaifang, a political journal based in Hong Kong. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s another year to go from now. They might still make some change at the seventh plenum next year.&rdquo;        

The leadership&rsquo;s checklist for candidates is not known. But clearly, not many pass muster.        
Jonathan Ansfield, Li Bibo and Shi Da contributed research.
