
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Hundreds of anti-Qaddafi militiamen converged on several neighborhoods of Tripoli on Friday, firing heavy weapons on residential streets in a rare outburst of violence that may have started with demonstrations in support of the deposed leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

There were reports of gun battles between Qaddafi loyalists and former rebel fighters, though it was not clear who started the fighting. Adam Ahmed, an anti-Qaddafi fighter, said he and his colleagues had come under fire on Friday afternoon after responding to reports that loyalists were trying to raise Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s green flag. At least seven armed men were arrested, he said, including one who was carrying a rocket-propelled grenade launcher.        

If confirmed, the protests would represent the boldest attempt by loyalist elements to assert their presence in the capital since its capture in late August. The violence that followed underscored Tripoli&rsquo;s still-combustible mix of armed militias with no central command, patrolling a city growing weary of their presence.        

Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s success at eluding capture, along with continued fighting in other parts of Libya, has contributed to the unease. The Benghazi-based interim government, the Transitional National Council, has said it will not form a proper government until the city of Surt is captured from Qaddafi loyalists.        

After weeks of fighting there, a group of a hundred or so anti-Qaddafi fighters were pinned down on Friday by snipers outside the last remaining pocket of the city under the control of the loyalists.        

In Tripoli, after the reports of the first gunfights, patrols by anti-Qaddafi forces swept through the city setting up checkpoints and searching cars for weapons. Anti-Qaddafi fighters said the loyalists had used Facebook to organize their demonstrations.        

But gunfire by anti-Qaddafi fighters in several parts of the city on Friday, with no enemy in sight, raised doubts about the extent of the threat. Around 4 p.m., hundreds of anti-Qaddafi fighters drove to an apartment block in the neighborhood of Abu Salim, a bastion of support for Colonel Qaddafi during the revolt. They fired their weapons as frightened residents fled their homes and some colleagues yelled at them to stop.        

The fighters then drove to another apartment block, chanted pro-revolutionary slogans and again fired their weapons, apparently for no reason.        

Residents of Abu Salim gave varying accounts of why the fighters had come to the neighborhood. Some said the violence started after Friday Prayer with rumors that a Qaddafi-era flag was being raised, while others said it started during a routine patrol for weapons.        

&ldquo;This is very dangerous,&rdquo; said Jamal Faraj, a resident and an anti-Qaddafi activist. &ldquo;Somebody saw a flag. There is no serious resistance here. We&rsquo;re trying to calm people down. This is not the way to deal with them.&rdquo;        

Less than half an hour later, a young man at a nearby traffic circle hoisted a rocket-propelled grenade launcher and fired it, without provocation, toward a distant block of apartment buildings.        
Mauricio Lima contributed reporting from Surt, Libya.
