
CAIRO        

IN 1996, Aboul-Ela Maadi, young and idealistic, had an idea to create a party that would answer a question that has bedeviled Arab politics for generations: How to bring political Islam into the mainstream. He had the same idea in 1998. And in 2004. And in 2009, each attempt rejected by a government that viewed dissent as sedition.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m the prophet Job of Egyptian parties,&rdquo; he declared, flashing the very same smile that he has beamed for 15 years as he faced trial, prison and critics in his quixotic attempt to form the Center Party. Patience paid off for the Pierre Cardin-wearing Mr. Maadi, when thanks to &ldquo;this very nice revolution,&rdquo; he finally won approval in February.        

Or, more precisely, 14 years, 9 months and 7 days after his first rejection.        

&ldquo;History,&rdquo; Mr. Maadi said, &ldquo;was on our side.&rdquo;        

An engineer by training and a reformer by intuition, Mr. Maadi has a host of metaphors these days to describe the moment in which he now finds himself, standing on the brink of a new era of Egyptian politics as promising as it is dangerous, with elections next month beginning a process to shape a new constitution and choose a president.        

Maybe he is playing a game of golf, he said &mdash; each shot bringing his party steadily closer to the goal of an electoral victory this spring. Or perhaps his party is an Apple-like innovator navigating a Paleolithic political class short on ideas. The most apt might be his suggestion that he and his followers represent commandos, trying for so many years to breach a wall that, in the end, crumbled entirely in just 18 days in January and February.        

Yes, commandos, he nodded in his office.        

With that description, Mr. Maadi, 53, seemed to capture the ambiguous place he and his party find themselves in today, winning one battle only to risk losing another.        

There is perhaps no greater challenge facing the Arab revolts and revolutions than the question of how an emerging body politic in the Middle East will deal with the entry of Islamist parties. The question has long obsessed Mr. Maadi, who has never lost his optimism that not only can democracy embrace political Islam but that it must.        

Yet his ideas that seemed so innovative in 1996, when he broke with the Muslim Brotherhood, igniting a bitter fight that lasts until today, have become the vernacular of many Islamist parties in Egypt and elsewhere: acceptance of coalitions with secular parties, democracy as a means of change, equality between Christians and Muslims, a liberal interpretation of Islamic law, and an order that ensures pluralism and the rule of law.        

His very success, in other words, may make him irrelevant.        

At the same time, there is even a greater diversity within political Islam, as once-repressed puritanical voices stake their claim within the new order, even if they remain a fringe. Sectarian tension has dangerously exacerbated, as Christians question the sincerity of even the best-intentioned Islamists. The divide between religious and secular runs no less deep. Amid all the cacophony, in a capricious landscape as unpredictable as prerevolutionary Egypt was stagnant, Mr. Maadi&rsquo;s voice may be drowned out again.        

&ldquo;Time is their real test,&rdquo; said Karima El Hefnawy, a secular Egyptian activist.        

In an office adorned with brown leather furniture, the same that was here 15 years ago, Mr. Maadi speaks with the sincerity of a reformer whose ideas take precedence. &ldquo;Some people never saw the light, but I did,&rdquo; he said from his headquarters, perched over the chaos of Cairo&rsquo;s Kasr al-Aini street. &ldquo;I always saw the light at the end of the tunnel.&rdquo;        

The question is, where will that tunnel lead him?        

There is a relentlessness to Mr. Maadi&rsquo;s schedule, and as affable and engaging as he is, even he complained that he was a little sleepless after campaigning both for his party and for his own seat in Parliament had taken him to the Egyptian cities of Aswan, Minya, Kafar el-Dauwar, Gharbiyah and Ismailiya, and back to Cairo, all in a week.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a good kind of tired,&rdquo; he said, as if to reassure himself.        

On this day, he visited the American University in Cairo, a newly built campus whose style evokes a traditional Islamic design and clashes violently with the vulgar, Persian Gulf-like pastiche of Cairo sprawl. He was late, but made no mention of it. Instead, he charmed the students &mdash; nearly all of them small children when he began his attempt to form the Center Party &mdash; with shout-outs. To the Egyptian students, he welcomed &ldquo;my brothers and sisters.&rdquo; To the Americans, he celebrated their birthplaces.        

&ldquo;Ah, Delaware,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;the home of Joe Biden!&rdquo;        

Greetings done, he settled in a chair to tell them his story.        
(Page 2 of 2)
LIKE so many of his generation, Mr. Maadi came of age with the devastating defeat in the 1967 war against Israel, a moment that disillusioned much of the region to the secular Arab nationalism that then held sway. At the university, in his hometown in southern Egypt, he gravitated toward Islamic currents and soon found himself in jail or on the run. (He once hid in the desert for 10 months, posing as a welder.) First secretly, then publicly, he worked with the Muslim Brotherhood, one of a handful of young activists who helped revive a movement withered by ferocious crackdowns.        

&ldquo;We rebuilt the Brotherhood,&rdquo; Mr. Maadi told the students.        

In ensuing years, he said, the group&rsquo;s old guard became ascendant and, in frustration, he and others broke with it in 1996. He eschewed the Brotherhood&rsquo;s proselytizing. He criticized its hierarchical order and iron discipline. And in defiance of a movement that loathes public displays of dissent, he declared his intentions to form the Center Party.        

The aftermath made for one of the more unusual moments in Egyptian Islamic politics. In courtrooms, the government sided with its enemy, the Brotherhood, to stop the Center Party from being recognized. In one court session in 1997, one of Mr. Maadi&rsquo;s lawyers told a Brotherhood representative that &ldquo;history will not forgive them.&rdquo;        

It is admittedly early, but Mr. Maadi seemed to be on the right side of history.        

In 2003, he helped found a movement that served as a precursor to Egypt&rsquo;s revolution, bringing 22 people to his apartment, with its view of the pyramids. Over a sumptuous meal of stuffed pigeon and soupy mulukhiya, Marxists mingling with Islamists, the group helped found a movement whose name &mdash; Enough! &mdash; captured the sentiments of what President Hosni Mubarak&rsquo;s long reign did to this proud country.        

These days, he still tries to serve as a bridge between religious and secular, helping draft a set of shared principles in August. (&ldquo;Citizenship is the basis of rights and duties,&rdquo; goes one.) Though his party&rsquo;s program calls for Islamic law &mdash; albeit interpreted liberally and consensually &mdash; he declines the name Islamist for centrist. He enjoys talking more about tourism than the fine points of Islamic strictures like interest-free banking.        

Prerevolutionary Egypt, he likes to say, was a civil, Islamic, corrupt, dictatorial state. He had no ambition to alter its civil or Islamic nature; the Constitution already declares Islam the religion of the state and enshrines Islamic law as the main source of legislation. He wants to make it &ldquo;open-minded, democratic and prosperous.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Islam is not the solution,&rdquo; said Mr. Maadi, back in his office and riffing on an old slogan of the Muslim Brotherhood and others. &ldquo;Being centrist is the solution.&rdquo;        

MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD leaders still hold a grudge against Mr. Maadi; some walked out of a recent lecture with his colleague, Essam Sultan. Abdel-Moneim Aboul-Futuh, a former Brotherhood leader and now a presidential candidate, said the dispute was always over &ldquo;personal issues, first and foremost.&rdquo;        

That seems especially true now, as the Muslim Brotherhood has inexorably moved toward the ideals the Center Party espoused in 1996, forming a political party and trying to claim the same middle ground sought by Mr. Maadi.        

That leaves his party one among many.        

&ldquo;Party life in Egypt is entering a new phase of huge pluralism and strong competition,&rdquo; said Emad Shahin, a scholar on Islam and professor at the University of Notre Dame. He called the Center Party &ldquo;no exception.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Many of its centrist ideas have been appropriated by other Islamists, which might reduce the party&rsquo;s influence,&rdquo; he said.        

That sense was echoed by Hesham Alaa, a young religious activist who left the Center Party after the revolution for fear that his work there would be in vain.        

He had nothing against Mr. Maadi, he said, but he added, &ldquo;My own feeling is that they&rsquo;re not going to have a lot of influence or a big role in the events ahead.&rdquo;        

With his infectious smile, Mr. Maadi dismissed the worries. He would work harder, he said, fashion coalitions, organize better and hone his vision of a liberal Islam.        

But as he prepared to head to a television interview last month, he uttered a phrase that seemed both celebratory and challenging. For a moment, his smile even seemed to wane.        

&ldquo;This is freedom,&rdquo; he admitted.        
