
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; A top United Nations official urged the international community on Friday to protect Syrian civilians from a brutal military crackdown by the government of President Bashar al-Assad, as activists said that at least 11 people were shot dead in demonstrations nationwide.        

In the strongest comments yet by the official, Navi Pillay, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, said that the crackdown on pro-democracy activists seeking the ouster of Mr. Assad could lead to civil war if the world did not intervene.        

&ldquo;The onus is on all members of the international community to take protective action in a collective manner, before the continual ruthless repression and killings drive the country into a full-blown civil war,&rdquo; Ms. Pillay said in a statement.        

She stopped short of calling for military intervention, and her spokesman, Rupert Colville, said that it was for the international community to decide on the appropriate measures. World powers intervened militarily in Libya when government forces turned on protesters.        

&ldquo;What we are calling for is a really coherent approach by all states,&rdquo; Mr. Colville said in an interview. &ldquo;Nothing done up until now really seems to be working.&rdquo;        

The United Nations statement came as tens of thousands of Syrians took to the streets across the country on Friday in demonstrations titled &ldquo;The Free Soldiers,&rdquo; in reference to hundreds of army soldiers who have refused to shoot at civilians and deserted to join the uprising.        

Ms. Pillay warned that with reports of more defections among the army, the situation could quickly turn into internal strife.        

Her concerns were echoed in Syria itself. &ldquo;What we are seeing now are the beginnings of an armed struggle,&rdquo; said Louay Hussein, a prominent opposition figure in Damascus. Over the past two weeks there have been a series of mysterious killings that seem to mark the advent of a new phase, he added.        

The statement from the Geneva-based human rights chief also raised the death toll to 3,000 people since demonstrations started in mid-March. It said that thousands have been arrested and tortured or have disappeared. At least 100 people have been killed in the past 10 days alone, Ms. Pillay said.        

On Thursday, human rights activists reported fierce clashes between defectors and armed troops in two provinces, Dara&rsquo;a in southern Syria and Idlib in the north, in which, they said, at least two dozen people died, including soldiers, deserters and civilians.        

The Local Coordination Committees, an umbrella group of activists who document and organize demonstrations, said Friday that at least one protester died in the capital, Damascus, when security forces opened fire.        

&ldquo;The Syrian government has changed the army&rsquo;s mission from protecting the homeland to protecting the Assad regime,&rdquo; said Ali, a 25-year-old political activist in Damascus.        

There were also protests in a town on the outskirts of the northern city of Aleppo, and one person was reported killed. Aleppo and Damascus have remained relatively quiet since the uprising started. Many residents in Damascus have blamed the tight security measures for the lack of big protests there, with several major mosques shut down or surrounded by security forces. Since the start of the uprising, mosques have been a meeting place for protesters.        

&ldquo;To see today one protester in Damascus is a big and encouraging step,&rdquo; said Mufeed, a 22-year-old protester from Damascus.        

In the northeastern city of Qamishli, activists said that at least 20,000 protesters took to the streets to honor the death of a prominent Kurdish opposition figure, Mashaal Tammo. Mr. Tammo was assassinated Oct. 7.        

Omar Idlibi, an activist with the Local Coordination Committees, said that at least eight people were killed in the town of Dara&rsquo;a.        

&ldquo;After seven months, Dara&rsquo;a is still protesting,&rdquo; said Mohammad al-Hariri, 40, a protester from Dara&rsquo;a reached by telephone. &ldquo;The regime cannot understand how residents here are still demonstrating despite heavy deployment of security forces.&rdquo;        

The Syrian government says that it is facing a foreign conspiracy to divide the country.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria, and Neil MacFarquhar from the United Nations.
