
PARIS &mdash; Michel Peissel, a French explorer and an ethnologist who devoted a good part of his life to recording the culture of Tibet and led numerous expeditions to seldom-traveled places, died on Oct. 7 at his home in Paris. He was 74.        

The cause was a heart attack, his son Jocelyn said.        

In 16 books and more than 20 documentary films, Mr. Peissel chronicled his explorations of inaccessible or ignored regions of the globe, including the Tibetan high plateau, remote Russian river towns and unrecorded Mayan ruins.        

Educated in England and France, Mr. Peissel (pronounced payss-EL) dropped out of Harvard Business School to become an explorer and follow his dream of understanding the peoples of Tibet, many of whom lived in regions closed to foreigners.        

Probing what he called historical Greater Tibet, he gained access to the Mustang region in the early 1960s; this led to his book &ldquo;Mustang: A Lost Tibetan Kingdom.&rdquo; Its follow-up, &ldquo;Cavaliers of Kham,&rdquo; created an even greater stir with its narrative of the secretive Tibetan Khampa guerrillas, who attacked Chinese troops with C.I.A. support.        

Traveling on foot and on horseback, with pack animals hauling supplies, he and his Sherpas, sometimes with family or friends, slogged for months on end through little-researched places like Ladakh and Zanskar. In Zanskar, Mr. Peissel found two brothers sharing the role of king and wrote &ldquo;Zanskar: The Hidden Kingdom.&rdquo; After years of wangling for permission, he managed to cross reclusive Bhutan.        

&ldquo;You can call me an adventurer, a man with a lot of curiosity,&rdquo; he told The New York Times in an interview in 2007. He was also a photographer, a painter, an inventor of various contraptions, a linguist and an ebullient storyteller.        

Over time he became more and more outspoken in his political views. Fluent in Tibetan, Mr. Peissel grew to identify with the monks, yak drivers, salt traders and other nomads he got to know in almost 30 expeditions, and to criticize the Chinese and even some Tibetans, including the Dalai Lama, for not standing up enough, in his view, against the &ldquo;Chinese occupiers&rdquo; and their oppression.        

He wrote angrily about the large-scale destruction of Tibet&rsquo;s Buddhist monasteries and other architectural treasures. That destruction and decay, and his quest to learn what he could about the people and the animals of &ldquo;that unique civilization, part Stone Age, part sophisticated,&rdquo; drove him &ldquo;to record the culture before it disappears,&rdquo; he once wrote.        

In the tradition of earlier explorers, Mr. Peissel was a fine draftsman and watercolorist, who recorded his findings in evocative scenes and detailed line drawings of monasteries. His artwork has been shown in exhibitions in Paris and New York.        

Always looking for unusual new projects as access was blocked elsewhere, Mr. Peissel once put together an expedition on the upper Ganges River, riding the rapids in a fan-driven hovercraft he had invented.        

In 1989, he persuaded relatives and friends to join him on a river journey, alternately rowing and sailing a Viking longboat to the Black Sea from the Baltic Sea, a soggy trip that took 53 days.        

Mr. Peissel took great pride in his discoveries, like identifying a small purebred Tibetan horse, later named the Riwoche horse. And he boasted of his expedition to what he believed to be the elusive historical source of the Mekong River, accompanied by Chinese handlers. It resulted in his book &ldquo;The Last Barbarians.&rdquo; He called one of his last books, &ldquo;Tibet: The Secret Continent,&rdquo; his bible and a distillation of his knowledge.        

But Mr. Peissel would just as easily speak of the journey during which he lay with two broken legs in freezing winds, or the time his truck was stuck for days in mud and ice until a passing caravan of yaks pulled it free, or the day a part of his mule train dropped off a precipice and animals, tents and provisions were swept away in a roaring stream. &ldquo;Travel with him was always a triumph over the impossible,&rdquo; said one of his sons, Olivier, a sometime travel companion.        

Besides being a passionate Tibetologist &mdash; he had a doctorate in ethnology from the Sorbonne &mdash; Mr. Peissel was a restless man who pushed himself hard, who was as eager to communicate with peasants as with aristocrats and who was determined to avoid the routine in life, his friends and family said.        

In recent years, as his travel slowed, Mr. Peissel returned to painting. He had just completed his first children&rsquo;s book about Tibet, illustrated with what he called &ldquo;patented stroboscopic images.&rdquo; On the day he died, he had tickets to travel to the Book Fair in Frankfurt to sell his latest book, said his wife, Roselyne Peissel.        

Born in Paris on Feb. 11, 1937, he liked to draw prehistoric animals as a child, and his boyhood heroes were explorers. Mr. Peissel was married first to Marie-Claire de Montaignac, with whom he had two sons, and then to Missy Allen, with whom he had a daughter and a son. He and Ms. Peissel also had a son. His five children survive him.        
