
ADEN, Yemen &mdash; Airstrikes, believed to have been carried out by American drones, killed at least nine people in southern Yemen on Friday, including a senior official of the regional branch of Al Qaeda and an American, the 17-year-old son of a Qaeda official killed by the United States last month, according to the government and local reports on Saturday.        

Fighting also escalated in the capital, Sana, where at least 12 antigovernment protesters were killed by security forces near the Foreign Ministry and at least four civilians were killed in a battle near the airport, opposition officials said.        

The fighting in Sana was the deadliest since President Ali Abdullah Saleh returned to the country last month, and coincided with rising political tensions as all sides await a statement by the United Nations Security Council expected in weeks.        

Yemen has been in turmoil for months, as protesters demanding the ouster of Mr. Saleh, who has ruled for 33 years, have filled the streets, and rival political factions have fought for power. Despite tremendous domestic opposition, international pressure and an assassination attempt that severely wounded him in June, Mr. Saleh has refused to step down.        

Islamic militant groups, including Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the Yemeni branch of the terrorist organization, have exploited the chaos, taking over large regions in Shabwa and Abyan Provinces in the south.        

The American drone strike last month that killed the Qaeda official, Anwar al-Awlaki, has been particularly controversial in the United States. Despite being an American citizen, Mr. Awlaki, a Qaeda propagandist, was killed without a trial. The United States has argued that he had taken on an operational role in the organization, plotting attacks against Americans, which made him a legitimate target.        

The killing of his son in a drone attack on Friday night, if confirmed, would be the fourth time an American was killed by such a United States attack in Yemen, although it was not clear if the son was an intended target. A second American, Samir Khan, the editor of Al Qaeda&rsquo;s online magazine, was killed in the attack on Mr. Awlaki, which was launched from a new secret C.I.A. base on the Arabian Peninsula.        

The Yemeni authorities said that there were two airstrikes in Shabwa Province on Friday night, and that Ibrahim al-Banna, the Egyptian-born leader of the media wing of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, was killed.        

The strikes hit two cars and wounded six people, according to a statement on the official Saba news agency. The Defense Ministry said the strikes were carried out by Yemeni forces. &ldquo;This comes in the framework of the Yemeni government&rsquo;s counterterrorism efforts with the cooperation of the international community,&rdquo; a statement on the ministry&rsquo;s Web site said.        

Local reports citing witnesses said the strikes were carried out by American drones, and that they had killed nine people.        

American drone strikes have increased in Yemen this year as the government has lost ground to Islamist militants.        

A military official confirmed that there was an attack on Friday, though it was not clear whether the strike was from a drone, a fighter jet or a missile launched from some other platform. He said that the strike was &ldquo;still being assessed&rdquo; to determine whether it hit its target. Officials would not comment about the target.        

A member of the Awlaki family said the dead included Mr. Awlaki&rsquo;s son, Abdelrahman al-Awlaki, 17, who lived in the capital and was visiting the family home in the Assan District of Shabwa Province after his father&rsquo;s death.        

Two other relatives of the Awlaki family were also killed, the family said. It was not known whether any of them were affiliated with Al Qaeda.        

There were also two battles in the capital.        

In the first, people protesting the government staged a large march on Saturday outside an area protected by troops loyal to Maj. Gen. Ali Mohsin al-Ahmar, a military commander who defected to the opposition in March.        

According to witnesses, thousands marched down a street and were fired on when they reached a government checkpoint just outside the Foreign Ministry. Some protesters retreated, while others marched on, only to be shot at again.        

The attack ignited fighting between government forces and the troops loyal to General Ahmar in what has become the new front line of the battle, the Haeel neighborhood, near Kentucky Square.        

The fighting also appeared to signal the end of an unofficial truce that had recently been brokered between the government and General Ahmar.        

Fierce fighting also broke out in the northern district of Soufan between antigovernment tribesmen and government forces. The area is near Sana International Airport, and government shelling into the district closed the airport on Saturday. An employee in the office of Sadeq al-Ahmar, a leader of a powerful clan rival of Mr. Saleh, said four civilians were killed in the shelling.        

The official Saba news agency said the shelling came from militias belonging to the opposition Isla Party and General Ahmar.        
