
LAHORE, Pakistan &mdash; The United States on Saturday demanded the release of an American official charged in the shooting deaths of two Pakistanis in this city two days ago, and now being held in police custody.        

Breaking a virtual silence on the case of the official, Raymond A. Davis, 36, the United States Embassy said in a statement that Mr. Davis held a diplomatic passport that protected him from prosecution and that he was being detained illegally.        

But Pakistani officials and lawyers said it was not clear whether Mr. Davis, described by the Americans as a &ldquo;security official&rdquo; and a &ldquo;U.S. diplomat,&rdquo; actually had diplomatic immunity.        

Mr. Davis is accused of killing the two men &mdash; who the police say were on motorcycles and tried to rob him at gunpoint &mdash; while he was driving in afternoon traffic.        

A third Pakistani was killed when he was hit by a vehicle from the American Consulate in Lahore that was rushing to the rescue of Mr. Davis, going the wrong way down a one-way road.        

With anti-American sentiment coursing across all segments of the population, the government faces a predicament of how to handle a case that exposes the fraught relationship between the United States and Pakistan.        

Many Pakistanis resent the presence of American officials and security contractors sent to Pakistan to fight terrorism, but who they say needlessly meddle in internal matters.        

The embassy statement identified Mr. Davis as a &ldquo;U.S. diplomat&rdquo; who carried a diplomatic passport and was assigned to the embassy in Islamabad. Foreign diplomats may not carry weapons, Pakistani officials say.        

A senior American official here said Mr. Davis was a &ldquo;security official,&rdquo; and as such was allowed to carry a gun. &ldquo;His job is security,&rdquo; the senior American official said.        

The Pakistani Foreign Office said Saturday that the case was &ldquo;sub judice in a court of law and the legal process should be respected.&rdquo;        

Mr. Davis appeared for a hearing at a magistrates&rsquo; court in Lahore on Friday, unlocked handcuffs showing on one wrist.        
