
CAMBRIDGE, England &mdash; Cambridge University has not had a candidate like Abdul Arain for its top post of chancellor in the more than 750 years the post has existed. Royal consorts, dukes, lords, military heroes, even a bishop beheaded by Henry VIII have all filled the largely ceremonial post, but never anybody quite like Mr. Arain, the proprietor of Al Amin grocery store on this city&rsquo;s busy Mill Road.        

And now, after an election completed on Sunday, the university, which has long competed with the likes of Harvard, Yale and the California Institute of Technology for the No. 1 spot in ratings for the world&rsquo;s top academic institution, will have to wait a little longer. For Mr. Arain will not be donning the gold-trimmed robe of chancellor or assuming duties that include, according to the university, acting as an arbiter in certain university disputes, presiding at official ceremonies and making ceremonial speeches in Latin.        

On Sunday, university constables in top hats and tailcoats, as much a feature of the university&rsquo;s life in their own way as its long list of Nobel Prize winners, were on hand as the results of the first contested election for the chancellorship in more than 150 years were posted on a modest board attached to the railings of the university&rsquo;s Senate House. Mr. Arain finished last of four candidates, with 312 votes, about 6 percent of the nearly 6,000 cast, and some distance behind the third-place finisher, Michael Mansfield, a lawyer and well-known patron of left-wing causes, who received 17 percent of the vote.        

The election was no cliffhanger, with the university&rsquo;s establishment candidate, David Sainsbury, 71, the billionaire former chairman of a family-founded supermarket chain, taking 52 percent of the votes, the majority needed to avoid a runoff. His closest challenger was the actor Brian Blessed, a 75-year-old veteran of film and television productions like &ldquo;Flash Gordon,&rdquo; &ldquo;I, Claudius,&rdquo; &ldquo;Blackadder&rdquo; and &ldquo;Treasure Island,&rdquo; but perhaps as well known for his possession of what The Times of London described last week as &ldquo;a beard you could lose a badger in.&rdquo;        

All in all, the contest made for one of the more unbuttoned events in the recent history of Cambridge, a mostly staid town 55 miles northeast of London that is celebrated for the idyllic beauty of many of its 31 colleges, many of them dating to the Middle Ages and clustered on the grassy banks of the gentle-flowing River Cam. The chancellorship fell open when Prince Philip, the husband of Queen Elizabeth II, stepped down this summer after 34 years in the post on reaching his 90th birthday, saying that he wanted a life with &ldquo;less frantic rushing about&rdquo; to ceremonial occasions and &ldquo;less trying to think of something to say.&rdquo;        

Much of the election&rsquo;s verve was provided by Mr. Arain and Mr. Blessed, each in his own way making the case for blowing some of the cobwebs from a university whose professors, known as dons or fellows, have clung to ancient traditions and privileges, including access to college wine cellars with some of the best vintages and rules that prohibit all but the fellows from walking on the immaculate college lawns.        

Mr. Arain, 46, who was born in Nairobi, Kenya, and came to Britain with his parents as a child, was drafted into the contest by customers at his store, many of them academics. He said they believed that he could provide the voice of the &ldquo;common man&rdquo; the university needed to free itself from its image as a crusty, if brilliant, redoubt for outdated customs and entitlements.        

Despite years of assertive outreach programs that have sought to draw talented students from underprivileged backgrounds, close to half of the university&rsquo;s 12,000 students are drawn from private schools, rather than the state schools that educate the vast majority of Britain&rsquo;s secondary school students.        

But Mr. Arain had a cause closer to home: a proposal by Sainsbury&rsquo;s, the supermarket chain that made the fortune of his rival in the contest, to open an outlet across the road from Mr. Arain&rsquo;s store. The Sainsbury&rsquo;s bid, fiercely contested by local residents, would threaten Mr. Arain&rsquo;s business and other groceries that cater to the surrounding multiethnic neighborhood. In his campaign for the common man, Mr. Arain found a vehicle for a personal, as well as a community, crusade.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;If Sainsbury&rsquo;s moves in, you&rsquo;ll end up with a lot of empty shops, and the sense of community cohesion will be lost,&rdquo; he said in an interview. &ldquo;The Mill Road area has a wonderful community of Turks, Europeans, Indians and Chinese, and they live in harmony with one another. It&rsquo;s because of that sense of community, of Cambridge being a cosmopolitan city that is a wonderful place to live, that the university has been able to attract and keep the brilliant minds it has, people who could go elsewhere and make more money but choose to stay for the quality of life.&rdquo;        

Mr. Arain, a graduate of Cambridge&rsquo;s less prestigious second university, now known as Anglia Ruskin, made his case at a candidates&rsquo; debate in the Cambridge Union, the university&rsquo;s debating society, with impeccable understatement, while Mr. Sainsbury, a member of the House of Lords, focused on university issues.        

One factor that may have helped swing the vote among the electors, drawn from the 200,000 graduates with at least a master&rsquo;s degree, doctorate or bachelor of divinity, was the $200 million Lord Sainsbury&rsquo;s foundation gave the university recently to build a new plant sciences laboratory. In a statement acknowledging his victory, the peer said he was grateful to the other candidates for having &ldquo;made this such a friendly election.&rdquo;        

Mr. Blessed, the actor, ran what was incontestably the most colorful campaign. As voters in academic gowns made their way down a cobbled back street behind the Senate House on Saturday, some arriving on bicycles, Mr. Blessed, a Yorkshire miner&rsquo;s son who left school at 14, held court at the Anchor pub beside the River Cam, a launching point for the punts that waft languidly down the river.        

The actor told his mostly youthful enthusiasts that Lord Sainsbury, though &ldquo;a good egg,&rdquo; lacked his &ldquo;sex appeal,&rdquo; and, &ldquo;If I see him I&rsquo;ll chuck him in the river.&rdquo; A mountaineer who reached the summit of Mount Everest in his late 60s, he said he would like to be the cox in the Cambridge boat for the annual Oxford-Cambridge race on the Thames. Beyond that, he said, he would like &ldquo;to steal all the books in the library.&rdquo;        
