
RAMALLAH, West Bank &mdash; Israel on Sunday released the names of the first 477 Palestinian prisoners that it will exchange for a soldier held by the militant faction Hamas, and the list revealed why the country has found the trade so wrenching: a majority of the inmates were convicted of manslaughter, attempted murder or intentionally causing death.        

Those being freed include the founders of Hamas&rsquo;s armed wing and militants who kidnapped and killed Israeli soldiers and civilians. A mastermind of the 2001 bombing of a Jerusalem pizzeria that killed 15 will walk out of prison, as will a woman who used the Internet to lure a lovesick Israeli teenager to a Palestinian city and had him murdered.        

Most of the prisoners were serving life sentences, some for being involved in attacks like the 2001 bombing of a Tel Aviv nightclub that killed 21 people and a suicide bombing a year later of a Netanya hotel in which 29 died.        

The Israeli soldier in the trade, Staff Sgt. Gilad Shalit, was seized by Hamas militants in a cross-border raid more than five years ago and held in Gaza. The exchange of the first batch of prisoners, which includes 27 women, is set for Tuesday. On Sunday, they were bused to central prisons where their health and identities were to be checked. In two months, 550 more prisoners will be released, but their names have not been published.        

A handful of the most important prisoners in Israel&rsquo;s jails will not be freed, including Marwan Barghouti, a major force behind the second intifada; his relative Abdullah Barghouti, a bomb maker; and Ahmed Saadat, the mastermind of the murder of Rehavam Zeevi, an Israeli government minister.        

About 200 of those being freed will not be permitted to return to their homes in the West Bank but will be sent either to Gaza or into exile, many to Qatar and Turkey. A small number will be permitted back after three years.        

By law, the government must provide 48 hours between the release of the list and the chance to challenge the pardons. Several Israeli families who lost members to terrorist attacks filed such petitions on Sunday, but few expected such efforts to succeed.        

Despite some of the more alarming prospects for the prisoner release, Israelis have pushed the government for years to make an exchange to ensure Sergeant Shalit&rsquo;s release. At the same time, though, recent polls have shown most also believe that by releasing men and women who have killed they are taking a clear security risk.        

Palestinians, preparing for the release, disputed the terms of the debate in Israel. They said that holding prisoners from occupied lands inside Israel violated international law. They said that many were peaceful people who were convicted in Israeli military trials that involved secret evidence and standards of proof that would be unacceptable in many Western countries.        

They also noted that of the 6,000 or so remaining Palestinian prisoners in Israel, hundreds were being held without being charged while others were held under administrative detention for crimes amounting to political activism. And they said Israelis and others minimized the terrible toll on the families of people held for years, not knowing if or when they would be released.        

&ldquo;One of the reasons we want Palestine to be recognized as a state by the United Nations is so that our people being held by Israel will be recognized for what they are: prisoners of war under the Geneva Convention,&rdquo; a top intelligence official in Ramallah said. He spoke on condition of anonymity because he is not permitted to speak publicly.        

The list includes Rawhi Mushtaha and Yehya Sinwar, two founders of Al Majd, a forerunner of Hamas&rsquo;s military wing. Al Majd killed Palestinian collaborators, cracked down on behavior regarded as immoral and gathered weapons. Both were arrested in early 1988, less than two months after the outbreak of the first Palestinian uprising and the formal creation of Hamas by Sheik Ahmed Yassin.        

Mr. Mushtaha, 52, was serving four life sentences for murder through an act of terror, military exercises, manslaughter and incitement. His wife, Raeda, wearing a full face niqab veil, confirmed Sunday that her husband was a founder of Al Majd.        

Asked if he regretted his actions she said, &ldquo;No.&rdquo; Speaking from her Gaza City home, she continued: &ldquo;Rawhi is with Hamas until we restore all our Islamic holy places and the return of refugees. Our method and path is resistance. We will not lay down weapons, because resistance is a legitimate right for any people fighting for their freedom.&rdquo;        
Ethan Bronner reported from Ramallah, and Stephen Farrell from Gaza.
