
JERUSALEM &mdash; An American law student from Queens who also has Israeli citizenship and was arrested in Egypt in June, charged there with spying for Israel, is expected to be released in the coming days in exchange for scores of Egyptians held in Israel.        

The exchange for the student, Ilan Grapel, 27, who attends Emory Law School in Atlanta, would follow an Egyptian-brokered exchange between Israel and Hamas, set for Tuesday, in which an Israeli soldier, Staff Sgt. Gilad Shalit, was expected to be returned home from Gaza for the first batch of what was expected to be the release of more than 1,000 Palestinian prisoners held in Israel.        

Representative Gary L. Ackerman, a New York Democrat from Queens, said in a telephone interview that he had been working closely on the Grapel case from the beginning.        

&ldquo;We are extremely close in this complicated deal,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We are going to be exceedingly happy to get our citizen back.&rdquo;        

In Egypt, senior security sources said the final agreement between Egypt and Israel would occur only after the Shalit deal was completed. Israeli officials declined to comment, but news reports said that 80 Egyptians who had been arrested over the Israeli border on drug and other charges would be exchanged for Mr. Grapel.        

Mr. Grapel and his family have consistently denied that he had any links to espionage. A graduate of Johns Hopkins, a student of Arabic and a former paratrooper in the Israeli Army, he was wounded in the 2006 Lebanon war. Mr. Grapel had gone to Cairo in May to work for a nonprofit group helping refugees, according to his family and Mr. Ackerman. He went frequently to Tahrir Square and made no secret of his Israeli citizenship. On his Facebook page, he displayed pictures of himself in Israeli military uniform.        

They described him as an inquisitive and idealistic man from a secular Jewish middle-class family who had once considered joining the Peace Corps. His Israeli father is a podiatrist; his American mother is a violist in the New York Philharmonic.        

Mr. Ackerman said Mr. Grapel had a strong social conscience and wanted to &ldquo;do good in the world.&rdquo; He said Mr. Grapel&rsquo;s decision to post photographs of himself in his Israeli uniform on Facebook had been the innocent behavior of a typical 20-something.        

&ldquo;Ilan was an intern of mine in the summer of 2002,&rdquo; Mr. Ackerman said. &ldquo;I also know his family. He&rsquo;s idealistic and interested in coexistence. Perhaps he was na&iuml;ve. But he&rsquo;s no spy.&rdquo;        

Posting the photos on Facebook, he added, &ldquo;is not something that a member of the Mossad would do.&rdquo; The Mossad is the Israeli intelligence service.        

Daniel Grapel, Mr. Grapel&rsquo;s father, said in an interview that there had been the strongest indications yet that his son could be released, but he had received no official confirmation from either American or Israeli authorities. He said that given the shifting geopolitics in the region, the family did not want to speculate.        

&ldquo;Nothing in the Middle East is assured,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t say one way or another until someone signs on the dotted line. It sounds like something is happening. But when he is crossing the border, we will be sure.&rdquo;        

Daniel Grapel dismissed what he called the propaganda circulating about his son, including that he had tried to pass himself off as a Muslim before he was captured. &ldquo;There have been all kinds of rumors and innuendo that is not true,&rdquo; he said.        

When Ilan Grapel was arrested, the official Egyptian news agency said an investigation had shown that he had been going to Tahrir Square from January and &ldquo;inciting sedition, spreading rumors and urging protesters toward friction with the armed forces and to commit acts of violence.&rdquo;        

Israel&rsquo;s relationship with Egypt has frayed since the overthrow in February of President Hosni Mubarak, with Egyptian popular anger directed at Israel because of its close relationship with Mr. Mubarak.        

Last month, a crowd stormed the Israeli Embassy in Cairo. It was partly in anger over the killing of five Egyptian security officers the previous month when Israeli troops chased militants who had carried out an attack in Israel that killed eight people.        

Israel recently formally apologized for those deaths, which it said were accidental. The apology partly cleared the way for the deal over Mr. Grapel.        

Mr. Ackerman said he had hopes that Mr. Grapel would be freed soon. In June, he traveled to Israel, where he said he had met with the prime minister and the Egyptian ambassador to discuss the case. &ldquo;This has been a horrible ordeal for this family and not something any mother or father wants to go through,&rdquo; Mr. Ackerman said.        
Ethan Bronner reported from Jerusalem, and Dan Bilefsky from New York.
