
TUNIS &mdash; In the final week of the first election campaign of the Arab Spring, political discourse here in Tunisia has been all but consumed by contention over the television broadcast of an animated film, &ldquo;Persepolis,&rdquo; which touched off accusations of heresy and censorship.        

In a campaign that people here often describe in terms of a choice between East and West, the debate has come closer than any poll to identifying the political center, underscoring why so many expect a victory for Tunisia&rsquo;s mainstream Islamist party, Ennahda.        

The episode began when a relatively small group of ultraconservative Islamists attacked the television station that had broadcast the 2007 film, about a Muslim girl growing up in post-revolutionary Iran, because of a scene in which she rails at God. He is depicted as she imagines him, violating an Islamic injunction against personifying him.        

But it soon became clear that ultraconservatives were hardly the only ones offended. The broadcast has touched a nerve among a far broader section of Tunisia&rsquo;s Muslims, even in the coastal regions where many pride themselves on their cosmopolitanism. &ldquo;It is true we do not all fast, and we do not all pray,&rdquo; said Saleh Mohamed Khoudi, 53, a director of technology at a private company. &ldquo;But this is too much.&rdquo;        

Semiha Sehli, 33, who works in finance, said she wanted nothing to do with the Islamists and did not trust Ennahda. But even she was shocked when she saw the offending scene on Facebook. Sure, she acknowledged, all little children imagine a personified God. &ldquo;You can imagine it, but you shouldn&rsquo;t put it in a movie,&rdquo; she said.        

The liberal standard-bearer, the Progressive Democratic Party, sometimes known here as the Western party, raced to distance itself from the film. &ldquo;We are against blasphemy,&rdquo; said Ahmed Bouazzi, a member of the party&rsquo;s executive committee. &ldquo;And we respect the freedom of expression, freedom of speech, freedom of creativity. And we are against violence.&rdquo;        

He acknowledged that this put the party on both sides of the issue. &ldquo;This is politics,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want to get characterized as on the side of unbelievers. We are a party of believers. Most of our members are Muslim.&rdquo;        

Some individual liberals observed with wry satisfaction that the film told the story of a supposedly liberal revolution that turned oppressive after Islamists took power in Tehran &mdash; bolstering the liberal argument that Tunisia&rsquo;s moderate Islamists should not be trusted, either. But among those seeking votes, only one well-known liberal party, the smaller Democratic Modernist Poll, embraced the film, filling a stage with artists at a rally Sunday night in an affluent neighborhood of Tunis and trumpeting its support for freedom of expression. &ldquo;There is no bad time for art,&rdquo; said Jalila Bakar, a Tunisian film director.        

The party&rsquo;s founder, Ahmed Ibrahim, added, &ldquo;Religion and politics should not be put in the same sphere.&rdquo;        

Ennahda, sometimes known here as the Eastern party, has sought to step cautiously. After an initial silence from the party, its founder, Rachid Ghannouchi, reportedly called it a &ldquo;provocation&rdquo; to show the movie so close to the election. &ldquo;I support the Tunisians&rsquo; right to denounce this attack on their religion,&rdquo; he said.        

But Said Ferjani, a member of the party&rsquo;s political bureau, said it was trying to distance itself from both the protesters and the television channel. The party did not want to appear to hold a narrow view of freedom of expression, he argued, which would allow its opponents &ldquo;to score a point domestically and internationally.&rdquo;        

But the party also risked divisions among some of its supporters if it took the side of the broadcaster. &ldquo;It would really put pressure on us in term of votes,&rdquo; he said.        

Both sides saw conspiracies. Many liberals argued that the debate had been engineered by Islamists to fire up their followers and demonstrate their strength. Islamists argued that the television station, which they said appeared to lean toward the liberals, had deliberately baited the ultraconservatives to put the mainstream Islamist party in a bind.        

Many others noted that the film had been shown before on Tunisian television without incident but in French, the language of Tunisia&rsquo;s former colonial power and still the second tongue of the elite. This time it was dubbed into the colloquial Tunisian Arabic dialect.        

&ldquo;If it was in French, it would be O.K., maybe because it would seem foreign to you,&rdquo; said Eya Trabelsi, 21, a sociology student who said she supported Ennahda. &ldquo;But for people who speak Arabic, that is not O.K.&rdquo;        

She made other fine distinctions as well, reflecting the complication of Tunisia&rsquo;s dual identity, as perhaps the most Westernized state in the Arab world, that is now playing out in the election. Sure, Tunisian television often shows racy scenes from French films or of couples kissing in public that might not fit with traditional Islam, and no one seemed to care. &ldquo;That is what happens in real life,&rdquo; she explained. &ldquo;But to personify God or the prophet, that is not O.K.&rdquo;        
Hend Hassassi contributed reporting from Tunis.
