
Liliane Bettencourt, the aging heiress of the L&rsquo;Or&eacute;al cosmetics fortune, was placed under the care of a legal guardian Monday by a judge, who based the decision on a medical evaluation that indicated she suffers from dementia and Alzheimer&rsquo;s disease.        

Lawyers for the French billionaire &mdash; who is turning 89 this week &mdash; vowed to appeal the ruling from St&eacute;phanie Kass-Danno, a judge in Courbevoie, a suburb west of Paris. It was the latest legal twist in a bitter and expensive feud that the richest woman in France has waged against her only daughter, Fran&ccedil;oise Bettencourt-Meyers.        

Just a few weeks earlier, Mrs. Bettencourt had threatened to leave France to live in exile if her daughter gained control, although now her lawyers say she will remain in the country.        

Under the decision, Mrs. Bettencourt&rsquo;s assets &mdash; which represent almost 30 percent of the voting shares of L&rsquo;Or&eacute;al &mdash; will be placed under the guardianship of her daughter. But the judge appointed her grandson, Jean-Victor Meyers, to guard over her health and personal life.        

The decision took effect immediately, although one of Mrs. Bettencourt&rsquo;s lawyers, Jean-Ren&eacute; Farthouat, said he would appeal the decision to a higher court.        

&ldquo;This is a deeply disappointing decision that I will have trouble telling Mrs. Bettencourt,&rdquo; Mr. Farthouat said.        

Their epic legal feud dates from 2007, when Mrs. Bettencourt-Meyers took steps in court to challenge Fran&ccedil;ois-Marie Banier, a celebrity photographer who had collected more than &euro;1 billion, or $1.38 billion, in gifts from Mrs. Bettencourt, a longtime friend.        

The Bettencourt women worked out their differences in December with an eight-page armistice agreement, but they erupted again when Mrs. Bettencourt-Meyers discovered that Mrs. Bettencourt was investing in a gambling company at the urging of the negotiator of the agreement, her lawyer and guardian, Pascal Wilhelm.        

A few days after they signed their own agreement, Mrs. Bettencourt-Meyers said the lawyer had pushed her mother to invest &euro;143 million in Lov Group Invest, an online gambling company owned by a businessman whom he also represented. The businessman, St&eacute;phane Courbit, has since returned the money.        

But this month, the police searched the offices of Mr. Wilhelm and the judge revoked his mandate to be her guardian. Mr. Wilhelm did not respond to a telephone call seeking comment.        

Charlotte Robbe-Phan, the lawyer for Mrs. Bettencourt&rsquo;s daughter, issued a statement for the family Monday, saying that the ruling was a &ldquo;huge relief,&rdquo; and that their efforts had &ldquo;always been guided by the sole desire to see their mother and grandmother protected.&rdquo;        

The family also noted that the ruling does not affect existing agreements dating from 2004 with another L&rsquo;Or&eacute;al shareholder, Nestl&eacute;, and that they continue to support the company&rsquo;s future development. T&eacute;thys, the holding company for the family fortune, is directed by Jean-Pierre Meyers, Mrs. Bettencourt&rsquo;s son-in-law.        

The medical evaluation that weighed heavily in the court ruling was leaked earlier to the French daily Le Monde, which published portions Monday that indicated that Mrs. Bettencourt suffered from dementia and a moderately severe form of Alzheimer&rsquo;s disease.        

In an unannounced visit in June to her Art Moderne mansion in the wealthy Paris suburb of Neuilly-sur-Seine, Bruno Daunizeau, a neurologist, interviewed her and found that she was unable to answer &ldquo;various test questions.&rdquo; A psychologist, Jean-Fran&ccedil;ois Dartigues, also evaluated her, concluding she suffers from &ldquo;anosognosia,&rdquo; a disorder in which a patient does not recognize that a disease exists.        

The judge on her case also interviewed Mrs. Bettencourt and found evidence of confusion, including that she did not know the name of the man who had received the &euro;143 million investment in his on line gambling company.        

In more fallout from her spending, several judges in Bordeaux are investigating allegations that she financed the presidential campaign of Nicolas Sarkozy with illicit cash contributions dating from 2007.        
