
Iran&rsquo;s top leaders said Monday that the American accusation of an Iranian-hatched plot to assassinate Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s ambassador to Washington was partly designed to sow discord between Iran and Saudi Arabia, in what appeared to be a new Iranian counterattack to the charges announced nearly a week ago. But the foreign minister of Iran said his government was at least willing to examine the evidence that the United States claims it has in the case.        

Both Iran&rsquo;s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and its president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, repeated their rejections of the American accusation, describing it as a ridiculous fiction invented by the Obama administration to divert attention from its other problems. But their argument that the United States was trying to drive a wedge between Iran and Saudi Arabia had not been made before.        

Ayatollah Khamenei said in a speech in the western Iranian city of Paveh that &ldquo;the Sunni-Shia divide has always been a tool of the enemies of Islam,&rdquo; Iranian news media reported. The ayatollah was also quoted as saying that &ldquo;the main objective behind the enemies&rsquo; divisive moves is to stop the spread of Iran&rsquo;s successful pattern among other nations.&rdquo;        

In an interview with Al Jazeera, Mr. Ahmadinejad expounded on the theme, saying the accusation was &ldquo;fabricated by Washington to cause a rift between Tehran and Saudi Arabia.&rdquo; Asked if there was any possible merit to the case, Mr. Ahmadinejad said, &ldquo;We have categorically rejected this accusation.&rdquo;        

It was not immediately clear why they focused on Iranian-Saudi relations. Ties between Saudi Arabia and Iran have never been particularly friendly, partly because of the Shiite-Sunni schism in Islam. Saudi Arabia, a strong American ally, is overwhelmingly Sunni, while Iran is overwhelmingly Shiite.        

In the accusation announced last Tuesday, which even some Obama administration officials acknowledge sounds like something from a Hollywood script, the Justice Department said Iranian officials had sought to hire hit men from a Mexican drug gang for $1.5 million to kill Adel al-Jubeir, the Saudi ambassador to the United States. The Justice Department&rsquo;s criminal complaint identified two defendants &mdash; Mansour J. Arbabsiar, a naturalized American citizen of Iranian descent from Corpus Christi, Tex., who has been taken into custody, and Gholam Shakuri, a member of the Quds Force of Iran&rsquo;s Revolutionary Guards Corps, who is at large and believed to be in Iran.        

Projecting a slightly more flexible message than Iran&rsquo;s ayatollah or president, the foreign minister, Ali Akbar Salehi, said Monday that Iran wanted to see what evidence the United States claims to have. He said in an  interview with the official Islamic Republic News Agency that &ldquo;Iran is ready to study the case patiently&rdquo; and was &ldquo;urging Washington to present any existing documents on the issue.&rdquo;        

Asked about Mr. Salehi&rsquo;s remarks, a State Department spokesman, Mark Toner, told reporters in Washington that the United States had already &ldquo;approached the Iranians on the matter directly and didn&rsquo;t receive a very constructive response.&rdquo;        

Mr. Toner also said the State Department was willing to grant Iran&rsquo;s request for consular visits to Mr. Arbabsiar, who is in federal custody in New York. But, Mr. Toner said, Iranian judicial authorities should either prosecute or extradite the other defendant, Mr. Shakuri. &ldquo;We leave it to them to take action,&rdquo; he said.        
Artin Afkhami contributed reporting from Boston.
