
RAFAH CROSSING, Gaza Strip &mdash; The cactus-lined highway that leads to this international gateway between Gaza and Egypt was draped in green bunting and flags on Monday, as Hamas stamped its Islamist mark across the scene of a long-awaited Israeli-Palestinian prisoner exchange scheduled for Tuesday.        

Along the length of Salahuddin Street, the main north-south road that runs the length of the Gaza Strip, Hamas activists were scaling ladders to attach Islamist banners to streetlights, welcoming home the 131 Gaza returnees from among 477 Palestinian prisoners who are due to be released by Israel. Another 550 are to be released in two months&rsquo; time.        

Both Israel and the divided Palestinian leadership &mdash; Fatah runs the West Bank while Hamas controls the Gaza Strip &mdash; were making elaborate preparations for the Tuesday handover, which will end five years in captivity for one Israeli soldier, Staff Sgt. Gilad Shalit; hundreds of the Palestinians have been held much longer. Early Tuesday, convoys of Israeli Prisons Service vehicles began ferrying Palestinian inmates from prisons in Israel to one in the West Bank and to the Rafah Crossing, The Associated Press reported.        

Rafah is the Gaza of Gaza &mdash; isolated, poor and, for years, all but cut off from the rest of the coastal strip during the era of Israeli settlements here, which ended in 2005.        

The community is not just where the Shalit saga was to end, barring a last-minute change, but it was also where it began. In June 2006, Hamas and two other militant factions mounted a surprise raid on an Israeli military post at Kerem Shalom, after having dug a long tunnel beneath the Rafah sands under the border, capturing Sergeant Shalit. He has not been seen in public since.        

If all goes as planned, he will be the first captured Israeli soldier to be returned home alive in 26 years.        

In Israel, there were elaborate preparations for his return, a calibrated mix of relieved celebration and acknowledgment &mdash; both of the pain and death that the released Palestinians caused many families and of the risk that their release may pose.        

Several petitions to block or alter the exchange were rejected by Israel&rsquo;s high court on Monday. The scene at the courtroom was emotionally charged, with some families who lost members in terrorist attacks assailing the Shalit family and the government.        

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu sent letters to the bereaved families saying he understood their heartache.        

&ldquo;I know that the price is very heavy for you,&rdquo; he wrote in the letters. &ldquo;I understand the difficulty to countenance that the evil people who perpetrated the appalling crimes against your loved ones will not pay the full price that they deserve. During these moments I hope that you will find solace that I and the entire nation of Israel embrace you and share your pain.&rdquo;        

Plans call for the Palestinian prisoners to board buses to start their journeys to freedom once Sergeant Shalit is known to have crossed from Gaza into Egyptian Sinai. He is to be taken to Israel, checked preliminarily for physical and mental health, given a new uniform to wear, then taken to an air base to see his family and meet Mr. Netanyahu, Defense Minister Ehud Barak and the military chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Benny Gantz.        

After a more extensive medical examination and some time with the officials and his family, Sergeant Shalit and his family are to be transported by helicopter to their home in northern Israel. Reporters and onlookers will be barred from his neighborhood to give the family a measure of privacy. Chiefs of major Israeli news organizations vowed to respect the restrictions.        

In Gaza, after a ceremony at Rafah, Hamas planned a huge welcoming rally in the center of Gaza City. The Hamas prime minister, Ismail Haniya, and one of the returning prisoners, Yehya Sinwar, a co-founder of an early security wing of Hamas, are scheduled to speak.        

With a hammer in his hand, Hussein al-Rifi, 20, paused on Monday while hanging flags to say that he was happy to help with the preparations, &ldquo;to show the people that Hamas still exists in Gaza and to make the happiness of the prisoners complete.&rdquo;        

As he spoke, a bulldozer was smoothing the sandy ridges that run on each side of the highway to beautify the route. Later, five numbered buses arrived at the barred crossing gates at Rafah, ready to pick up the released prisoners; they were followed by a busload of Hamas police officers to form an honor guard.        

In the West Bank, President Mahmoud Abbas was to greet the prisoners to be released there at a ceremony in Ramallah. Though the exchange was negotiated by his rivals in Hamas, Mr. Abbas was expected to try to make it as much of a nonpartisan Palestinian achievement as possible.        

Atallah Abu al-Sebah, Hamas&rsquo;s minister of prisoners&rsquo; affairs, said the prisoners released in Gaza would first be greeted inside the Rafah crossing by 200 officials and up to four members of each prisoner&rsquo;s family. There would be a &ldquo;short official reception,&rdquo; including the Palestinian national anthem.        

Mr. Sebah said that any prisoners who needed accommodation, including those who did not have families in the strip, would be put up in hotels for one month, irrespective of whether they were associated with Hamas, Fatah or other factions. They would then be moved to apartments being prepared for them around Gaza.        

&ldquo;We call upon our Palestinian people to put our brothers from the West Bank in their hearts and eyes, regardless of their affiliation,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It is enough that they belong to Palestine.&rdquo;        
Fares Akram contributed reporting.
