
Libyan forces fighting the vestiges of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s toppled government said Monday that anti-Qaddafi fighters were in complete control of Bani Walid, a loyalist desert enclave south of Tripoli, the capital, but had yet to proclaim total victory in his Mediterranean hometown of Surt.        

Bani Walid and Surt, the last holdouts of pro-Qaddafi resistance, have prevented the Transitional National Council, the interim government, from declaring the official end of the Qaddafi era in the nearly two months since Colonel Qaddafi fled Tripoli and went underground.        

Western news agencies with correspondents close to Bani Walid said anti-Qaddafi fighters had driven into the center of the enclave, raised the new Libyan flag, fired machine guns into the air and screamed &ldquo;God is great!&rdquo; in victory chants.        

Agence France-Presse quoted Seif al-Lasi, a commander of one of the units that assaulted Bani Walid, as saying that the city had been &ldquo;completely liberated.&rdquo; The news agency also quoted Musa Yunis, the overall commander of the assault force, as saying that all pro-Qaddafi resistance had stopped and that the loyalists had taken off their military uniforms, changing to civilian clothes to avoid arrest.        

Previous victory claims by the Transitional National Council have often proved overly optimistic. But if their accounts about Bani Walid are verified, that will mean that a small district within Surt is the last remaining pocket of pro-Qaddafi forces in Libya.        

Backed by tanks and rocket launchers, anti-Qaddafi fighters in Surt stormed a loyalist sniper position early Monday afternoon that had halted their progress for days. The fighters, from eastern Libya, arrested a man they said was a sniper along with two women from a school and residential compound along the coastal road.        

The news coincided with other developments that further dimmed the outlook for Colonel Qaddafi, who has communicated infrequently since taking refuge and whose whereabouts remain a mystery. His audio messages exhorting Libyans to rise up and support him, broadcast on Al Arrai, a sympathetic television channel in Syria, have gone unheeded. On Monday, Al Arrai reported that it had confirmed that one of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons, Khamis, had been killed in late August, something that had been rumored but never verified.        

Agence France-Presse quoted anti-Qaddafi fighters who have been laying siege to Surt as saying that they believed that important loyalists had fled that city, including the mother and brother of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s spokesman, Moussa Ibrahim. It was impossible to confirm their assertions.        

The British foreign secretary, William Hague, paid a brief visit to Tripoli on Monday, officially reopening the closed British Embassy, holding talks with the Transitional National Council chairman, Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, and announcing a new package of assistance for the post-Qaddafi government, including extra help for clearing land mines from areas around Bani Walid and Surt.        

Mr. Hague was quoted by the BBC as saying that it would take at least two years to fully restore the British Embassy, which was ransacked during the conflict.        

He also had a warning for neighboring countries that might be sheltering Colonel Qaddafi or any of his subordinates who are wanted on arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal Court. Reuters quoted him as saying, &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve been very active in reminding other countries in Africa of their responsibilities.&rdquo;        
Mauricio Lima contributed reporting from Surt, Libya.
