
MOSCOW &mdash; Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin confronted criticism over his decision to seek a return to the presidency next year, warning in a television interview shown on Monday of a return to the volatility of previous decades should Russia swerve from its current course.        

&ldquo;They say that things cannot get any worse,&rdquo; Mr. Putin said, referring to his critics. &ldquo;But I would be wary. It is enough to take two or three incorrect steps and all that came before could overcome us before we know it.&rdquo;        

He continued: &ldquo;We lived through the collapse of the country. We lived through a very difficult period in the 1990s. Only in the 2000s did we begin to get to our feet. We are stabilizing the situation, and of course we need stable development ahead.&rdquo;        

The session, which was shown on Russia&rsquo;s three major government-connected television channels, followed a similar interview last month by Dmitri A. Medvedev, Russia&rsquo;s current president, in which he tried to allay frustrations, particularly in liberal circles, over his decision announced in September to cede the presidency to Mr. Putin.        

Supporters credit Mr. Putin, who has been in power for 12 years, with pulling Russia from the chaos that enveloped the country after the Soviet collapse. But there are fears that his return to the presidency, possibly for another 12 years, could mire the country in stagnation, or worse, lead to further limitations on political and human rights.        

In the interview, Mr. Putin acknowledged such sentiments, but dismissed his critics, saying they offered no alternatives.        

&ldquo;Our opponents need to propose their own program,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And more importantly, they need to show through practical work what they can do better.&rdquo;        

Since coming to power, Mr. Putin has eliminated most legitimate opposition, leaving Russia with a smattering of parties loyal to the Kremlin and little in the way of civil society. Few doubt that he will win elections next year, though he took issue with critics who said Russians would have no choice in the matter.        

In explaining his decision to seek the presidency again, Mr. Putin admitted that he had not wanted the position when it was offered to him by his predecessor, Boris N. Yeltsin, in 1999, but would &ldquo;take it to a logical conclusion.&rdquo; He likened himself to Franklin D. Roosevelt, who was elected to four terms.        

&ldquo;He ruled the country during the most difficult years of economic depression and the Second World War,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;He was elected four times because he was effective. The number of terms or years was not important.&rdquo;        

Asked about foreign policy, and the so-called reset in relations with the United States and Western Europe, Mr. Putin said that Russia would continue to protect its national interests but was &ldquo;not interested in confrontation.&rdquo;        

During Mr. Putin&rsquo;s first term as president, relations with the West dropped to their lowest point since the cold war. Relations improved under Mr. Medvedev, but some experts predict that Mr. Putin will have to continue along the current course, given Russia&rsquo;s need to keep open Western markets for its energy resources amid deepening economic problems.        

But when one interviewer asked what he thought of a perception in the West that he is a foreign policy hawk, he said, &ldquo;A hawk is a very nice bird.&rdquo;        
