
ROKHA, Afghanistan &mdash; As the suicide bombers threaded their way past patchwork farms and snow-dusted mountains here in eastern Afghanistan, they had to stop for directions. It was 4 a.m. and, apparently in need of help finding their target, they pulled up to a police station and asked the overnight guards, Which way to the Americans?        



There was really only one answer: Forward Operating Base Lion, a small roadside outpost that is one of the last vestiges of the United States presence in the stable and fiercely independent Panjshir Valley. After years of the area&rsquo;s being overlooked by insurgents, the war finally found its way here on Saturday morning.        

The five assailants rammed a car loaded with explosives into the base&rsquo;s red front gate and for half an hour in the chilly predawn buffeted the base with rocket-propelled grenades. At least two of the attackers were able to breach the walls, running a few feet inside before being cut down by American and Afghan bullets.        

For the insurgents, the attack was a clear defeat: No Americans were killed or wounded. All five assailants &mdash; whose trip toward the base was recounted by the Afghan provincial intelligence chief &mdash; were killed or blew themselves up.        

But outside the base, Afghans worried that the attack had somehow pierced the inviolability of the Panjshir Valley, a place that in years past had fended off both the Soviets and the Taliban. More important than ripping a hole in the front gate, the attack punctured a belief that the war existed only somewhere else, far from these sheer mountain valleys.        

&ldquo;That&rsquo;s the symbolism they were trying to attack,&rdquo; said Lt. Col. Dan Gajewski, who commands the small military development support team stationed at the base, &ldquo;that Panjshir is a safe, secure place that the Taliban can never get to.&rdquo;        

That image has become an article of faith in a place that was home to Ahmed Shah Massoud, the iconic guerrilla commander who retreated to the Panjshir in 1996 after Taliban fighters overran a wrecked Kabul. As the Taliban consolidated territory across the country, driving many opposition leaders into exile, the resistance here burnished the idea of &ldquo;Free Panjshir.&rdquo;        

Assassinated in September 2001 by suicide bombers from Al Qaeda, Mr. Massoud still permeates the valley, his beatified image smiling down from billboards and posters. They amount to a symbolic message of national unity, but also one of defiance against the Pashtun-anchored Taliban and, perhaps, against any negotiated peace with them.        

The recent assassination of Burhanuddin Rabbani, Afghanistan&rsquo;s chief peace negotiator and a former leader of the anti-Taliban Northern Alliance, strengthened the opposition to peace talks among many Tajiks here and across the country&rsquo;s north, stirring talk &mdash; if not action &mdash; about girding for civil war.        

&ldquo;You have to defend your motherland,&rdquo; said a man named Amrudin, whose brother is a security guard at the base. &ldquo;You have to arm yourself. You have to take up weapons.&rdquo;        

As in many Taliban attacks, Afghan civilians were collateral damage on the outskirts of the base. Two Afghan civilians who had been sitting in a parked truck, waiting to make a delivery to the base, were killed as the firefight erupted. It was unclear who fired the shots that killed them.        

Hours after the attack, the grisly chore of cleaning up was in full swing. The Afghan police hauled away the twisted metal wreckage of the bombed-out Toyota 4x4. American soldiers gathered bodies, taking fingerprints and digital images of the attackers.        

It was hardly a regular day&rsquo;s work for the soldiers stationed here.        

The Americans built roads and schools in Panjshir, but never needed to do much fighting against a Tajik-dominated population that largely welcomed the overthrow of the Taliban.        

Only three members of the NATO-led coalition have been killed here in the last decade, two of them gunned down this summer in a shootout after an argument with a bodyguard for Afghanistan&rsquo;s spy agency. And apart from an occasional rocket-propelled grenade, Saturday&rsquo;s attack was the only major assault on the base since it opened six years ago, NATO officials said.        

Questions of blame were already coursing through conversations outside the base. How had well-armed attackers slipped through one of the few roadside checkpoints into the Panjshir, where cars are inspected and visitors registered? Were the Taliban&rsquo;s claims of responsibility for the attack credible? Were there more to come?        

&ldquo;The attacks are increasing,&rdquo; said Mohammed Kabir, the acting police chief of the province&rsquo;s Unaba district. &ldquo;If this keeps up, people will turn against the government. They are not paying attention to security.&rdquo;        

This summer, Panjshir assumed formal responsibility for its own security as part of the slow transition to Afghan-controlled security. With 33,000 American troops set to leave before the end of next year, it is quite possible that the few American soldiers here will not be replaced when their tour expires.        

The withdrawal and drumbeat of insurgent attacks raise anxiety across Afghanistan, but here, they also spur a call to arms with men like Khalil Ulam, a retired mujahid who said he had fought the Soviets and Taliban.        

&ldquo;We are ready to fight them anytime,&rdquo; he said, as he surveyed the detritus of the attack. &ldquo;We are ready to defend our province.&rdquo;        
Mokhtar Amiri contributed reporting.
