
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; A big battle may be shaping up in southern Somalia between the Kenyan military, which took the unusual step of sending hundreds of soldiers into Somalia over the weekend, and the Shabab militant group, a ruthless franchise of Al Qaeda that vowed Monday to attack Kenya in retaliation.        

Kenyan military officials sought to reassure the public that they were on guard for reprisal suicide bombings in Kenya&rsquo;s capital, Nairobi, the business hub of East Africa and a well-traveled tourist spot.        

Kenyan officials also implied that their military operation might be far more ambitious than the originally stated goal &mdash; simply pushing the Shabab back from the Kenya-Somalia border &mdash; and that Kenyan troops were prepared to go as far as Kismayo, a Shabab stronghold about 100 miles up the Indian Ocean coast.        

&ldquo;We want to create an environment that&rsquo;s good for the T.F.G.,&rdquo; said a Kenyan military official, Maj. Emmanuel Chirchir, referring to the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, a weak and fractious authority that has struggled to impose order. &ldquo;If that means going all the way to Kismayo, we are ready.&rdquo;        

The Shabab, in turn, have vowed to hit back.        

&ldquo;The Kenyan government does not know war!&rdquo; a Shabab spokesman, Sheik Ali Mohamud Rage, warned Monday. &ldquo;We know what war is. War is destruction, displacement, and your tall buildings will be immediately brought to the ground.&rdquo;        

He said that the Shabab would attack Kenya unless Kenyan troops immediately withdrew and that Kenyan planes had already bombed the Shabab, killing many civilians. Kenyan officials deflected questions on Monday, saying they were not ready yet to discuss details of their operations.        

According to witnesses, Shabab fighters were streaming out of Kismayo toward Afmadow, a small town near Kenya. Hundreds of Kenyan soldiers, backed up by tanks and helicopters, were also headed there.        

But heavy rains seemed to be limiting movement on both sides. That patch of southern Somalia has almost no paved roads, and when the ground is wet, it turns into gluey mud.        

Kenyan officials revealed on Monday that they had already taken some casualties in the operations, which Major Chirchir said involved up to 3,000 Kenyan troops, some based along the border and some in Somalia. A Kenyan helicopter crashed on Sunday night near the Kenyan border town of Liboi, killing all five people on board. Major Chirchir said the cause was &ldquo;mechanical malfunctioning,&rdquo; not enemy fire.        

&ldquo;There are no Shabab in that area,&rdquo; he said, adding that in the past few days the Kenyan military and Somali militias loosely allied with the transitional government had pushed the Shabab back 40 miles from the border.        

For years, Kenya has followed a decidedly mild foreign policy, often playing peacemaker in its neighbors&rsquo; civil wars. While Uganda, Rwanda, Ethiopia and Tanzania have intervened in African conflicts, Kenya, save for a few covert operations in Somalia, has stayed out of the combat.        

Many Kenyans are now worried that their country may be playing with fire by so openly attacking a notorious terrorist group that has slaughtered countless people in Somalia and grimly demonstrated last year in bombings in Uganda that it can attack abroad. Kenya&rsquo;s security service gets millions of dollars each year in training and support from the American and British governments, but it is widely known for being corrupt and disorganized.        

Kenyan officials have justified the push into Somalia by blaming the Shabab for a recent wave of kidnappings in Kenya, though many independent analysts believe that the culprits are not Shabab fighters but bandits or pirate gangs with considerable experience abducting foreigners and ransoming them for millions of dollars. In a statement Monday, the Shabab denied that they were responsible for the latest kidnappings.        

Some analysts have wondered if the United States nudged Kenya into these operations, because something seems to have persuaded Kenyan officials to abandon their reluctance to get dragged into Somalia. American forces have killed several Shabab leaders in airstrikes, and American officials have blamed the Shabab&rsquo;s draconian, anti-Western policies, including barring Western aid groups, for causing the famine in southern Somalia.        

Kenya&rsquo;s leading newspapers have enthusiastically endorsed the military operations.        

&ldquo;By the abductions, the militias have declared war on Kenya,&rdquo; said an editorial in The Standard, &ldquo;and we must reserve the right to defend our sovereignty and territorial integrity.&rdquo;        

The Sunday Nation called the Shabab &ldquo;rebels without a cause.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;There is no greater external threat to Kenya&rsquo;s stability than the al Shabab, a loose gathering of radical extremists and rootless youth,&rdquo; The Sunday Nation said. &ldquo;This will not be an easy fight.&rdquo;        
Mohamed Ibrahim contributed reporting from Mogadishu, Somalia.
