
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; Kenyan officials made a surprise visit to Somalia on Tuesday to reassure the weak Somali government that Kenya was not harboring intentions to occupy Somalia, despite sending hundreds of troops across the border over the weekend.        

Meanwhile, a suicide bomber blew up a car outside a government building in Mogadishu, Somalia&rsquo;s capital, in the afternoon, killing at least three people.        

Many Somalis are unhappy that Kenya sent hundreds of its troops streaming across the border over the weekend to fight the Shabab, a militant Islamist group, in Somali territory. It was not clear how much Kenya told the transitional government about its plans; as late as Monday night, several high-ranking Somali officials were still publicly denying that there were any Kenyan soldiers inside their country.        

&ldquo;It was embarrassing, and undermined our credibility,&rdquo; one Somali official said of the situation. &ldquo;The Kenyans didn&rsquo;t tell us much.&rdquo;        

Kenya has been involved &mdash; or as some say, has meddled &mdash; in the internal politics of Somalia for years. It has convened various reconciliation conferences and, more recently, has covertly trained and armed clan-based militias along the Kenya-Somalia border.        

Even so, the incursion that began over the weekend, with attacks by helicopters, artillery and tanks against militant positions, is the farthest Kenyan forces have ventured into Somalia in decades. In the 1960s, Kenya sent troops across the border during a conflict known as the Shifta War, which pitted Somali irredentists against Kenyan security forces and arose from the widely held belief among Somalis that northeastern Kenya, which is populated predominantly by ethnic Somalis, actually belongs to Somalia.        

Many Somalis remain suspicious of Kenya.        

&ldquo;If the Kenyans want to protect their people against the Shabab, they should protect their borders inside Kenya, not inside Somalia,&rdquo; Mohamed Hassan, a land surveyor in Mogadishu, said on Tuesday. &ldquo;Our country is not a no man&rsquo;s land. Kenya is invading us to occupy these regions.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mohamed said the Kenyan incursion would play straight into the hands of the Shabab because young Somalis might join the group to fight what they see as foreign aggression.        

The Kenyan government has been working hand in hand with clan-based Somali militias along the border, but those militias have expressed only tepid support for the transitional government, which has control over only a few square miles of the capital. What unites all these forces right now is antipathy toward the Shabab, a ruthless group that has become Al Qaeda&rsquo;s franchise in East Africa. The Shabab have detonated countless suicide bombs and are blocking Western aid agencies at a time of famine. The Kenyans have blamed the Shabab for a recent wave of kidnappings inside Kenya and used the kidnappings as a pretext for their military action, even though most independent analysts believe that the abductions were actually the work of Somali pirate gangs and bandits, not Shabab fighters.        

On Tuesday, the Somali government signed a communiqu&eacute; with the visiting Kenyan delegation, emphasizing that the Shabab were a mortal threat to both countries.        

&ldquo;The recent spate of blatant attacks is indicative of a changed strategy by Al Shabab calculated to terrorize civilians,&rdquo; the communiqu&eacute; read.        

Kenya and Somalia will work closely together in the future, the communiqu&eacute; said, to &ldquo;defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of both countries.&rdquo;        

No Kenyans were hurt in the bombing on Tuesday, whose target was a government building more than a mile from where the meetings were taking place.        

The Shabab withdrew from most neighborhoods of Mogadishu in August, but seem to be regrouping near the Kenyan border, where the transitional government has little sway. Many analysts are worried about the next looming fight if the Shabab are defeated, and they predict that the militias that have been armed by Kenya against the Shabab may turn to fighting one another. Already, several skirmishes have broken out among the anti-Shabab militias.        

Heavy rains have slowed the eastward advance of the Kenyan troops toward Shabab-controlled areas. The region has few paved roads, and in the rainy season the ground turns to sticky mud. Still, local villagers in famine-stricken southern Somalia welcome the rains and say they are essential for survival.        
Mohamed Ibrahim contributed reporting from Mogadishu, Somalia.
