
The Rev. Boon Lin Ngeo, a Malaysian Protestant pastor whose message of tolerance for homosexuals has drawn fire in his country, sat with his male partner on a lime-green sofa inside the Office of the City Clerk in New York on a late summer day, where they waited their turn to be married.        

The banality of the scene &mdash; the plastic-sealed bouquets, the bureaucratic march of couples through the office &mdash; masked the roiling effect that Mr. Ngeo&rsquo;s nuptials have had in Malaysia, where Muslims are a majority and sodomy, even among consenting adults, remains a crime punishable by as many as 20 years in prison.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m nobody here,&rdquo; he said in New York, where same-sex marriage became legal in June, &ldquo;but this marriage could have a global impact.&rdquo;        

While prosecutions in Malaysia under the sodomy law are rare, they are not unheard of. The leader of the country&rsquo;s political opposition, Anwar Ibrahim, is facing sodomy charges for the second time in what he has called a politically motivated trial.        

Advocates for gay rights say that even if such legal threats are remote, many Malaysians remain afraid to come out publicly for fear of religious condemnation, choosing instead to survive in a conservative society by remaining in the shadows.        

But in recent years, Mr. Ngeo, 41, and others have encouraged gay Malaysians to let a little more light seep in, tentatively pushing the boundaries of what is acceptable.        

One group, Sexuality Merdeka, created an annual festival in 2008 celebrating sexuality in all its forms. Last year, it encouraged Malaysians to post videos online proclaiming their sexuality, in a campaign modeled on the American &ldquo;It Gets Better&rdquo; video project combating the bullying of gays. The organization received 15 submissions, but posted only 5 before stopping because of a backlash that included death threats.        

For his part, Mr. Ngeo has used his platform &mdash; he is a well-known Chinese-language writer and newspaper columnist in Malaysia &mdash; to push for greater rights by shining a spotlight on his own relationship. He came out publicly in a memoir in 2006, and has traveled to Kuala Lumpur several times with his partner of two years, Phineas Newborn III.        

Even the date of their marriage at the City Clerk&rsquo;s office was chosen to draw attention. They were married by a justice of the peace on Aug. 31, the Malaysian independence day.        

Government officials and conservative newspapers in Malaysia appeared happy to respond, lashing out at Mr. Ngeo when the wedding plans were announced. &ldquo;Day by day, we see various attempts to destroy our value system and Pastor Ou is doing it in the open,&rdquo; a columnist wrote in the conservative daily, Utusan Malaysia, referring to Mr. Ngeo by his Chinese name, Ou Yang Weng Feng.        

The couple plan to celebrate their marriage in the winter with a large banquet at a restaurant in Kuala Lumpur, a move likely to further inflame conservative sentiment in the country.        

Of course, some gay people live openly in Malaysia, especially in Kuala Lumpur and other cities. In an interview in New York, where he now lives, Mr. Ngeo said he had noticed changes in the country and counted it as a success that newspapers in Malaysia were reporting on homosexuality when they reported about him. &ldquo;At least now they articulate the word &lsquo;homosexual&rsquo; in the newspaper,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Before they just ignored it.&rdquo;        

He has been working with the Metropolitan Community Church, a global organization with congregations in 23 countries that welcome lesbian, gay and transgender worshipers. Along with a former Baptist minister, the Rev. Joe Pang, he has been developing a safe gathering place in Kuala Lumpur. Christians make up about 9 percent of the Malaysian population, where the right to freedom of religion is enshrined in the country&rsquo;s Constitution, though religious tensions have occasionally flared.        
J. David Goodman reported from New York, and Liz Gooch from Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
