
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton pledged political and economic support for Libya&rsquo;s transitional government on Tuesday, even as a senior administration official warned that Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and his loyalists remained &ldquo;a lethal nuisance&rdquo; who could stall the country&rsquo;s evolution.        

Mrs. Clinton, the Obama administration&rsquo;s most ardent champion of the NATO-led intervention, arrived here from Malta aboard an American military jet shortly after noon and was greeted by a phalanx of uniformed fighters, part of an irregular militia that now controls Tripoli&rsquo;s airport.        

They chanted &ldquo;God is great&rdquo; and raised their hands in signs of victory.        

&ldquo;I am proud to stand here on the soil of a free Libya,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said at an Islamic conference center in the capital after meeting with the country&rsquo;s interim leaders, including the chairman of the Transitional National Council, Mustafa Abdel-Jalil.        

Mrs. Clinton raised a host of issues with Mr. Abdel-Jalil and other Libyan officials, including the consolidation of political control, the prevention of violence against Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s supporters and the integration of myriad rebel militias into a new security structure.        

&ldquo;Not all of the militias have yet come on board,&rdquo; said a senior official traveling with Mrs. Clinton. &ldquo;More are. More still need to come.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Clinton is the highest-ranking American official to visit Libya since the fall of Tripoli two months ago, the climax of a conflict in which the Obama administration went to some lengths to play down American involvement. She is the first secretary of state to visit Libya since Condoleezza Rice in 2008, during a thaw in the Qaddafi government&rsquo;s international isolation.        

&ldquo;Now the hard part begins,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton told Libya&rsquo;s interim prime minister, Mahmoud Jibril, when she greeted him on the steps of the conference hall.        

The United States has contributed $135 million in assistance to Libya&rsquo;s new leaders since February, including humanitarian aid and military equipment &mdash; though not weapons, which France, Qatar and other nations have supplied. Mrs. Clinton promised more help on Tuesday, including medical equipment and treatment in the United States for some of the most gravely wounded fighters, educational and cultural exchanges and a project with Oberlin College in Ohio to help preserve ancient ruins at Cyrene.        

Mrs. Clinton said the relatively meager amount of new assistance reflected not only fiscal austerity at home &mdash; she told Mr. Jibril that such aid faced deep opposition in Congress &mdash; but also the fact that oil-rich Libya needed expertise more than cash to rebuild its society and economy after four decades under Colonel Qaddafi.        

One of the largest pieces of the aid &mdash; $40 million &mdash; involves expanding the search for mobile antiaircraft rockets in an effort to keep them out of terrorists&rsquo; hands after they were looted from Libya&rsquo;s arsenals. The United States has sent 14 civilian contractors to join the hunt for the missiles, which, along with sealed stockpiles of chemical weapons, are among the most worrisome aspects of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s fall.        

Mrs. Clinton arrived a day after the interim government said it had taken control of Bani Walid, a loyalist enclave in the desert south of Tripoli. The anti-Qaddafi forces had been stalled for weeks at the approach in a valley dominated by loyalist positions on the hills above the city.        

On Tuesday, though, anti-Qaddafi fighters celebrated in one of the town&rsquo;s squares, near an electric utility building that appeared to have been flattened by an airstrike. Commanders said they had captured hundreds of fighters during an assault on Sunday. Many more had fled, along with most of Bani Walid&rsquo;s residents.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s like a city of ghosts,&rdquo; said Hatem Dwaik, a fighter from Tripoli.        

With no one to stop them, some former rebels looted and burned houses, as they have in other loyalist towns. New cars could be seen being carted out of town on the back of trucks. A transitional government official, Abdulhakim Momen, said several of the houses he owned in the city had been looted.        

&ldquo;We are sorry for this,&rdquo; Mr. Momen said. &ldquo;It is a few people. There are honorable freedom fighters.&rdquo;        
Kareem Fahim contributed reporting from Bani Walid, Libya.
