
CAIRO &mdash; An exclusive interview by Egyptian state television with Sgt. First Class Gilad Shalit of Israel&nbsp; &mdash; fresh from captivity, and before he had seen his family &mdash; provoked strong but polar opposite reactions on both sides of the Israel-Egypt border.        

Israelis blasted the station for putting an obviously exhausted captive into the spotlight and fishing for compliments for Egypt, while Egyptians criticized the broadcaster for focusing on the Israeli captive instead of on the hundreds of Palestinians being released.        

Both state television and the journalist herself defended the roughly 10-minute interview as an exclusive that any news organization would have sought.        

&ldquo;When a scoop like this comes our way, should we leave it?&rdquo; asked Khaled Mehanna, the director of news for state television. &ldquo;From a professional point of view, when we get the opportunity to interview a person of whom there have only been a few pictures before in the media, shouldn&rsquo;t we seize this opportunity?&rdquo;        

The interview was not a condition for Sergeant Shalit&rsquo;s release, said Shahira Amin, the reporter who conducted it. Ms. Amin said she had asked the minister of information if it would be possible and he passed on the request to the military and intelligence officials handling the release, who authorized it at the last minute. Nevertheless, Ms. Amin said she had still made a point of asking Sergeant Shalit if she could talk to him briefly.        

&ldquo;If he had said no, I would not have forced him into it,&rdquo; she said. She did say in Arabic during the exchange that she was skipping questions because he was so visibly tired.        

Sergeant Shalit, wearing a blue checked shirt, was interviewed in English but answered in Hebrew through a translator. He struggled frequently, his face gaunt and his head lolling from side to side. The interview was not broadcast live, but was put on the air as soon as he was headed back to Israel, with virtually no editing, Ms. Amin said.        

Ire in Israel focused mostly on the fact that she asked why he thought Egyptian mediation had succeeded where others had failed, and whether he was planning to work for the release of about 4,000 more Palestinians in Israeli jails. (The answers: Egypt had good relations with both sides. He would, as long as former prisoners did not fight Israel again.)        

&ldquo;For heaven&rsquo;s sake, mediation efforts have been ongoing for how many years and none of them have succeeded,&rdquo; Ms. Amin said. &ldquo;This was a success &mdash; Shalit is out, and that is a positive outcome. Give credit where credit is due.&rdquo;        

Ms. Amin, who is 52 and is famous in Egypt for quitting state television in February over its support for the continued rule of President Hosni Mubarak, said she also wanted to emphasize that there are still thousands of Palestinians behind bars in Israel.        

She speculated that the Ministry of Information was eager to have the interview because the state-run news agency had been heavily criticized all year, especially in recent weeks when it was accused of inciting mobs to attack mostly Christian protesters in the riots on Oct. 9 that left 27 people dead.        

But it seemed to have exactly the opposite effect on Egyptian viewers, at least those who commented on the channel&rsquo;s Web site. Some echoed the common complaint among Arabs that Sergeant Shalit, although an armed soldier, was treated as an individual while the Palestinian prisoners were lumped together as a mob.        

&ldquo;What is this bizarre act?&rdquo; wrote one man. &ldquo;Our media is boasting about its exclusive interview with the soldier of those who kill our soldiers? When will we change?&rdquo;        

Others said Egyptian television should have given the same spotlight to a released Palestinian. Ms. Amin defended state television, saying it had put a couple of cameras on the buses ferrying the prisoners home.        

But the bulk of the comments lauded Egypt&rsquo;s role in mediating the exchange.        

Safwat el-Alim, a professor of political media at Cairo University, said that state television never missed a chance to promote Egypt, however inappropriate, and that doing so would outweigh any consideration that interviewing Sergeant Shalit while he undoubtedly felt he was still in captivity would not necessarily elicit honest answers.        

&ldquo;State television looks for political propaganda in any situation to support Egypt&rsquo;s policies, even if the situation does not require that,&rdquo; he said.        
Heba Afify contributed reporting.
