
MOSCOW &mdash; Belarus has begun releasing opposition political figures in what appears to be a last-minute attempt to mollify European leaders who are preparing to impose sanctions this week against the nation&rsquo;s president, Aleksandr G. Lukashenko, and his government.        

At least seven opposition leaders imprisoned after a large antigovernment protest last month have been freed in recent days, according to family members and the Belarussian news media. Among them was Vladimir Neklyaev, a former presidential candidate, who was whisked to prison directly from his hospital bed after being beaten unconscious during a crackdown that followed the presidential election in December.        

Irina Khalip, a respected investigative journalist, was also freed, though her husband, Andrei Sannikov, another former presidential candidate, remained in jail. The authorities had threatened to take custody of Ms. Khalip&rsquo;s 3-year-old son, Danil, but backed down.        

The security services, still called the K.G.B. in Belarus, a former Soviet republic, have placed Ms. Khalip and Mr. Neklyaev under house arrest, keeping them under 24-hour surveillance.        

The European Union is expected to complete plans this week on sanctions, including travel bans and asset freezes against Mr. Lukashenko and dozens of other officials. European leaders said that only the unconditional release of all those jailed after the elections could avert the sanctions.        

Three former presidential candidates are among the two dozen or so opposition leaders who remain in jail. They face up to 15 years in prison for their roles in organizing the protest after the elections on Dec. 19.        

As the polls closed that day, thousands of people angered over Mr. Lukashenko&rsquo;s victory converged on a central square in Minsk, the capital, calling for the president&rsquo;s ouster. Mr. Lukashenko, a former collective farm boss who has ruled Belarus for 16 years, won with almost 80 percent of the vote, though independent observers documented widespread fraud.        

Mr. Lukashenko said the protest, which was mostly nonviolent, was an attempt, backed by the Western powers, to overthrow his government, charges that European leaders said were absurd.        

Last week, Mr. Lukashenko appeared to mock European officials, telling them to stay out of his country&rsquo;s affairs and almost daring them to impose sanctions.        

&ldquo;Are you trying to frighten me with sanctions? Well God be with you,&rdquo; he said, in remarks posted on his Web site. &ldquo;I have lived under visa restrictions for probably 10 years and am still alive and well.&rdquo;        

Still, he said, he remained open to talks and a possible compromise.        

The United States and the European Union have employed various tools to pressure Mr. Lukashenko to ease his grip over the years. Sanctions against the president and his government have won the release of political prisoners in the past.        

Looking somewhat disheveled, but otherwise upbeat, Mr. Neklyaev, a poet and leader of the Tell the Truth movement, arrived at his apartment in Minsk on Saturday evening after spending nearly six weeks in jail.        

&ldquo;Good evening, everyone; I&rsquo;m glad that you&rsquo;ve come,&rdquo; he said as he dashed past applauding supporters and through the front door of his building, as documented in a video posted to the Web site of Radio Liberty&rsquo;s Belarussian service.        

Though out of prison, Mr. Neklyaev and the others are hardly free. They still face lengthy prison terms and are under heavy surveillance.        

Lyutsina Khalip, the mother of Irina Khalip, the freed journalist, said her daughter was practically imprisoned at home. &ldquo;She is not allowed to speak with anyone, no one is allowed to come over, she is not allowed to speak on the phone,&rdquo; Lyutsina Khalip said.        

In addition, two K.G.B. agents are stationed inside the apartment at all times, she said. It was unclear whether the authorities planned to release Irina Khalip&rsquo;s husband, Mr. Sannikov, or any others still in jail.        

For now, Lyutsina Khalip said, her daughter was making up for lost time with her son, who she said was &ldquo;completely overjoyed.&rdquo;        
