
BANGKOK &mdash; Thousands of Thai soldiers and volunteers worked on Wednesday to strengthen Bangkok&rsquo;s flood defenses as water surged to the edges of the city, two days after officials proclaimed that the worst was over.        

The governor of Bangkok, Sukhumbhand Paribatra, called for more than a million additional sandbags to be filled, and warned during the day that seven districts in northern and eastern Bangkok were at risk.        

His warning contrasted with earlier remarks by government officials that the flooding threat to the city had eased. Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra, who had offered a series of reassuring statements, said Wednesday that her government was stretched to its limits.        

&ldquo;Today I will frankly tell you the truth,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;We haven&rsquo;t hidden anything from the public. I have left no stone unturned in this crisis, but I cannot solve it alone. I need cooperation from all sides.&rdquo;        

In a sign that the threat to Bangkok had outstripped officials&rsquo; expectations, some evacuation sites were themselves being evacuated or prepared to evacuate as the Chao Phraya River threatened to top its banks.        

Thailand is experiencing its worst flooding in half a century. As rivers and streams have filled to overflowing with heavy seasonal rains, operators of dams have been forced to release water downstream. Floodwaters have inundated some northern cities, forcing tens of thousands from their homes and taking the lives of more than 300 people.        

As the waters have surged south toward Bangkok, where the Chao Phraya empties into the ocean, at least 10 percent of the country&rsquo;s rice fields have been ruined, according to Thai news media reports, and at least 1,000 factories closed, many of them owned by foreign companies or suppliers to them. Estimates of the economic toll have risen to as high as $3 billion. The country&rsquo;s commerce minister, Kittirat Na Ranong, said Wednesday that the government would need to invest hundreds of billions of baht, or billions of dollars, to repair the damage and rebuild investors&rsquo; confidence in Thai industry.        

&ldquo;The government will have to increase the budget deficit to help entrepreneurs who have been affected by the floods,&rdquo; Mr. Kittirat said. &ldquo;Moreover, commercial banks should help their customers to avoid problems with bad debt.&rdquo;        

As the crisis has mounted, the response has become tangled in politics, with rival ministers sometimes issuing contradictory directives and warnings. Mr. Sukhumbhand, the Bangkok governor, pleaded with city residents to &ldquo;listen to me and me alone&rdquo; because, he said, he had no further political ambitions. &ldquo;Please believe me and only me,&rdquo; he said.        

Floodwaters approaching the capital have surged close to Bangkok&rsquo;s two airports, although officials say the airports themselves are safe.        

Soldiers and volunteers stacked sandbags six feet high along the river bank in the Sai Mai district on the northern edge of the city on Wednesday. Touring the area, Korn Chatikavanij, a former finance minister, said: &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t think there will be mass flooding of northern Bangkok in the way we saw in other provinces. Inner Bangkok is even more safe.&rdquo;        
Poypiti Amatatham contributed reporting.
