
CAIRO &mdash; Andrea Bosch had been waiting for hours Sunday at Cairo International Airport for a flight to whisk her and her young daughters away from the maelstrom that Egypt&rsquo;s capital had become.        

The planes were ready, but few crews could be assembled to fly them.        

&ldquo;They said it was a combination of people who couldn&rsquo;t or wouldn&rsquo;t come in today,&rdquo; said Ms. Bosch, 45, an administrator of an education project of the United States Agency for International Development. &ldquo;I can imagine people are home trying to take care of their families.&rdquo;        

The terminals were packed Sunday with crowds of frustrated travelers anxious to flee the country. Some jostled their way to customer service desks, while others sat glumly on top of suitcases or napped in corners and on window sills. At a ground floor gift shop, a line of customers waiting to pay for candy bars and bottles of water stretched out the door. The departures board registered delay after delay.        

Terminal 1 was so crowded that more than a thousand people sat outside on the sidewalks and in the parking lot, surrounded by luggage. Most were not foreign visitors, but Egyptians hoping to escape the turmoil at least temporarily.        

Salma Khalil, 20, a student at the American University, and her mother, Rasha Khodary, 49, had fled a gated suburb west of Cairo after it was attacked by a gang of looters on Saturday night. &ldquo;If we go home, I am not sure we will come back,&rdquo; Ms. Khalil said. Their flight to Syria does not leave until Wednesday, but they decided it was better to sleep at a closed Burger King in the airport for the next three days than to brave the possibility of violence at home.        

The American Embassy announced that, starting Monday, it was organizing chartered flights to evacuate its citizens &ldquo;to safe-haven locations&rdquo; in Europe. It urged Americans in Egypt to &ldquo;consider leaving as soon as they can safely do so.&rdquo; The first flights were expected to take off Monday afternoon, though many American citizens had already found space on charters organized by private companies on Saturday and Sunday.        

An estimated 90,000 Americans live and work in Egypt, most in cities now roiled by antigovernment protests, looting and a military presence that includes tanks and helicopters. By some estimates, 100 people have been killed during the six days of demonstrations.        

Hundreds of expatriates and tourists were stranded in their homes, hotels or at the airport. Mirianna Gaitani, 30, a photographer from Crete who is vacationing in Egypt, said her hotel, the Atel Concorde, had earlier prohibited her and her three friends from leaving because of the tumult on the streets.        

Ms. Bosch was booked on Egypt Air with her daughters, Maya, 12, and Asia, 8, and a Yorkshire terrier, Chauncy, to join her husband in Turin, Italy. Although some &ldquo;random planes&rdquo; were flying, she said, some passengers had been waiting for 48 hours.        

&ldquo;People are just wandering back and forth, and they&rsquo;re running out of food,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;People are serving pizza, but the lines are really long.&rdquo;        

Randi Danforth, 56, an editor for American University in Cairo Press,  has been reluctant to leave, partly because of her cat, Stella, but she booked a flight leaving Wednesday. Until then, she remains in Maadi, a comparatively wealthy suburb south of Cairo where many foreigners and well-off Egyptians live.        

&ldquo;I have been calm and reasonable about everything, but uncertain of what is going to happen long term,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;There have been no demonstrations in Maadi, but what people are concerned about are opportunists and thugs. There are rumors going around of home invasions and looting. In fact, we have seen little of that ourselves.&rdquo;        

Ms. Danforth said tanks were positioned on key roads and that security guards were patrolling her apartment building. The 60 or so residents have been gathering in the garden to trade information. Some neighbors have armed themselves with baseball bats and golf clubs.        

At the airport, Patty Axelsen, 37, another American resident of Maadi, stared sadly at the floor, a small dog in a pet carrier on her lap. Nearby, her husband worked the phone trying to book a flight out.        

&ldquo;We love it here, and it was a very hard decision to leave,&rdquo; she said.        

But as the police vanished from the streets of Cairo on Friday and looters appeared, the city began to feel unfamiliar and frightening, Ms. Axelsen said. She and her daughter Jessica, 16, awoke to a neighborhood transformed, with small fires burning in a street covered with rubble and stones.        

&ldquo;Our building porter and some other guys were guarding our building with sticks and clubs,&rdquo; Ms. Axelsen said. &ldquo;These are just regular guys.&rdquo;        

Tourists were also anxious to get out. Helen McBride, 21, a British backpacker, stood in line at the currency exchange counter with her companion, Neil Brodingan, 31, waiting to turn in her Egyptian pounds before leaving town four weeks ahead of schedule.        

&ldquo;Things were great until a few days ago when the protests started,&rdquo; Mr. Brodingan said. &ldquo;Then we were confined to our hotel room.&rdquo;        

From their hotel in Talaat Harb Square, they could hear gunfire and see gangs of young men armed with clubs and pipes &mdash; some looters, others local youths protecting the neighborhood.        

&ldquo;You couldn&rsquo;t tell who was good and who was bad,&rdquo; Ms. McBride said. &ldquo;And they were not just holding the chains, they were really ready to use them. It was freaky.&rdquo;        
Liam Stack reported from Cairo and Joseph Berger from New York.
