
WASHINGTON &mdash; The United States will resume exploratory talks with North Korea next week in Geneva and has appointed a full-time envoy with a background in nuclear issues, the State Department announced Wednesday.        

The news media in North Korea reported, meanwhile, that the country&rsquo;s leader, Kim Jong-il, made rare comments on the possibility of resuming broader six-nation talks aimed at ending his country&rsquo;s nuclear program.        

The current American representative for North Korea policy, Stephen W. Bosworth, will be replaced by Glyn Davies, the United States ambassador to the International Atomic Energy Agency, said Mark Toner, a State Department spokesman. In the past, Mr. Davies held a senior position in the State Department&rsquo;s Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s important to stress this is a change in personnel, not a change in policy,&rdquo; Mr. Toner said during a regular State Department briefing.        

Indeed, Korea specialists in Washington said that they would not read too much into the departure of Mr. Bosworth, 71, who has divided his time between his Korea duties and his position as dean of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University. But the specialists said that the appointment of a full-time replacement could pave the way for more intensive contacts.        

The Geneva talks, set for Monday and Tuesday, will include both men as well as a North Korean counterpart, Kim Kye-gwan. It was his meeting with Mr. Bosworth in New York in July that offered an initial sign of modest warming in diplomatic relations after the bitter chill produced by the North&rsquo;s continued nuclear activities, its testing of long-range missiles and the lethal shelling of a South Korean island, as well as the sinking of a South Korean naval vessel, which the South said was attacked by the North.        

Kim Jong-il&rsquo;s comments on the broader six-nation talks were included in remarks he made about his government&rsquo;s nuclear program; in content, they simply restated the North&rsquo;s well-known conditions for the resumption of the talks, involving both Koreas, the United States, Russia, China and Japan. Those talks collapsed in 2008 in a dispute over how thoroughly North Korea should reveal its nuclear activities and subject its nuclear facilities to outside inspections.        

&ldquo;Our principal position remains unchanged: that the six-way talks should be quickly resumed without preconditions,&rdquo; Mr. Kim said in a written interview with Itar-Tass of Russia, according to the North&rsquo;s official Korean Central News Agency. It was the reclusive North Korean leader&rsquo;s third known interview with the foreign news media.        

Mr. Kim said that his government remained committed to the 2005 agreement setting up the six-nation talks, in which the North vowed to give up its nuclear assets in return for economic aid and a peace treaty and diplomatic ties with Washington.        

That seemed almost to anticipate a remark by Mr. Toner, the State Department spokesman, who said that the Geneva talks were &ldquo;a continuation of the exploratory meetings to determine if North Korea is prepared to fulfill its commitments under the 2005 joint statement of the six-party talks and its nuclear, international, obligations, as well as take concrete steps toward denuclearization.&rdquo;        

Since six-party talks ended, North Korea has detonated a nuclear device and tested a long-range rocket that may one day be able to carry nuclear warheads. It also revealed an industrial-scale uranium enrichment plant, and it has increased hostilities with South Korea.        

That has left policy makers in Washington and Seoul with few options: engaging North Korea in talks, even though it may use them to try to extract more economic concessions without giving up its nuclear weapons; or avoiding talks, risking a runaway North Korean nuclear program and more military tension on the Korean Peninsula.        

A concern has been that North Korea would try again to manipulate differences in the interests of the other countries in the talks to its advantage. But at this point, any differences are probably between China and Russia on the one side, and the United States, South Korea and Japan on the other, according to Jonathan D. Pollack, an East Asia specialist at the Brookings Institution.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s fair to say that there have been some heightened pressures, particularly coming from the Chinese and the Russians, beseeching us to explore talks with North Korea again,&rdquo; Mr. Pollack said.        

On Wednesday, a senior Obama administration official said, &ldquo;If we don&rsquo;t engage, that could result in miscalculations by the North Koreans.&rdquo; The official, traveling with Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton in Afghanistan, spoke anonymously under diplomatic protocol.        

Mr. Kim also repeated his government&rsquo;s longstanding position that the denuclearization of the &ldquo;whole&rdquo; Korean Peninsula was a dying wish of his father, Kim Il-sung, the North&rsquo;s founder.        

He said North Korea wanted to improve ties with the United States and Japan, but only if they abandoned their &ldquo;hostile policy&rdquo; toward North Korea. &ldquo;We built our nuclear deterrent to protect our sovereignty in the face of the United States&rsquo; blatant nuclear threats and its escalating hostile policy,&rdquo; Mr. Kim was quoted as saying.        

The United States, South Korea and Japan have been closely coordinating North Korea policy. After the sinking of the South Korean ship, the Cheonan, in March 2010, the United States bolstered the South by staging naval exercises in the Yellow Sea to deter the North. President Lee Myung-bak of South Korea, who has taken a tough line on North Korea, visited President Obama in Washington last week and signaled close agreement regarding the North. And in a visit on Wednesday to Seoul, Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda of Japan and Mr. Lee expressed similar unity, saying they would work closely on the North&rsquo;s illegal nuclear weapons program.        

Meanwhile, easing obstacles to incremental diplomatic moves, Mr. Lee has dropped a demand that North Korea apologize for the sinking of the Cheonan &mdash; for which the North denies responsibility &mdash; before North-South talks can be resumed.        
Brian Knowlton reported from Washington, and Choe Sang-hun from Seoul, South Korea. Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Kabul, Afghanistan.
