
MITZPE HILA, Israel &mdash; The release of Gilad Shalit took years of delicate negotiations at the top levels of the Israeli government and the Hamas militant group. But it also required an extraordinary campaign by his parents, Noam and Aviva Shalit, to build overwhelming support among Israel&rsquo;s people and its right-leaning government to trade more than 1,000 Palestinian prisoners, some guilty of heinous terrorist killings, for their son.        

Their relentless, attention-grabbing effort, perhaps unprecedented for Israel in its scope and endurance, transformed all the Shalit family members, including the grandfather Zvi, from quiet and anonymous citizens into household names, and put their barely known village in northern Israel definitively on the media&rsquo;s map.        

Experienced public relations professionals volunteered their services, and the news media rallied to the cause. Popular musicians composed and performed songs about Gilad. Thousands of citizens became dedicated activists participating in demonstrations and marches, staffing protest tents and trying to block buses taking Palestinians to visit relatives in Israeli jails.        

To mark the fifth year since the soldier was seized in a cross-border raid and dragged into captivity in Gaza, local celebrities recently took turns sitting alone for an hour in a simulated cell, their experiences broadcast online.        

The Shalit story gripped Israel, where most youths are conscripted at 18. His image appeared everywhere; broadcasters kept a public count of the number of days he had been in captivity. The army promoted him repeatedly, most recently to sergeant first class. The Shalits were embraced as the Israeli everyfamily, giving human form to the deeply ingrained national ethos to never abandon a soldier in the field.        

&ldquo;It was a very long and difficult struggle, and a unique one,&rdquo; said Tami Shienkman, the Shalit family&rsquo;s spokeswoman for the last four years. &ldquo;We had to keep Gilad in the public consciousness and build him into a national icon.&rdquo;        

On Wednesday, the Shalits published a huge advertisement in the Hebrew newspapers thanking the millions of people in Israel and abroad who supported them.        

&ldquo;Each and every one of you had a part in the success of the struggle,&rdquo; they wrote. &ldquo;Together we brought him home.&rdquo;        

Some supporters made their own indelible marks. In late 2008, two sisters from northern Israel felt the need to do something and set up the protest tent near the prime minister&rsquo;s residence in Jerusalem. Hundreds of people immediately signed up to sit in it for two-hour shifts.        

In June 2010, the Shalits embarked on a 12-day march from their village to Jerusalem. Tens of thousands joined them along the way. They then moved into the protest tent and vowed to spend their days there until their son returned, a pledge they kept.        

Among those celebrating in the streets of Mitzpe Hila late into Tuesday night was Gadi Shabtai, 47, a businessman who last year conducted an arduous nine-day, one-man march for Sergeant Shalit from Rosh Hanikra, on Israel&rsquo;s northern border with Lebanon, to Jerusalem, a 120-mile drive south.        

&ldquo;I have four children who will be going into the army,&rdquo; he explained, adding that he worried that Sergeant Shalit seemed to be slipping from the headlines at the time.        

But even as the prisoner exchange got under way, Israelis were still debating whether it was the public pressure that had pushed the Israeli government into action and led the Shalit saga to a successful end, or whether the unrelenting popular campaign had instead prolonged the captive&rsquo;s suffering, raising his value in the eyes of Hamas and leading the Islamic militant group to believe it should hold out longer for its maximalist demands.        

Mor Tarazi, 41, the chairman of Mitzpe Hila&rsquo;s tiny council, held to the first idea. &ldquo;The campaign had a very significant effect on the prime minister and the government,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We thank the media. It created a consensus in Israel and we saw the results, even in the government, at the moment of truth.&rdquo;        

It could not have worked without Aviva and Noam Shalit, he said, adding, &ldquo;They stood at the vanguard.&rdquo;        

A columnist, Nehemia Shtrasler, concurred, arguing in the liberal newspaper Haaretz last week that without the couple&rsquo;s &ldquo;elegant harassment&rdquo; &mdash; they spent the last 16 months in the tent outside the Israeli prime minister&rsquo;s residence &mdash; and without the popular demonstrations, &ldquo;Gilad Shalit would still be in a Gaza basement.&rdquo;        

However, writing in the same newspaper on Tuesday, the day of the exchange, Yehuda Ben Meir, a public opinion expert at the Institute for National Security Studies in Tel Aviv, posited the opposite: The Israeli government was not swayed by public pressure for a deal at any price, and did in the end manage to wring some crucial concessions from Hamas.        

&ldquo;It is possible,&rdquo; he concluded, &ldquo;that without all the public protest, demonstrations and irresponsible behavior by the media over the years &mdash; which only strengthened Hamas&rsquo;s mistaken feeling that Israel would surrender to all its demands &mdash; Gilad Shalit would have been home a long time ago and for a much lower price.&rdquo;        

Another well-wisher, Zev Taff, 64, from the nearby village of Kfar Vradim, said that the Israeli media &ldquo;certainly had a huge effect both ways,&rdquo; in creating the necessary public pressure for a deal and possibly also raising the expectations of Hamas.        

&ldquo;But when I saw Gilad hug his father and mother today,&rdquo; he said, expressing the feelings of so many Israelis, &ldquo;that made it all worthwhile.&rdquo;        
