
ISTANBUL &mdash; Kurdish militants killed at least 24 Turkish soldiers in an attack near the Iraq border on Wednesday, one of the deadliest strikes in years, and Turkey&rsquo;s military responded by sending hundreds of troops into northern Iraq in a counterattack on Kurdish insurgent hide-outs.        



Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said that Turkish forces were pursuing the attackers, making it clear that his military was crossing the Iraq border, which the Turks have done numerous times in their protracted effort to crush a resilient Kurdish insurgency movement.        

&ldquo;As of now, wide-reaching operations, including hot-pursuit operations, are continuing in the region within the framework of international law,&rdquo; Mr. Erdogan said at a news conference in Ankara. &ldquo;We will combat terror on one front and, on another front, we will continue our path to destroy the grounds that terror manipulates.&rdquo;        

He spoke after having conferred with senior government officials at an emergency meeting about the deadly Kurdish militant attack, which the prime minister&rsquo;s office said had also left at least 18 Turkish soldiers wounded.        

NTV, a private television network, said 600 Turkish ground troops chasing the attackers pushed 2.5 miles into northern Iraq, where the Kurdistan Workers&rsquo; Party, a militant separatist group known as the P.K.K., is based. The group has long battled the Turkish government for autonomy in the predominantly Kurdish southeast.        

Local media also reported Turkish air deployments and artillery fire in the mountainous border area.        

The militant strike, which started in the early hours of Wednesday, mainly in Hakkari Province, lasted for about four hours. It came a day after a blast in Bitlis, another southeastern province, that killed five policemen and three civilians.        

Using unusually harsh language, President Abdullah Gul vowed in an earlier speech that the country would strike back against the Kurdish militants. He had visited military bases in the region only days before.        

&ldquo;They will see that the revenge for these attacks will be massive and much stronger,&rdquo; he said.        

&ldquo;Embracing our own people, being affectionate to our people, protecting rights and law of our people is one thing while struggling against terror without compromise is a joint decision of both our state and the nation,&rdquo; he said.        

President Obama also condemned the Kurdish attack in a statement issued by the White House. &ldquo;The United States will continue our strong cooperation with the Turkish government as it works to defeat the terrorist threat from the P.K.K. and to bring peace, stability and prosperity to all the people of southeast Turkey,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said.        

The top commander in the Turkish Army flew to the region to coordinate the operation on Wednesday, local media reported.        

The attacks came at a time when the country is drafting a new constitution with greater rights for ethnic minorities. The effort is widely perceived as designed to end Kurdish separatist violence that has claimed more than 40,000 lives since the 1980s.        

&ldquo;In today&rsquo;s Turkey when there is a better democracy to respond the Kurdish needs, the P.K.K. terror is no different than Osama bin Laden&rsquo;s terror manipulating Islam in the way it manipulates Kurdish ethnicity,&rdquo; said Ihsan Bal, a security expert at the Ankara-based International Strategic Research Organization.        

The P.K.K. has escalated attacks in recent months in rural and urban areas. The Turkish military has responded with airstrikes and artillery attacks against the group&rsquo;s bases in northern Iraq, killing as many as 160 militants, according to the Turkish military.        

Iraq&rsquo;s foreign minister, Hoshyar Zebari, signaled during an official visit in Ankara last week that the Iraqi Army could join military efforts to eliminate P.K.K. bases in northern Iraq.        

At the same time, however, the Iraqi government, as well as Kurdish officials in the northern Iraq, have expressed concern about unilateral Turkish military interventions in Iraq&rsquo;s territory.        

Laid Abawi, Iraq&rsquo;s deputy foreign minister, said in response to the Turkey military operations on Wednesday that it was still trying to learn details.        

Mr. Abawi said, &ldquo;We are against Turkey violating our borders and we are against the shelling.&rdquo; But he also said, &ldquo;We condemn the armed operations of the P.K.K. in Turkey.&rdquo;        

The United States, along with the European Union and Turkey, list the P.K.K. as a terrorist organization and have shared intelligence with Turkey on the group&rsquo;s movements in northern Iraq since 2007.        

&ldquo;As a friend and ally, the United States will continue to stand with the people and government of Turkey in their fight against the P.K.K., which the United States has officially designated as a terrorist organization,&rdquo; the American ambassador to Ankara, Francis J. Ricciardone Jr., said in a written statement.        
Michael S. Schmidt and Yasir Ghazi contributed reporting from Baghdad, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
