
ASADABAD, Afghanistan &mdash; American and Afghan troops have killed at least 115 insurgents as part of a tough fight to gain control of a critical corridor and resupply route to a key American base in northeastern Afghanistan, according to Afghan and American military officers.        

Civilians in the area, as well as American and Afghan soldiers, described an exceptionally intense fight, which was still going on, in which long-range bombers have flown in from as far away as the Persian Gulf emirate of Qatar, the southern Afghan province of Kandahar and Bagram Air Base outside Kabul, the Afghan capital.        

The Americans have also fired long-range rockets from more than 100 miles away as the troops have struggled to oust large numbers of insurgents who month after month have attacked convoys on the road and dominated much of this corner of Kunar Province.        

&ldquo;We had too many F16s and F15s to count, almost continuous coverage,&rdquo; said Capt. Ron Hopkins, 27, the fire support officer of the Second Battalion, 27th Infantry Regiment, who was in the command center for the fight.        

As parts of the operation were still winding up, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton arrived in Kabul to meet with President Hamid Karzai and other senior figures in the Afghan government to discuss long-term American-Afghan relations and reconciliation with the Taliban, among other subjects.        

Kunar, perhaps more than any other area of the country&rsquo;s northeast, has posed serious problems for American troops, just as it did for the Russians when they occupied the country.        

More Americans have died in Kunar than anywhere else in the country outside of southern Afghanistan.        

The terrain is made up of tall, arid mountains that rise in successive folds, dropping down into narrow, heavily wooded valleys that provide cover for insurgents. Those valleys have been the site of some of the most iconic fighting of the war, including a series of deadly encounters in the Korangal Valley, where more than 40 Americans lost their lives in the five years that the Americans had an outpost there. It was closed in April 2010. Now in Kunar and elsewhere across the country, NATO troops are making an intense effort to weaken insurgents as much as possible before they withdraw and hand over combat outposts and forward operating bases to the Afghan Army.        

The majority of the fighting took place in Ghaziabad and Asmar, two of several districts in Kunar that have become something of a gathering point for large numbers of fighters crossing the border from Pakistan, according to Afghan Army officers.        

&ldquo;Our greatest concentration has been on Ghaziabad District, where we believe the Taliban have built their bases and strongholds,&rdquo; said Col. Mohammed Numan Atifi, a spokesman for the Afghan National Army&rsquo;s 201st Corps.        

&ldquo;Our aim is to destroy their bases and their stations in these areas,&rdquo; he said.        

Master Sgt. Nicholas Conner, a spokesman with Regional Command East, said the recent fight was a joint operation with the Afghan National Security Forces.        

&ldquo;The A.N.S.F. was definitely in the lead on this, and the coalition was in a supporting role,&rdquo; he said.        

The enormous air power, however, was provided by the Americans. In addition to the bombers and long-range rockets, they employed a heavily armed plane, the AC-130, which the insurgents have described as &ldquo;the death plane,&rdquo; Captain Hopkins said.        

As the fighting raged, four children under the age of 6, all from one family, were killed when their rural compound came under fire, said their aunt and grandmother, who were caring for the family&rsquo;s survivors at the public hospital here in Asadabad, the provincial capital.        

Two of the survivors, Nadia, 5, and her brother, Matay, 8, had burns over 35 percent of their bodies and were bandaged from head to toe.        

Shrapnel badly cut the feet and ankles of an aunt, Zakira, 22, who lived with them in the compound. As she lay stiffly in her hospital bed, Zakira described days of fighting in which the sound of fire reverberated off the mountains.        

&ldquo;The first day, the noise was very loud and we were afraid, but thought it would be over soon,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;But it kept on, and then five days ago, it was just before lunch, there was so much firing and a round landed in our compound and exploded.&rdquo;        

NATO is investigating the deaths, Sergeant Conner said. Before the assault on the compound, Afghan and American soldiers saw women and children leaving the town, Shal, soldiers involved in the fight said.        

&ldquo;Coalition troops engaged insurgent firing from a house,&rdquo; Sergeant Conner said. &ldquo;At the time, they assessed no civilians in the area. The insurgents, especially in the Kunar area, have developed the tactic of attacking coalition troops, then producing &lsquo;civilian&rsquo; casualties later with the claim that we did it.&rdquo;        

The United Nations office here said its initial inquiry showed that civilians had died.        

&ldquo;Our preliminary investigation indicates that four children were killed and six others injured,&rdquo; said Georgette Gagnon, the director of human rights for the United Nations&rsquo; Afghanistan office. She welcomed the NATO investigation.        
Mimi Wells contributed reporting from Forward Operating Base Bostick in Kunar Province, Afghanistan, and Ray Rivera from Kabul.
