
ATHENS &mdash; After a day of violent demonstrations against government cutbacks, Greek Socialist lawmakers on Thursday gave their final approval to a raft of tough new austerity measures, taking a critical step toward securing crucial foreign aid and averting a default.        

The measures &mdash; including additional wage cuts, pension cuts, layoffs for public sector workers and changes to collective bargaining rules to make it easier to hire and fire &mdash; were passed on Thursday night with the support of all but one of the governing Socialist party&rsquo;s 154 legislators.        

Earlier in the day, a demonstration that started out peacefully devolved into violent skirmishes. For the first time in recent memory, demonstrators hurled firebombs not at the police but at one another, as anarchists apparently battled a pro-Communist group.        

In a striking defection among the Socialists, Louka Katseli, a party stalwart and former labor minister, voted against a controversial element in the bill on collective bargaining, defying government warnings that rejection of any provisions of the legislation could jeopardize the release of rescue financing on which the country&rsquo;s solvency depends.        

A letter from Prime Minister George A. Papandreou, which was read out in Parliament after the vote, said that Ms. Katseli had been expelled from the party, narrowing to 153 the Socialists&rsquo; majority in the 300-seat House.        

Ahead of Thursday&rsquo;s vote, Mr. Papandreou and Finance Minister Evangelos Venizelos appealed to lawmakers to approve the entire package. Greece&rsquo;s foreign lenders say the changes are needed to liberalize Greece&rsquo;s economy, but they have met with intense popular anger.        

&ldquo;They are cutting our wages and diminishing our way of life for the sake of the banks,&rdquo; said Nick Zolotariof, 40, who works in the public administration in Dionysos, a suburb of Athens. He said his salary had been cut to $1,235 a month from $1,650.        

The Athens police said that about 50,000 demonstrators poured into the central Syntagma Square outside Parliament on Thursday. It soon became a war zone, as anarchists began throwing stones and firebombs at members of the Communist-backed labor union, PAME, who fought back while the police stood by.        

One man, a 53-year-old member of a construction workers&rsquo; union, died of a heart attack shortly after being admitted unconscious &mdash; but apparently uninjured &mdash; to a hospital, according to a doctor at the hospital. The Greek news media reported that 16 people were injured, 3 seriously, but there was no official confirmation.        

In recent years, with the proliferation of cellphone videos and YouTube, the idea that there is vague cooperation between the police and violent demonstrators has grown beyond conspiracy theory and entered more mainstream discourse.        

&ldquo;Every time we have these manifestations, we have these videos that show some kind of protection from the police to these groups,&rdquo; said Giannis Panousis, a professor of criminology at the University of Athens. &ldquo;Perhaps in these groups there are some ex-policemen or some ex-military people who play some role inside the group, as agents provocateurs.&rdquo;        

Thursday&rsquo;s vote came as European Union leaders prepared to meet Sunday for a final decision on the release of the next $11 billion installment of aid to Greece, part of a $150 billion bailout engineered last year. They will also be looking at a much broader European rescue designed to protect the bloc should Greece default. And, within days, a so-called troika made up of the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund is to issue its newest report on the Greek crisis.        

A draft report prepared by the commission, in &ldquo;liaison&rdquo; with the European Central Bank, recommended that the next installment of financial support to Athens be released as soon as possible after the latest austerity measures are enacted. On Thursday, Reuters quoted unidentified European officials as saying that the I.M.F. believes European assessments are too optimistic and wants to await a clearer outlook before signing off on the next installment.        
