
CAIRO &mdash; With Arab despots toppling at an unprecedented pace since January, a range of options for the final curtain have been tested, with Libya&rsquo;s leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, typically, making the most dramatic exit with his gory death on Thursday.        

&ldquo;Qaddafism was a kind of cult,&rdquo; Juan Cole, a University of Michigan history professor, said in describing the last stand in Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s hometown, Surt, as the act of fanatics. &ldquo;They drank the Kool-Aid, and they were determined to die. It is their truth against the evil world.&rdquo;        

Even before the uprisings, of course, Saddam Hussein had vowed to fight to the death. But the Iraqi strongman ended up hiding underground, in a six-foot spider hole, and was eventually hanged in 2006 after a trial, however predetermined the outcome.        

Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali of Tunisia, the first president who was forced out by popular outrage this year, back in January, chose exile in Saudi Arabia, where the ruling family will take virtually any Muslim. (Remember Idi Amin of Uganda?) But it is a difficult option for someone accustomed to being the center of attention; Mr. Ben Ali has not been heard from since.        

President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt chose to stand and fight in the courts. But he now risks being remembered mostly for lying on a stretcher in a metal cage, all part of his defense that he is too sick to suffer the indignity of a trial.        

Among the remaining Arab Spring autocrats under siege, Presidents Bashar al-Assad of Syria and Ali Abdullah Saleh of Yemen are struggling to hold on to power. Mr. Assad first tried a feint about concessions, but soon abandoned any pretense of compromise, and his security forces have killed at least 3,000 demonstrators. Mr. Saleh nearly left office in a bomb attack, but survived with severe burns and sought treatment in Saudi Arabia.        

It is not clear what lesson, if any, either man will take from Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s fall and death.        

His demise did not unroll exactly as anticipated, even if he kept vowing to fight to the death. Jerky videotape provided a few gruesome details showing Colonel Qaddafi, blood-soaked and disheveled.        

Many expected that he would spend years cruising Libya&rsquo;s vast desert in a flotilla of black sport utility vehicles, directing a sputtering counterrevolution from afar.        

&ldquo;It would have been more consistent with the way people viewed him to have found him in Niger or on the border, going in and out,&rdquo; said Rob Malley, the Middle East program director at the International Crisis Group.        

There is no greater glory in Islam than dying for a righteous cause, as a &ldquo;martyr,&rdquo; gaining direct access to heaven.        

The scholars at Al Azhar, the ancient seat of Sunni Muslim learning in Cairo, anticipated that Mr. Qaddafi or his acolytes would try to claim that mantle, so they rolled out a fatwa this month saying he would get no such honor. A martyr dies defending his religion and his nation, the religious fiat explained.        

No doubt some of his surviving family members and most dedicated followers will still label him a martyr. But many expect that the darker legacy of his one-man rule will be remembered long after his manner of dying fades.        

&ldquo;I think that Qaddafi&rsquo;s history is so black that it is very difficult to give him any honorable connotations because of his death,&rdquo; said Mohamed el-Kheshen, a law professor at Cairo University.        

The mood on the streets of Cairo, like in Tripoli, Libya, and many other Arab cities, was celebratory, with cars honking long into the night. Twitter and Facebook were crowded with high-speed commentary rejoicing in his death, with a weak undertow of regret that Colonel Qaddafi would never face the kind of trial that he had used to humiliate so many.        

Libya &ldquo;deprived us of what would have been the funniest trial in history with the star Moammar Qaddafi,&rdquo; one person wrote on Twitter. A less restrained comment was from Nawara Negm, an Egyptian activist: &ldquo;Thank God, killing is the least that should be done to you Qaddafi, a killer and a dog.&rdquo;        

One of the most popular links on the Web showed a cartoon with a man holding a red can of paint, having just smeared giant X&rsquo;s over portraits of Mr. Ben Ali, Mr. Mubarak and Colonel Qaddafi. The next two on the wall, Presidents Saleh and Assad, look down with expressions of shock and fear as the man with the paint &mdash; who is labeled &ldquo;ash-shab,&rdquo; or the people &mdash; approaches.        

Walid al-Tabtabai, a member of the Kuwaiti Parliament, wrote on Twitter: &ldquo;Ben Ali fled, Mubarak was imprisoned, Saleh was burnt and Qaddafi was killed; notice that the fate of dictators gets worse every time. I wonder what gloomy fate awaits the criminal Bashar?&rdquo;        

There were questions on whether Mr. Qaddafi&rsquo;s death would encourage Mr. Assad, Mr. Saleh and other autocrats to use greater force against their people or to pull back.        

&ldquo;For Arab dictators, it shows that for the amount of pressure they place on their people, there will be an equal and opposite reaction, and they cannot hold on forever,&rdquo; said Yuseff Assad, an expert on Libya and an early supporter of the uprising.        

Despite the tendency to lump together all Arab dictators, they are unique in their circumstances, and Colonel Qaddafi perhaps the most singular of all, in that he stuck around long enough to alienate just about everyone. (He could not, for example, muster enough friends to stave off the internationally sanctioned, if contentious, NATO bombing campaign.)        

If Mr. Qaddafi is missed and mourned anywhere, it will be in Africa, where he bought friends far and wide. In Bamako, the capital of Mali, a new campus of government buildings bears Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s name, and all the fancy hotels advertise their Libyan ownership with giant green neon signs on the upper floors.        

Ultimately, though, many think that the real legacy of Mr. Qaddafi&rsquo;s fall &mdash; and of those who preceded him and those sure to follow &mdash; is that the Arab people have changed.        

&ldquo;The real lesson here is that there is a new wave of popular politics in the Arab world,&rdquo; said Professor Cole of the University of Michigan. &ldquo;People are not in the mood to put up with semi-genocidal dictators.&rdquo;        
Heba Afify contributed reporting from Cairo.
