
ISTANBUL &mdash; Turkey&rsquo;s offensive against Kurdish militants this week is one of its largest military operations in years, with 10,000 troops backed by warplanes pursuing rebels in southeastern Turkey and northern Iraq, the Turkish Army said on Thursday.        

The offensive began only hours after the Kurdistan Workers&rsquo; Party, or P.K.K., mounted deadly attacks against the Turkish military, killing 24 soldiers and wounding 18 early on Wednesday in Hakkari Province.        

In all, 22 battalions of elite commando and special-forces troops were operating against the insurgents in five locations, supported by surveillance drones, helicopters and F-16 and F-4 jets, the army said, adding that at least three militants had been killed so far and that explosives and other military equipment had been confiscated.        

The Iraqi government and the Kurdish regional administration in northern Iraq have expressed concerns about Turkish cross-border military incursions in the past, but both of them condemned the attacks by the P.K.K. in strong terms and offered to help prevent the group from operating in northern Iraq, according to Turkish news outlets.        

Turkey has demanded that the Iraqi Kurds support their efforts to eliminate militant bases around the Qandil Mountains, a rugged section of northern Iraq.        

Nechirvan Barzani, a senior Iraqi Kurdish official, arrived in Turkey&rsquo;s capital, Ankara, on Thursday to discuss the situation with the Turkish prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and the foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu.        

Mr. Erdogan said that he also invited Mesud Barzani, the leader of the Kurdish regional administration in northern Iraq, to join talks on a common strategy for tackling the militants.        

The prime minister said on Turkish television that the P.K.K.&rsquo;s violence was &ldquo;not only aimed at Turkey, but at the brotherhood between Turks and Kurds,&rdquo; and added, &ldquo;We have to get over this and succeed together.&rdquo;        

Funerals for the soldiers killed in the militant attacks on Thursday drew large crowds, and demonstrations shown on Turkish television showed thousands of people holding flags and chanting slogans denouncing the P.K.K., which is classified by Turkey, the United States and the European Union as a terrorist organization.        

Public opinion in Turkey strongly favors a political solution to the conflict with Kurdish rebels, which has claimed more than 40,000 lives since 1984. A new constitution being drafted by a parliamentary commission is expected to expand the rights of Turkey&rsquo;s ethnic minorities, including Kurds, who make up almost one-fifth of the country&rsquo;s population of 74 million.        
