
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; An unusually powerful American delegation arrived here on Thursday to deliver the starkest warning yet to Pakistan, according to a senior American official: that the United States would act unilaterally if necessary to attack extremist groups that use the country as a haven to kill Americans.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton; David H. Petraeus, the new director of the Central Intelligence Agency; and Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, the new chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, planned to push their Pakistani counterparts to make a definitive choice between fighting terrorists or supporting them, the administration official said.        

&ldquo;This is a time for clarity,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton declared in Kabul, Afghanistan, where she met President Hamid Karzai before leaving for Islamabad, the Pakistani capital. &ldquo;No one should be in any way mistaken about allowing this to continue without paying a very big price.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s no place to go any longer,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton added, referring to Pakistan&rsquo;s leaders, whom the administration has accused of equivocating by supporting the Afghan insurgency.        

The American and Pakistani officials, who included the chief of the military, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, and the director general of the intelligence service, Lt. Gen. Ahmed Shuja Pasha, met for four hours, ending after 2 a.m. A senior administration official said afterward that the two sides had agreed to keep talking on Friday and did not want to comment in the meantime. Mr. Petraeus met separately with General Pasha, a Pakistani official said.        

Earlier, another senior Pakistani official said that Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s remarks in Kabul did not &ldquo;enable the atmosphere.&rdquo;        

They did, however, underscore a growing American realization that hopes for a smooth withdrawal from Afghanistan by 2014 now hinged on Pakistan&rsquo;s willingness to confront insurgent groups based in the country who have had the support of Pakistan&rsquo;s intelligence service.        

Before the meeting, which took place at the residence of Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani, a senior administration official said that the delegation would make it clear that if the Pakistanis did not act against insurgents like the Haqqani network, then the United States would have to.        

The Haqqani network uses Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal areas as a base and has become the most potent part of the insurgency in Afghanistan. Before stepping down last month, Adm. Mike Mullen, General Dempsey&rsquo;s predecessor, called the Haqqanis &ldquo;a veritable arm&rdquo; of Pakistan&rsquo;s intelligence service.        

The public accusation added to tensions in America&rsquo;s relationship with Pakistan, which plummeted to a new low this year as Pakistan arrested a C.I.A. contractor and American commandoes killed Osama bin Laden deep inside the country in May.        

The Obama administration decided to take a harder line with Pakistan in a meeting at the White House on Sept. 29 in the wake of a 19-hour assault on the American Embassy in Kabul by heavily armed insurgents linked to the Haqqani network.        

The senior administration official said that the administration&rsquo;s previous efforts to press the Pakistanis to sever support for extremists had clearly failed and now required a more confrontational approach. &ldquo;Soft love hasn&rsquo;t worked,&rdquo; the official said.        

Pakistan&rsquo;s response remains to be seen. In recent weeks, Pakistani officials have sent conflicting signals, both publicly and privately. Prime Minister Gilani greeted the American delegation warmly, in contrast to a tense meeting with Mrs. Clinton and Admiral Mullen in May after the raid that killed Bin Laden. Pakistan&rsquo;s foreign minister, Hina Rabbani Khar, also attended the meetings and dinner.        

But General Kayani and General Pasha hold different views from the Americans on how the war in Afghanistan should end and what kind of Afghanistan they would like to see after the American withdrawal.        

The Pakistani officials said that they wanted to see if the American delegation would present a unified front, especially on the true extent of America&rsquo;s support for reconciliation with opponents of Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s government in Kabul. Some Pakistani military officers appeared to have given up on having anything but the most limited of relationships with the United States, and were resigned to deep cuts in American aid, given declining support in Congress.        
Jane Perlez contributed reporting from Islamabad, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.
