
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; As Islamist militants displayed scores of blood-soaked bodies, the African Union on Friday acknowledged that its peacekeeping force in Somalia had sustained heavy casualties in its battle against the Shabab, the deadly insurgent group squaring off against a multipronged assault by troops from Kenya, Uganda, Burundi, the Somali government and local militias.        

The precise number of peacekeepers killed in the fighting remains something of a mystery, with the militants saying they killed nearly 80 and witnesses saying that approximately 60 peacekeepers had been killed Thursday on the outskirts of Somalia&rsquo;s capital, Mogadishu. But the African Union said 10 had been killed, and the Burundi military, which provides soldiers to the peacekeeping force, said only six had died in the fighting.        

A spokesman for the African Union on Friday said its forces had solidified control over Mogadishu and were in the process of securing the neighborhood of Deynile, the scene of intense fighting the day before.        

&ldquo;The fighting was fierce, but in the end we captured the entire trading center,&rdquo; said the spokesman, Lt. Col. Paddy Ankunda, speaking from Kenya&rsquo;s capital, Nairobi. &ldquo;We are mopping up the area, building defenses and conducting security operations.&rdquo;        

But testimony from Mogadishu, along with photographs from an exhibition of bodies by the Shabab, suggested a far bleaker picture. Witnesses in Mogadishu said scattered fighting continued Friday morning and had dissipated by the afternoon. Bodies were splayed across streets, they said, and trucks were loaded with corpses.        

&ldquo;We have killed 76 Burundian soldiers in the fight,&rdquo; a Shabab spokesman, Ali Mohamud Rage, said Friday. A day earlier he had said, &ldquo;This will be a message to the Kenyan government who invaded our country.&rdquo;        

A senior American military official said Friday that there were about 30 American citizens fighting within the Shabab&rsquo;s ranks, and on Thursday two Somali-Americans in Minnesota were convicted of financing the group.        

Over the last week, offensives carried out by the African Union, Somalia&rsquo;s transitional government, independent militias and the Kenyan military &mdash; which sent hundreds of soldiers backed by tanks and aircraft into Somalia last weekend &mdash; have homed in on the remaining pockets of Shabab resistance. The neighborhood of Deynile was one, but resistance by Shabab fighters was stiff.        

In photographs published online, row upon row of corpses believed to be Burundian peacekeepers with flak jackets, helmets and military fatigues are laid out as crowds look on. In some of the photographs, a Shabab official shows off a necklace with a cross on it, seemingly taken from a Burundian soldier. In another, a Bible written in Burundi&rsquo;s local language Kirundi hangs open on a stick.        

Several witnesses said that the faces on the corpses did not have typical Somali features, and that the soldiers were believed to be from either Burundi or Uganda. But the African Union called the photographs &ldquo;propaganda.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The truth is that those pictures were cooked up,&rdquo; Colonel Ankunda said. &ldquo;We have no soldiers that died in that operation in the magnitude that they displayed.&rdquo;        

An official with the United Nations, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that the number of deaths claimed by the Shabab seemed exaggerated, but that the figures from the African Union and Burundian government were too low. The official said that the number of peacekeeper deaths was likely to be around 20, and that some corpses displayed by the Shabab on Thursday may have been from previous battles.        

&ldquo;There are a lot more bodies that don&rsquo;t belong to us there,&rdquo; the official said.        

If the number of peacekeepers killed was indeed around 20, it would make Thursday among the deadliest days for African Union peacekeepers since they arrived in Mogadishu in 2007.        

The Shabab have threatened to carry out terrorist attacks in Kenya in retaliation for the country&rsquo;s incursion into Somalia. The group claimed responsibility for suicide bombings in Uganda last year that killed over 70 people, calling it retaliation against Uganda&rsquo;s participation in the African Union peacekeeping force.        

&ldquo;We call upon the Kenya public to think about their safety and their livelihoods and urge their government to immediately withdraw their troops from Somalia,&rdquo; the Shabab said in a statement. &ldquo;Do not let the flames of this war spill over into your country,&rdquo; the statement added.        

In a news release on Friday, Kenya&rsquo;s military said it had secured a number of towns along the Kenya-Somalia border.        

Kenya&rsquo;s police force began operations this week against people suspected of being Shabab agents and illegal immigrants from Somalia throughout Nairobi. On Friday, two doctors were charged with engaging in terrorist activities, but the police declined to give a total number of people arrested.        

&ldquo;We have been hosting Somali people here since 1991,&rdquo; said Charles Owino, a Kenyan police spokesman. &ldquo;If we have any person that operates with the enemy, it can create issues here.&rdquo;        
Josh Kron reported from Nairobi, and Mohamed Ibrahim from Mogadishu, Somalia.
