
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The death of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi reverberated across Syria on Friday, reviving protests that had begun to stall and focusing attention on a newly organized, unarmed opposition group seeking to challenge the Assad family&rsquo;s four decades of rule.        

With an ordinary name and ambitious task, the Syrian National Council, announced in Istanbul this month, has begun trying to emulate the success of Libya&rsquo;s opposition leadership, closing ranks in the most concerted attempt yet to forge an alternative to President Bashar al-Assad and courting international support that proved so crucial in Libya.        

&ldquo;The focus of the world will now turn to Syria,&rdquo; Samir Nachar, an activist from Aleppo and leader of the group, said Friday. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s Syria&rsquo;s turn to receive attention.&rdquo;        

But the challenges before this effort remain vast, many of them the same issues that have beset the uprising in Syria since it began seven months ago. A gulf still separates the opposition in exile and at home, and rivalries and ideological disputes compromise their work. As important, Europe and the United States have proven reluctant to give the council the recognition that they quickly provided the opposition in Libya.        

Perhaps most challenging is a debate that has overshadowed many of its discussions &mdash; what kind of international intervention it will seek, as unlikely as the prospect may be now, in trying to end Mr. Assad&rsquo;s rule. Not even activists these days believe that protests alone, however big, are enough to topple the government.        

&ldquo;Libya&rsquo;s model will be tempting,&rdquo; said Louay Hussein, a prominent opposition figure in Damascus, the capital, though a critic of the council itself.        

Protests erupted across Syria on Friday, and at least anecdotally, activists called them bigger than in past weeks, and just as bloody. Security forces killed at least 24 people. Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s death offered a bloody lesson in an autocrat&rsquo;s fate, and became a theme on Facebook pages, Twitter and in the demonstrations themselves. &ldquo;Qaddafi is gone, your turn is coming, Bashar,&rdquo; one banner read.        

&ldquo;Let us be next,&rdquo; went a chant.        

One slogan played on a song of Um Kalthoum, an Egyptian diva of another era: &ldquo;Qaddafi sings to Bashar: I&rsquo;m getting bored as I wait for you.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Today we are walking on the same path as Libya,&rdquo; said a 25-year-old protester in Barzah, near Damascus, who gave his name as Basil. He called for &ldquo;armed resistance.&rdquo;        

But the protesters face a government that acts emboldened today, waving the prospect of a victory at its supporters. Until Friday, protests had waned, not least because so many protesters are in jail. Even the most ardent critics of Mr. Assad now talk of a struggle of months, and perhaps years, when they had once predicted weeks.        

Last week, with a mass pro-government rally in Damascus, the leadership underlined its support in Syria&rsquo;s largest cities and among minorities that seem more fearful than ever of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s fall. In a bit of bluster, Syria&rsquo;s foreign minister warned of retaliation against any country that recognized the opposition, though leaving imprecise what it could do.        

The protest movement itself has become more complicated, with an armed rebellion emerging forcefully in central Syria and some peaceful protesters acknowledging they have lost momentum and morale. Several council leaders suggested that the push to close ranks came as much from abroad as inside Syria, where complaints had grown over what some demonstrators saw as endless bickering abroad.        

&ldquo;The revolution on the ground clearly reached a critical point whereby it had given everything it could give in terms of results through peaceful means,&rdquo; said Bassma Koudmani, a prominent Syrian dissident and a key figure on the council. The opposition group, she added, was the antidote to &ldquo;the impossibility of any breakthrough.&rdquo;        

Even critics are impressed by the group&rsquo;s ability over more than three months of negotiations to band together disparate constituencies across a landscape where the Assad family has so extinguished politics that not even the ruling Baath Party really has a much of a say. The council was announced in Istanbul on Oct. 2, after what Yaser Tabbara, an lawyer in Chicago and council member, called &ldquo;incredibly intense negotiations.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re getting closer to staking a common ground,&rdquo; Mr. Nachar said.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Though not all the members are yet named &mdash; a sign of lingering disputes &mdash; the council organized itself into a body of 230 representatives, with a smaller secretariat of 29 people and an executive committee of 7. The executive committee counts among its members a Muslim Brotherhood leader, a figure from the Assyrian minority, and a Syrian academic in France, in addition to Mr. Nachar.        

Burhan Ghalioun, the academic in Paris, has emerged as its spokesman.        

Mr. Ghalioun is &ldquo;not particularly charismatic, nor has he staked out any political platform, but he tends to be seen as clean, meaning consistent in his positions over the year, and independent inasmuch as he earns a living and has no known affiliations,&rdquo; said an analyst based in Damascus, who asked to speak anonymously for fear of reprisal.        

No other opposition movement in the Arab revolts faces the challenges that Syria&rsquo;s does. The government has ensured that no Tahrir Square has emerged to focus dissent. With most journalists barred, Syria is bereft of the coverage that helped drive Tunisia&rsquo;s uprising in the early days. Unlike Libya, there is no open border, nor a city like Benghazi where the opposition can organize. Most difficult is the makeup of Syria itself &mdash; sizable minorities whose fears of an aftermath the government has relentlessly stoked.        

Unlike with Libya, Western officials have called the council&rsquo;s formation a positive step but offered little more. &ldquo;I think we will have to find out a bit more yet,&rdquo; said Catherine Ashton, the European Union&rsquo;s foreign policy chief. (So far, only Libya&rsquo;s new government has recognized the council as the representative of Syria&rsquo;s people.)        

An Obama administration official was especially critical, saying the council had lobbied the international community more than Syrians themselves, particularly the Christian and Alawite minorities. The official declined to refer to the council as the opposition, but rather as &ldquo;oppositionists,&rdquo; in reflection of the body&rsquo;s embryonic nature.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a right step, but we&rsquo;re still skeptical basically,&rdquo; the official in Washington said. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re far from a real body that fully represents the Syrian people.&rdquo;        

Within the opposition, some worry about the disproportionate power of Islamists, namely the Muslim Brotherhood, especially given its lack of any organizational presence inside Syria. Others suggest Turkey may seek to corral the opposition, and some activists were opposed to holding the meeting in Istanbul. Though Turkish officials have sought to place themselves broadly on the side of change in the Arab world, they have deep relations with Islamist movements in Egypt, Tunisia and the Palestinian territories.        

While Mr. Ghalioun has said the council opposes the intervention of NATO, even if it is not on the table, others have endorsed what they call international protection of protesters, an admittedly ambiguous position, or no-fly zones or havens along Syria&rsquo;s borders. Inside Syria, some dissidents still caution against the overthrow of Mr. Assad &mdash; fearing civil war &mdash; and instead endorse gradual reform.        

And though this month has witnessed one of the biggest Kurdish demonstrations, the community has yet to forcefully enter the fray on the opposition&rsquo;s side.        

&ldquo;Things are still very blurred,&rdquo; said Abdel-Basit Hammo, a Kurdish activist.        

Some analysts say the opposition&rsquo;s biggest challenge in the coming months is to elaborate precisely its vision for a future Syria, beyond a set of principles. Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government is remarkable for its lack of any ideology; fear of chaos drives much of its support. Most slogans at last week&rsquo;s pro-government protest paid tribute to the remnants of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s personality cult, itself diminished by the viciousness of the crackdown.        

&ldquo;The key is whether they can offer a real alternative,&rdquo; said Nadim Houry, senior researcher with Human Rights Watch in Beirut. &ldquo;If they do, they would be setting the agenda, regardless of whether they are in Damascus or not. This is where their true power lies today, if they can set the agenda and define what tomorrow&rsquo;s Syria will look like.&rdquo;        
