
CAIRO &mdash; Egypt&rsquo;s powerful Muslim Brotherhood and the secular opposition banded together Sunday around a prominent government critic to negotiate for forces seeking the fall of President Hosni Mubarak, as the army struggled to hold a capital seized by fears of chaos and buoyed by euphoria that three decades of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s rule may be coming to an end.        

The announcement that the critic, Mohamed ElBaradei, would represent a loosely unified opposition reconfigured the struggle between Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s government and a six-day-old uprising bent on driving him and his party from power.        

Though lacking deep support on his own, Dr. ElBaradei, a Nobel laureate and diplomat, could serve as a consensus figure for a movement that has struggled to articulate a program for a potential transition. It suggested, too, that the opposition was aware of the uprising&rsquo;s image abroad, putting forth a candidate who might be more acceptable to the West than beloved in Egypt.        

In scenes as tumultuous as any since the uprising began, Dr. ElBaradei defied a government curfew and joined thousands of protesters in Liberation Square, a downtown landmark that has become the epicenter of the uprising and a platform, writ small, for the frustrations, ambitions and resurgent pride of a generation claiming the country&rsquo;s mantle.        

&ldquo;Today we are proud of Egyptians,&rdquo; Dr. ElBaradei told throngs who surged toward him in a square festooned with banners calling for Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s fall. &ldquo;We have restored our rights, restored our freedom, and what we have begun cannot be reversed.&rdquo;        

Dr. ElBaradei declared it a &ldquo;new era,&rdquo; and as night fell there were few in Egypt who seemed to disagree.        

Dr. ElBaradei also criticized the Obama administration, as Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton delivered the message via Sunday news programs in Washington that Mr. Mubarak should create an &ldquo;orderly transition&rdquo; to a more politically open Egypt, while she refrained from calling on him to resign. That approach, Dr. ElBaradei said, was &ldquo;a failed policy&rdquo; eroding American credibility.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s better for President Obama not to appear that he is the last one to say to President Mubarak, it&rsquo;s time for you to go,&rdquo; Dr. ElBaradei said.        

The tumult Sunday seemed perched between two deepening narratives: a vision of anarchy offered by the government, and echoed by Egyptians fearing chaos, against the perspective of protesters and many others that the uprising had become what they called &ldquo;a popular revolution.&rdquo;        

The military, Egypt&rsquo;s most powerful institution and one embedded deeply in all aspects of life here, reinforced parts of the capital Sunday. It gathered as many as 100 tanks and armored carriers at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, the site of President Anwar el-Sadat&rsquo;s assassination in 1981, which brought Mr. Mubarak to power. The Interior Ministry announced it would again deploy once-ubiquitous police forces &mdash; despised by many as the symbol of the daily humiliations of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s government &mdash; across the country, except in Liberation Square.        

In a collapse of authority, the police withdrew from major cities on Saturday, giving free rein to gangs that stole and burned cars, looted shops and ransacked a fashionable mall, where dismembered mannequins for conservative Islamic dress were strewn over broken glass and puddles of water. Thousands of inmates poured out of four prisons, including the country&rsquo;s most notorious, Abu Zaabal and Wadi Natroun. Checkpoints run by the military and neighborhood groups, sometimes spaced just a block apart, proliferated across Cairo and other cities.        

Many have darkly suggested that the government was behind the collapse of authority as a way to justify a crackdown or discredit protesters&rsquo; calls for change.        

&ldquo;Egypt challenges anarchy,&rdquo; a government-owned newspaper declared Sunday.        

&ldquo;A Conspiracy by Security to Support the Scenario of Chaos,&rdquo; replied an independent newspaper in a headline that shared space at a downtown kiosk.        

The United States said it was organizing flights to evacuate its citizens on Monday, and the American Embassy urged all Americans to &ldquo;consider leaving as soon as they can safely do so,&rdquo; in a statement that underlined a deep sense of pessimism among Egypt&rsquo;s allies over Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s fate.        

Turkey, a major power in the region, said it was sending three flights to evacuate 750 of its citizens from Cairo and Alexandria.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re worried about the chaos, sure,&rdquo; said Selma al-Tarzi, 33, a film director who had joined friends in Liberation Square. &ldquo;But everyone is aware the chaos is generated by the government. The revolution is not generating the chaos.&rdquo;        
Reporting was contributed by Kareem Fahim, Liam Stack, Mona El-Naggar and Dawlat Magdy from Cairo; Nicholas Kulish and Souad Mekhennet from Alexandria, Egypt; and J. David Goodman from New York.
