
A Paris court on Saturday convicted a German doctor of manslaughter in the 1982 death of his stepdaughter, bringing to a tentative close a 29-year crusade by the girl&rsquo;s father to see the doctor brought to justice.        

The doctor, Dieter Krombach, 76, was sentenced to 15 years in prison. His lawyers said they would appeal the ruling.        

The girl&rsquo;s father, Andr&eacute; Bamberski, 74, had devoted nearly three decades to the pursuit of Dr. Krombach, who he believed had raped and killed his daughter, Kalinka Bamberski, when she was 14.        

A German court ruled in 1987 that there was not sufficient evidence to charge Dr. Krombach, and Germany refused to extradite him for trial in France. A French court convicted him in absentia on wrongful death charges in 1995, but that conviction was later annulled on procedural grounds.        

Kalinka&rsquo;s body was found on a bed at Dr. Krombach&rsquo;s home in Lindau, Germany, on July 10, 1982. An autopsy revealed a host of bizarre circumstances, including damage to her genitals, the presence of an unidentified whitish substance in her vagina, and a recent injection mark on her arm, which Dr. Krombach said came from an iron supplement he had administered to her on the evening of her death. According to a coroner&rsquo;s report, Dr. Krombach was present at the autopsy.        

He later admitted having given the girl a tranquilizer pill, as well, but denied raping her or causing her death.        

Later in life, however, Dr. Krombach came to be known as a sexual deviant, pleading guilty in Germany in 1997 to charges that he drugged and raped a 16-year-old patient, and losing his medical license. Other young women have since reported similar encounters with the doctor. Despite losing his right to practice medicine, Dr. Krombach continued to see patients. He was convicted in 2007 of illegal medical practice and fraud and was sentenced to 28 months in prison. He was released in 2008.        

Mr. Bamberski, meanwhile, had never forgiven or forgotten the man who had seduced and married his former wife, broken up his family and, he believes, raped and killed his daughter. He has spent nearly 30 years trying to bring him before a French court. Although Kalinka died in Germany, she was a French citizen.        

In 2009, Mr. Bamberski promised kidnappers 20,000 euros, then about $30,000, to have Dr. Krombach kidnapped and brought to France. The doctor was delivered to French soil, bound and badly beaten, in October of that year.        

Mr. Bamberski is soon to be tried in connection with the kidnapping.        
