
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; Veterans of the decisive battle for Surt streamed into this eastern Libyan port city on Saturday to a raucous heroes&rsquo; welcome, firing round after round into the air and yelling greetings to a jubilant crowd that jammed the entry-point to a main boulevard into town.        

Benghazi, proud of its role as the first headquarters of the rebellion against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, has assigned itself a central part in what people here call the new Libya. In the tumultuous, hours-long reception at the edge of the city on Saturday, children waved the country&rsquo;s new flag, women wearing head scarves chanted hymns to fallen fighters, and the packed crowd chanted derisive slogans mocking the dead leader.        

The procession came on the eve of a ceremony here at which leaders of the transitional government will officially announce the country&rsquo;s liberation and confirm a timeline for national elections. Officials were congregating at a downtown hotel here on Saturday night, preparing for speeches the next day. And reinforcing the idea of a new phase for the country, the interim prime minister, Mahmoud Jibril, held to an earlier promise by saying Saturday that he was resigning his post now that the last Qaddafi stronghold had been captured, Reuters reported.        

Other regional factions in Libya, including fighters based in Tripoli, around the city of Misurata, and in the western Nafusah Mountains, have sometimes bristled at what they see as the Benghazi leadership&rsquo;s self-importance. But military officers at Saturday&rsquo;s event tried to play down any potential regional rivalries. Colonel Qaddafi, setting one region against another, benefited from the divisions, enhanced in some ways by the differing roles these widely spaced entities played in Libya&rsquo;s revolution.        

&ldquo;What has happened is a disgrace,&rdquo; the people at Saturday&rsquo;s rally yelled, playing in Arabic on a contemptuous designation for Colonel Qaddafi.        

Soldiers stood on the back of pickup trucks shooting into the air, or leaned down to shake the hands of beaming onlookers. On one truck, uniformed men swiveled round and round in the seats of an anti-aircraft gun. Men on horseback in traditional embroidered white robes accompanied the dusty motorcade, recalling the nomadic desert culture at the city&rsquo;s doorstep.        

Though transition officials have insisted they would not try to move the capital to Benghazi from Tripoli, some in the crowd of proud residents still suggested that their city&rsquo;s political fortunes would improve after the passing of a dictator who, at best, neglected Benghazi.        

&ldquo;Benghazi has played the biggest role in this revolution, since it started here,&rdquo; said Salah Bunudelai, who described himself as a businessman. &ldquo;It was the ignition of the revolution. It will have a very big role in the new Libya.&rdquo;        

The crowd&rsquo;s noisy enthusiasm for the returning soldiers seemed to grow as the sunlit afternoon wore on, and car after car jammed the tree-lined road. A judge, Tudje Naima Gebril, who was on hand to greet the troops wearing a head scarf with the country&rsquo;s new red, black and green colors &mdash; she said she was the first female judge in Libya, appointed in 1975 &mdash; called the moment a symbolic new beginning for her country.        

&ldquo;All the people are here for building the new Libya,&rdquo; she said. As soldiers fired into the air, she added: &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want to see any more guns in Libya. We want civil institutions in Libya.&rdquo;        
