
BAGHDAD &mdash; Beyond the final withdrawal of troops that President Obama announced Friday, America&rsquo;s fiscal troubles are dictating a drastic scaling back of plans for diplomatic, economic and cultural programs once deemed vital to steadying Iraq, building a long-term alliance and prying the country from Iran&rsquo;s tightening embrace.        

As recently as this summer, the State Department had planned to establish a 700-person consulate in the still-restive northern city of Mosul. And as recently as the spring, the United States was moving ahead with plans for a consulate in the ethnically divided and potentially explosive city of Kirkuk.        

Those plans have now been shelved or indefinitely postponed, and pleas from some Iraqi leaders to open diplomatic offices in the Shiite-dominated south, where Iran wields outsize influence, were summarily rejected.        

Taken together, the shrinking of the United States&rsquo; military and diplomatic ambitions underscores the reality that a post-America Iraq is taking shape more rapidly and completely than many Iraqis and Americans had envisioned. That has heartened many Iraqis and Americans, weary of more than eight years of war and occupation, but left others fearful.        

&ldquo;The United States should not turn its back on Iraq,&rdquo; Labid Abawi, the deputy foreign minister, said in an interview on Saturday. &ldquo;Iraq needs the United States, and the United States needs Iraq.&rdquo;        

The shifting relationship comes at a delicate time for Iraq and the region.        

The country finds itself surrounded by nations undergoing significant change. Iran, which has long sought to increase its influence on its neighbor, has been emboldened by the Arab Spring, which ousted or diminished several Western-leaning leaders. At the same time, Syria has been suffering through months of unrest that Iraqi leaders fear could spill over the border, reopening what was once a thoroughfare for fighters from Al Qaeda.        

Domestically, many issues remain unresolved. Twenty months after a national election, the country&rsquo;s leading political blocs cannot agree on who should run the Defense and Interior Ministries. The Parliament still has not passed legislation about how the country&rsquo;s oil and gas revenues should be divided &mdash; years after the Bush administration set such a law as a benchmark for progress.        

The issue of whether Baghdad or the Kurdish region should hold sway over Kirkuk also remains unresolved.        

American officials emphasize that they still plan a major increase in diplomatic and cultural programs &mdash; the building blocks of so-called soft power &mdash; scattering branch offices across the country in the largest diplomatic mission since the Marshall Plan.        

On Saturday, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton stressed the ties that will remain &mdash; and issued what appeared to be a barely veiled warning to Iran.        

&ldquo;As we open this new chapter in a relationship with a sovereign Iraq, to the Iraqis we say: America is with you as you take your next steps in your journey to secure your democracy,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton told reporters in Dushanbe, Tajikistan. &ldquo;And to the countries in the region, especially Iraq&rsquo;s neighbors, we want to emphasize that America will stand with our allies and friends, including Iraq, in defense of our security and interests.&rdquo;        

But the expansion of a diplomatic presence will be much smaller than imagined, a victim not only of budgetary constraints but also of a growing awareness that the decision to withdraw American soldiers makes it much harder for diplomats to safely do their work. The State Department&rsquo;s more extensive plans were drawn up at a time when military officials were pushing to keep up to 20,000 soldiers in Iraq next year.        

Christopher R. Hill, a former United States ambassador to Iraq, worries that even a less-expansive presence might be risky.        

&ldquo;I and many other people have concerns of the sustainability of keeping so many diplomats in so many far-flung places,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;If you don&rsquo;t have freedom of movement, you do go back to the question of whether it is worth the outlay of the budget and risk and personnel for keeping these people there.&rdquo;        

The reactions in Baghdad on Friday night and Saturday, after Mr. Obama&rsquo;s remarks, were muted, a possible reflection of the country&rsquo;s mixed emotions.        
Omar al-Jawoshy contributed reporting from Baghdad, an employee of The New York Times from Mosul, Iraq, and Steven Lee Myers from Dushanbe, Tajikistan.
