
CAIRO &mdash; Prince Sultan bin Abdel Aziz, the heir apparent to the Saudi throne and one of the kingdom&rsquo;s most powerful princes until illness sapped his strength in recent years, has died, raising complex succession issues at a time of political turmoil in the region.        

The Royal Court announced the death on Saturday, saying the elderly prince had died &ldquo;abroad.&rdquo; American officials confirmed that he died at New York-Presbyterian Hospital. State television immediately switched to broadcasting Koranic verses.        

His death leaves Prince Nayef, the powerful and feared interior minister who has led the battle against both Islamic extremists and freedom of expression, widely expected to be tapped as the next crown prince. But for the first time the appointment will most likely come from the new family Allegiance Council, which is expected to weigh a broader range of candidates, rather than from the king alone.        

Prince Sultan, who built a close alliance with the United States during his nearly 50 years as defense minister, left one of his sons, Prince Khaled, running the ministry. Whether such an important ministry can be inherited, a legacy numerous senior princes are trying to provide for their sons, will be closely watched.        

Prince Sultan has reportedly been battling colon cancer since 2004, and has left the kingdom for treatment for up to a year at a time since 2008. An American diplomatic cable released by WikiLeaks described him in 2009 as &ldquo;for all intents and purposes incapacitated.&rdquo;        

He had been admitted to New York-Presbyterian over the summer, where in recent weeks he had been slipping in and out of a coma, according to several Saudi experts who did not want to speak publicly about the royal family. A state funeral will take place on Tuesday.        

Prince Sultan, at least 80 and by some accounts 85, was a member of the Sudeiri seven &mdash; seven full brothers by the favorite wife of King Abdul Aziz al-Saud, who founded the kingdom in 1932. They have formed a kind of sub-tribe within the ruling al-Saud clan and often worked to block or stall King Abdullah&rsquo;s reform measures.        

King Abdullah, who left a hospital in Riyadh on Saturday after having back surgery, had formed a new family council to deal with succession questions, particularly when the throne might pass to a new generation. If summoned as expected, this would be the first time the 35-member council would endorse the inheritance.        

Given the power of Prince Nayef, the nation&rsquo;s top law enforcement officer since 1975, no serious challenge is anticipated, particularly since he was left running the country during frequent medical absences by the king and Prince Sultan.        

The Saudi monarchy, which has sought to counter the revolutions shaking its neighbors, wants to be seen as stable while much of the Arab world is in political turmoil. Attempts to organize antigovernment demonstrations in the kingdom have largely fizzled, while those that did emerge among the Shiite minority in Eastern Province were put down forcefully.        

&ldquo;We will not see dramatic changes in the next two or three monarchs,&rdquo; said Joseph Kechichian, the author of a book on succession in the kingdom. &ldquo;The change will come when a new generation comes in.&rdquo;        

Prince Bandar, the Saudi ambassador to Washington from 1983 to 2005, is perhaps the most famous son of Prince Sultan, along with Prince Khaled, the deputy minister of defense, who was nominally in charge of the military during the 1991 war to expel Iraqi forces from Kuwait.        

Given the longevity of Saudi princes, several have turned their government ministries into personal fiefs, with their sons as their top aides. Prince Sultan&rsquo;s death will be the first important test of whether such a crucial ministry can be inherited, a move his brothers are expected to contest.        

In addition, since many of his regional portfolios were left in limbo in his absence, analysts are looking to see whether the country will now take a more forceful role in crises like the uprising in Yemen. &ldquo;Although the late crown prince hasn&rsquo;t been directly involved in relations with Yemen in the past few months, relations with Yemen will have to officially be moved to another senior member of the family,&rdquo; said Sultan Sooud Al-Qassemi, a Persian Gulf-based analyst.        
Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington, and Elizabeth A. Harris reporting from New York.
