
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Afghanistan&rsquo;s embattled spy agency absolved itself of any wrongdoing on Saturday in the case of a wandering Islamic preacher detained by intelligence officials who ended up in a hospital this month, fading in and out of consciousness and seemingly near death.        

Ten days ago, doctors in the eastern province of Khost reported that the preacher, Maulavi Abdullah, had been held for 12 days by the intelligence service and arrived at the hospital badly beaten, unable to drink fluids and with failing kidneys. Afghan intelligence agents prevented doctors and reporters from talking to the patient, except for two doctors who were treating him.        

The allegations of his mistreatment surfaced just days after the United Nations office here released a withering report that detailed widespread mistreatment in detention centers run by the Afghan National Police and the intelligence agency, the National Directorate of Security. Khost, a mountainous border area where insurgents are active, was one of five provinces where human rights investigators found &ldquo;compelling evidence&rdquo; that intelligence agents employed torture to elicit confessions.        

On Saturday, government investigators gave Mr. Abdullah a clean bill of health, concluding that he had concocted the accusations of torture &ldquo;to escape from the law, show himself innocent and hide his crimes.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The claim by the accused is baseless,&rdquo; the National Directorate of Security summarized in its findings. &ldquo;There was no torture and no beating at all.&rdquo;        

It was impossible to verify the agency&rsquo;s conclusions. A doctor in Khost said that Mr. Abdullah had been taken from the hospital there several days ago by government officials and security guards. He was believed to be at a military hospital in Kabul, doctors said, but officials have not said where and the intelligence agency did not respond to requests for comment on Saturday.        

After the grim descriptions by the preacher&rsquo;s doctors and accusations from his family became public, threatening to undercut the government&rsquo;s claims that it was making reforms to eliminate mistreatment at its detention centers, President Hamid Karzai ordered an investigation.        

The intelligence agency said it sent a team of investigators to Khost, where they met with doctors, reviewed detention records and worked &ldquo;in cooperation&rdquo; with the regional United Nations office. Georgette Gagnon, director of the United Nations&rsquo; human rights unit here, said her office was conducting &ldquo;an independent investigation into this incident, which is not yet completed.&rdquo;        

Little is clear about what happened to Mr. Abdullah during his time in jail, and whether he ended up in the hospital because of chronic kidney problems, abuse, or perhaps both or neither.        

Afghan intelligence officials said that Mr. Abdullah had been arrested on suspicion of terrorism and had been in their custody until Oct. 9, when he was transferred to the province&rsquo;s general prison. They said he was healthy when he left the intelligence detention center. They did not say how long he had been detained, but doctors said he had been held for 12 days.        

On Oct. 4, observers from the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission visited the Khost intelligence facility and spoke to Mr. Abdullah, among other prisoners. He reported that his kidneys hurt but did not complain about any abuse, said Ahmad Nader Nadery, a commissioner for the rights group.        

Intelligence officials quoted an ultrasound specialist, named Dr. Mohammed Ayub, who later examined Mr. Abdullah and determined that he was in &ldquo;good health.&rdquo; But medical reports from an internist in Khost who examined Mr. Abdullah on Oct. 13 cast doubts on that conclusion. The internist, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he feared antagonizing the intelligence service, found a laceration on Mr. Abdullah&rsquo;s left kidney and fresh blood in his bladder, symptoms consistent with trauma. He said any problem-free diagnosis would have to have been almost willfully shoddy.        
