
ISTANBUL &mdash; At least 138 people were killed and about 350 were injured after a powerful earthquake struck eastern Turkey, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said in a news conference early Monday. The death toll was expected to rise, perhaps significantly, with many people reported to be stuck beneath dozens of collapsed buildings.        



The earthquake, measured at a magnitude of 7.2 by the Turkish seismic institute, occurred in the early afternoon on Sunday in Van Province, not far from the border with Iran. It was centered near the city of Van and the nearby town of Ercis, and it was felt strongly in nearby villages and some parts of northern Iraq, the semiofficial Anatolian News Agency reported.        

Speaking in Ercis, Mr. Erdogan said that the death toll in the center of Van was 93, with 45 dead in Ercis. Many of the 55 buildings that collapsed along the main road in Ercis were residential, which could raise the death toll. Almost all the sun-dried brick houses in nearby villages were also destroyed, he added. Early Monday, officials said that 970 buildings had collapsed in and around the city of Van.        

&ldquo;It is not possible to give exact figures on the death toll at this point, as our hope is to reach survivors alive,&rdquo; Mr. Erdogan said, referring to the rescue operation in Ercis.        

Video taken almost immediately after the earthquake showed hundreds of people in Van running through a cloud of smoke in one of the city&rsquo;s main streets, crying and shouting in panic. As the full extent of the damage became clear, desperate survivors dug with bare hands into the collapsed steel and concrete, trying to rescue the trapped and the injured, various television channels showed.        

There were more than a hundred aftershocks in the region, the strongest with a magnitude of 5.7, according to the state-owned television network TRT.        

People used flashlights to search for survivors trapped under piles of rubble. Videos on television showed cranes working around some of the collapsed buildings, while aid workers periodically called for silence to try to detect signs of life under huge chunks of concrete.        

In Van, the walls of a prison collapsed, and about 200 inmates escaped, NTV reported; about 50 prisoners were later recaptured.        

More than 1,270 aid workers from 38 nearby towns were sent to Van and Ercis to help in the relief efforts, while other nations, including Israel, offered assistance.        

Israel&rsquo;s offer came as a diplomatic standoff has virtually frozen relations between the two countries, in the aftermath of a raid that killed nine people by Israeli commandos last year trying to halt a Turkish aid flotilla bound for Gaza.        

In a statement, President Obama offered condolences to the victims&rsquo; families. &ldquo;Our thoughts and prayers are with the brave men and women who are working to bring assistance to this stricken region,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said. &ldquo;We stand shoulder to shoulder with our Turkish ally in this difficult time, and are ready to assist the Turkish authorities.&rdquo;        

Units of the Turkish Army were sent to the mountainous region in the east, and the Health Ministry assembled 145 ambulances and 500 staff members to help coordinate the medical operation, the Anatolian News Agency reported.        

The Turkish Red Crescent sent tents, blankets and other supplies to the area. Earthquakes take place frequently in Turkey, which is crisscrossed by fault lines, and both the government and the Red Crescent are expected to act more effectively in organizing rescue and relief operations. In 1999, thousands of people were killed
 by two powerful earthquakes in northwestern Turkey.        

&ldquo;Tents will not be enough &mdash; we do not have food, no rescue teams have reached here yet,&rdquo; said Serif Tarakci, an official from the village of Halkali, about 30 miles from the city of Van. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s cold at night, everybody is outside and we&rsquo;re freezing here.&rdquo; Temperatures in the region were about 34 degrees late on Sunday night.        
