
BENGHAZI, Libya &mdash; The leader of the transitional government declared to thousands of revelers in a sunlit square here on Sunday that Libya&rsquo;s revolution had ended, setting the country on the path to elections, and he vowed that the new government would be based on Islamic tenets.        

The emotional ceremony, hastily improvised three days after the death of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, was intended to put a cap on Libya&rsquo;s bloody upheaval and mark the beginning of a transition to an elected government within 20 months. The location, next to a military compound where the uprising&rsquo;s first battles were fought, was chosen to close a violent circle.        

A sea of flag-waving citizens &mdash; grandmothers and former soldiers, fathers and housewives, children and workers &mdash; greeted with a surge of noisy euphoria the country&rsquo;s transitional leaders and military officers who had defected to the rebel cause.        

But as the eight-month conflict has drawn to a close, the challenges facing the new Libya have come into sharp relief. In the barren political landscape that is the legacy of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s 42 years in power, the weak interim government has struggled to calm incendiary regional and factional disputes or exert control even over its own militias.        

The most powerful force in the fledgling state, the armed groups remain a law unto themselves. The threat they pose was underscored with the discovery Sunday of at least 53 bodies, people who appeared to have been executed, possibly by anti-Qaddafi fighters.        

Peter Bouckaert of Human Rights Watch documented the killings and said the victims, who included Qaddafi loyalists and a senior official in the former government, had been found in the garden of a hotel in Surt. Several had their hands tied behind their backs. The victims were thought to have been killed about a week ago, when the hotel was a base for several former rebel brigades from Misurata, Mr. Bouckaert said.        

The discovery came amid continued uncertainty about the circumstances surrounding the deaths of Colonel Qaddafi and his son Muatassim, who may have been killed while in the custody of former rebel fighters. The interim authorities have promised to investigate the deaths.        

Libya&rsquo;s chief forensic pathologist said Sunday that he had performed autopsies on the bodies of Colonel Qaddafi, Muatassim Qaddafi and Abu Bakr Younes, a former defense minister. The pathologist, Dr. Othman al-Zentani, told The Associated Press that Colonel Qaddafi had been killed by a gunshot to the head. Later, he indicated that there may have also been other causes, without providing details.        

In Benghazi, the joy of the moment was untempered by what many in the crowd acknowledged were the immense tasks ahead. Laws, national institutions, civic life &mdash; all will need to be built from scratch after four decades of Qaddafi&rsquo;s personality-cult dictatorship. There was relief, too, that the effort could finally begin.        

When Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, the chairman of the Transitional National Council, pronounced the end of the uprising, the crowd reacted with shouts of &ldquo;God is great.&rdquo; This was not long after people sang the bouncy national anthem of pre-Qaddafi days, which was revived to help celebrate the downfall of the dictator, who was killed on Thursday after he tried to flee Surt.        

Two strands &mdash; a new piety and all-purpose, freewheeling happiness &mdash; dominated the ceremony. Mr. Abdel-Jalil, stooping humbly to shake hands in the crowd and embracing the elderly relative of a fallen rebel, made clear that personality would have nothing to do with the new order.        

&ldquo;We are an Islamic country,&rdquo; he said as the sun descended. &ldquo;We take the Islamic religion as the core of our new government. The constitution will be based on our Islamic religion.&rdquo;        

Among other things, he promised that Islamic banks would be established in the new Libya. He also talked of lifting restrictions on the number of women Libyan men can marry, The Associated Press reported.        

The comments reflected not only the chairman&rsquo;s personal religious conservatism and the country&rsquo;s, but also the rising influence of Islamists among the former rebels. The Islamists, who include some influential militia commanders, have warned that they will not permit their secular counterparts in a new government to sideline them.        
Adam Nossiter reported from Benghazi, Libya, and Kareem Fahim from Misurata, Libya.
