
CIZRE, Turkey &mdash; Thousands of people filled the streets of this dusty town near the borders with Syria and Iraq on Sunday to mourn the death of a local heroine, a commander in a mountaintop training camp for Kurdish militants seeking autonomy for the country&rsquo;s largely Kurdish southeast.        

The elderly leaned on knotted wooden canes as they marched, and children in balaclavas fashioned from T-shirts gathered stones to throw at police officers at dusk, when the sounds of percussion bombs echoed through deserted streets. Chants exulting the Kurdistan Workers&rsquo; Party, or P.K.K., mingled with condolences for the family of Cicek Botan, a native of Cizre and the middle-age P.K.K. commander who fought the Turkish state for more than two decades before being killed on Oct. 10 in a raid on a training camp in Iraq.        

&ldquo;The P.K.K. is the community, and we are the community,&rdquo; the crowd chanted as they awaited her body, which did not arrive in time for the funeral that quickly turned into a demonstration. &ldquo;Oh martyr, your blood will not be spilled in vain! Every Kurd is a guerrilla!&rdquo;        

Although Turkey, the United States and the European Union consider the P.K.K. a terrorist organization, sympathy for both the group and its goals remains widespread in many towns in Turkey&rsquo;s rugged southeast.        

Public opinion in the rest of the country runs in the opposite direction. In Istanbul&rsquo;s Taksim Square on Sunday, thousands rallied against the P.K.K., whose fighters killed 24 soldiers and injured 18 others in a complex attack last week. In response, the Turkish military sent more than 10,000 soldiers backed by surveillance drones, helicopters and F-16 and F-4 jets into the southern province of Hakkari and over the border into Iraq, killing at least 270 militants and injuring more than 210, the top commander of the Turkish Armed Forces, Gen. Necdet Ozel,&nbsp; said in a rare interview with the NTV news channel on Sunday.        

&ldquo;We will not tie our hands waiting for a political solution while they are killing our young,&rdquo; Ayfer Ozcan, 38, said in Istanbul as she tied a headband in the colors of the Turkish flag around her daughter&rsquo;s head. Nearby, people chanted in support of the military operation.        

&ldquo;Our operations proved no results so far, but neither have the attacks by the P.K.K.,&rdquo; Ms. Ozcan said. The P.K.K.&rsquo;s aggressive attack and the government&rsquo;s muscular response have provoked anxiety about the future, particularly because they follow several years of relative calm.        

&ldquo;These developments are a really disturbing escalation, because they appear to be an attempt by the P.K.K. to invite Turkey back to the hell of the 1990s,&rdquo; said Hugh Pope, an analyst at the International Crisis Group, which researches conflicts worldwide.        

Turkey had appeared to be moving toward political reforms intended to address the roots of its conflict. At the center of the effort are draft constitutional amendments that would give broader rights to Kurds and other minorities. Parliament is still drafting the amendments.        

&ldquo;There has been a new narrative of normalcy in the southeast for the last several years, and they are trying to bring it back to the old narrative of conflict with the Turkish state,&rdquo; said Mr. Pope, who, like many people, contended that only political reforms can solve the conflict, which has claimed more than 40,000 lives since 1984.        

But violence has increased markedly here in the southeast since June, according to figures compiled by the International Crisis Group; 111 members of the security forces have been killed, as have 31 civilians and at least 80 P.K.K. fighters. The separatist group has also kidnapped at least 20 people viewed as supportive of the state, although data on kidnappings are imprecise.        

&ldquo;We have been down this road many times before,&rdquo; Mr. Pope said, referring to the recent military action. &ldquo;Politicians might say they can hit the P.K.K. out of the park this time, but it never has worked and it never can work.&rdquo;        
Liam Stack reported from Cizre, and Sebnem Arsu from Istanbul.
