
ISTANBUL &mdash; Rescue crews dug with their bare hands, used heavy machinery to remove chunks of fallen concrete and relied on cellphone calls from the missing in the search on Monday for survivors of the deadly earthquake in eastern Turkey.        



The prime minister&rsquo;s office put the official death toll at 279, and said about 1,300 people had been injured in the magnitude 7.2 quake, which struck near the city of Van on Sunday. Government officials refused to say how many people had been rescued, but news media reports said at least 25 survivors had been pulled from the wreckage during the day on Monday.        

They included a 19-year-old in the town of Ercis who used his cellphone to direct teams to the collapsed building where he had been trapped, and a woman buried in the rubble of a cafe whose fianc&eacute; used his hands to help dig her out.        

About 3,000 rescue workers and 12 specially trained dogs had been called out, Bulent Arinc, the deputy prime minister, said in a news conference that was broadcast nationally. About 2,260 buildings near Van had collapsed, he said.        

&ldquo;This is one of the strongest earthquakes registered in Turkey in recent years,&rdquo; Mr. Arinc said. &ldquo;Our relief efforts include everything that would apply in an officially declared disaster region.&rdquo;        

At least 213 aftershocks have been reported in Turkey, which is crisscrossed by faults. The strongest was a magnitude 5.7 quake, the Turkish Seismic Institute said.        

Video images broadcast on television showed heavy machinery lifting concrete blocks from multistory buildings that had collapsed like houses of cards on Kazim Karabekir Street in Ercis, about 30 miles north of Van.        

At one point, the search team at one Ercis building called for silence as they strained to hear the calls of survivors.        

About 9,000 tents and more than 25,000 blankets were shipped to the region, which is about 730 miles east of Ankara, the capital, and near the borders with Armenia and Iran. The government was also sending in food supplies. But relief efforts were plagued by chaos in places, and there were reports of fights at some of the distribution centers.        

There were also stories of heroism and unlikely survival.        

The 19-year-old in Ercis, Yalcin Akay, was rescued after he called the police on his cellphone while he was buried in the rubble of a six-story building, then helped lead his rescuers to his location, the Anatolian Agency reported.        

NTV reported the story of Gul Karakoc, a teacher, and two friends who were found alive 17 hours after the initial quake under heaps of concrete that had been a cafe in Ercis. Ms. Karakoc&rsquo;s fianc&eacute;, Onur Eryasar, a military officer rushed to the scene after the quake and dug for hours with his bare hands, the television report said.        

A 13-year-old boy, identified only as Yunus, was pulled from the rubble of an Internet cafe in Ercis. Television broadcast the moment of his rescue, his eyes wide with fright and the hand of a dead person on his shoulder.        

There was also video of rescue groups cutting through the twisted steel of a multistory building in Ercis to save Halil Ozdemir, a young man who was barely conscious when he was found.        

Thousands of people whose homes were destroyed or were considered unstable were spending the nights outside, with temperatures forecast to be as low as 28 degrees, and snow expected midweek.        

The government said it had set aside about $1.7 million in disaster aid, and donations of money and supplies were coming in from civilian groups and private donors throughout Turkey, the official crisis center in Ankara reported.        

More than 50 nations also offered aid, including Israel, whose relations with Turkey have been strained since the Turkish deaths last year in an Israeli commando raid on a flotilla that was trying to run the blockade of Gaza.        

Mr. Arinc strongly denied initial reports that his government had refused the Israeli offer, saying that the two countries had always cooperated at times of natural disaster. Relations with Israeli government might not be as good as desired, he said, but &ldquo;it would have been highly inappropriate and unpleasant to refuse the offer by the Israeli government.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Nobody should even think about such a thing,&rdquo; he said.        
