
JERUSALEM &mdash; Israel announced Monday that it had reached an agreement with Egypt, with American assistance, for the release of Ilan Grapel, an American law student from Queens who also holds Israeli citizenship.        

Mr. Grapel, who was arrested in Egypt in June and charged with spying for Israel, is to be exchanged for 25 Egyptians, including three minors, held in Israeli jails. Egypt&rsquo;s state television had a similar announcement Monday, Agence France-Presse reported.        

No date was given for the release, but it is expected to be within days. The Israeli security cabinet is to convene Tuesday to approve the deal; the 25 Egyptians are not classified as security prisoners, so there is not likely to be much opposition.        

Although the accord had been in the works for a while, it was finalized only after the Egyptian-brokered exchange between Israel and Hamas last week. An Israeli soldier, Sgt. First Class Gilad Shalit, returned home from Gaza in return for the release of the first batch of a total of more than 1,000 Palestinians from Israeli jails, many convicted of deadly terrorist attacks.        

Representative Gary L. Ackerman of New York, a Democrat from Queens, said he had worked to secure the release of Mr. Grapel, 27, a constituent and former intern in Mr. Ackerman&rsquo;s office, &ldquo;by personally intervening with the Egyptian Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, the prime minister of Israel and the U.S. State Department.&rdquo;        

Daniel Grapel, Mr. Grapel&rsquo;s father, told Israeli television on Monday that he was not privy to the details, but was aware that things were happening &ldquo;behind the scenes.&rdquo; He said he did not know exactly where and when the exchange would occur.        

Ilan Grapel and his family have denied that he had any role in espionage. Egyptian officials also accused him of sedition and inciting protesters to violence. He went to Cairo in May to work for a nonprofit group that helps refugees, his family said. Photographs posted online showed him holding signs at Tahrir Square protests.        

A graduate of Johns Hopkins, a student of Arabic and a former paratrooper in the Israeli Army, Mr. Grapel has made no secret of his Israeli citizenship. On his Facebook page, he displayed pictures of himself in an Israeli military uniform. He was wounded in the 2006 war with Lebanon.        

Mr. Ackerman said that from the beginning, he was &ldquo;assured by the highest levels in Israel that in no way did Ilan have anything to do with espionage, the Mossad or any other type of spy agency.&rdquo; Mr. Grapel &ldquo;loves Egypt and the Egyptian culture,&rdquo; he said, and &ldquo;just found himself in the wrong place at the wrong time.&rdquo; Mr. Grapel, he added, had been treated well in detention.        

The agreement gave additional indication of the quiet, working relations between Israel and Egypt&rsquo;s transitional rulers, despite the fraying of ties since the overthrow in February of President Hosni Mubarak, a staunch ally. Israel and Egypt have maintained a peace treaty for three decades, but long-simmering Egyptian popular hostility against Israel has burst into the open since the revolution.        

Last month, a crowd stormed the Israeli Embassy in Cairo, motivated, in part, by anger over the killing of five Egyptian security officers in August when Israeli troops pursued militants into Egypt after an attack killed eight people in Israel. Israel recently apologized formally for the deaths of the Egyptian officers, which it said were accidental.        
