
Security forces beat and arrested student protesters in the Sudanese capital on Sunday as the unrest and antigovernment fervor in Tunisia and Egypt showed their first indication of spreading to the streets of Khartoum, if on a far smaller scale.        

The protests, organized by groups of university students and graduates, came together as Facebook, Twitter and other Web sites were used to rally several thousand demonstrators in at least four locations in Khartoum and Omdurman, the commercial center across the Nile from the capital, according to news services and activists.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s about time we fight for our God-given rights,&rdquo; a Facebook page announcing the protests exhorted, calling for an end to autocratic government practices that have led to corruption, rising prices and unemployment. More than 16,000 people had indicated they would attend. &ldquo;Our brothers in Tunisia did it, and so did our brothers in Egypt.&rdquo;        

Midhat Afifi, 28, was among the roughly 1,000 demonstrators who gathered on Al-Qasr Street in downtown Khartoum around 11 a.m. As they started to shout slogans like, &ldquo;We are ready to die for Sudan,&rdquo; they were surrounded by riot police officers.        

Video shot by protesters shows security forces in blue camouflage beating protesters with batons. Representatives of the student groups, calling themselves &ldquo;The Spark,&rdquo; &ldquo;Youth for Change&rdquo; and &ldquo;We are Fed Up,&rdquo; reported that about 50 people were arrested.        

Albaqir Mukhtar, the director of KACE, a local human rights organization, said that the demonstrations were the first time the pro-democracy youth groups had attempted to organize a demonstration without the broader support of the organized Sudanese political opposition.        

He said that student leaders said they would rethink the strategy of holding demonstrations on Al-Qasr Street near the heavily guarded Republican Palace, the seat of government. At other locations, the police used tear gas against demonstrators, Reuters reported. About 500 young people also protested in the city of El Obeid in Northern Kordofan, in the west of the country, Reuters reported.        

By late Sunday, access to the student group Web sites was shut down, Mr. Mukhtar said. &ldquo;But people speak of it as a spark,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and the idea is to keep the flame and the demonstrations alive.&rdquo;        

Sudan is in a deep economic crisis, and the government recently cut subsidies on petroleum products and sugar, setting off smaller protests throughout the north. The protests also coincided with the first official announcement of results from the referendum in southern Sudan on its secession from the north. The overwhelming vote for independence, more than 99 percent, is adding to anger against the government in the north, where separation was opposed.        

Demonstrations are not permitted in Sudan without a permit, and permits are seldom given. A police spokesman, Ahmed al-Tuhami, told Reuters that the police did not have figures for any injuries or arrests. &ldquo;We did not use more violence than necessary,&rdquo; he said.        

In Tunisia, meanwhile, the leader of a long-outlawed Tunisian Islamist party returned home on Sunday after two decades in exile, and was welcomed at the airport by thousands of people shouting &ldquo;God is great,&rdquo; The Associated Press reported.        

Rachid Ghannouchi, a theorist known for studying Islam and democracy, and about 70 other exiled members of the Renaissance, or Ennahdha Party, flew home from Britain two weeks after President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali was forced from power by violent protests. Though the ban on the party has not officially been lifted, the new interim government is more tolerant of it.        

The party was branded an Islamic terrorist group by Mr. Ben Ali, but scholars widely consider it moderate. In an interview with The A.P., Mr. Ghannouchi said that his Western-looking country has nothing to fear.        
