
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; Somalia&rsquo;s president on Monday criticized Kenya&rsquo;s military offensive into his nation to root out Islamist rebels, raising questions about how bilateral the military action is.        

&ldquo;There are things we see as inappropriate,&rdquo; President Sheik&nbsp;Sharif&nbsp;Sheik Ahmed said during a tour of a Mogadishu neighborhood, &ldquo;such as Kenyan troops crossing the border into Somalia.&rdquo;        

Kenya sent hundreds of soldiers, backed by tanks and aircraft, into Somalia this month to fight the Shabab, ruthless Islamists who control parts of the country. Kenya has said the purpose of the operation is to support Somalia&rsquo;s government, which has been battling the Shabab with limited success for years, and that it plans to stay in Somalia until the threat of the insurgents has been &ldquo;reduced.&rdquo;        

The Shabab have threatened to retaliate against Kenya for the offensive, much as they struck Uganda last year for sending peacekeepers to Somalia. Two separate grenades went off in Kenya&rsquo;s capital, Nairobi, on Monday &mdash; killing one person and wounding well over a dozen &mdash; though officials were not yet prepared to blame the Shabab.        

Somalia and Kenya signed a joint communiqu&eacute; on Oct. 18 calling for &ldquo;decisive action&rdquo; against the Shabab, who have pledged allegiance to Al Qaeda, cut off food aid during a famine this year in Somalia and killed many civilians in bombings and other attacks in the past.        

But Sheik&nbsp;Sharif&rsquo;s comments on Monday suggested that the two countries might not agree on the Kenyan incursion.        

A Kenyan government spokesman and military spokesman did not return calls on Monday. A Somali government spokesman, echoing Sheik&nbsp;Sharif&rsquo;s sentiments, said that while Somalia welcomed assistance from Kenya, the Somali government&rsquo;s territorial sovereignty must be ensured.        

Already, the battle against the Shabab is widening, with the Kenyan military on Sunday announcing that a French naval ship had bombarded a city to the south of Kismayu, a major seaport and stronghold of the Shabab.        

A French official in Paris on Monday denied the statement, but he said France would send equipment and logistical support to Kenya in its operation.        

&ldquo;It will start either this afternoon or tomorrow,&rdquo; said Thierry Burkhard, a French military spokesman.        

On Sunday, the American ambassador to Kenya, Scott Gration, indicated that the United States might also help in the operation.        

&ldquo;We are talking with the Kenyans right now to figure out where they need help,&rdquo; Mr. Gration told The Financial Times.        

Kenya began its operation into Somalia &mdash; called Linda Nchi, which means &ldquo;protect the country&rdquo; in the local language, Swahili &mdash; after a spate of kidnapping of Westerners inside Kenya by Somali gunmen, two from a Somali refugee camp and two from its tourist-laden beaches on the Indian Ocean. But many analysts doubt the Shabab were behind the abductions.        

After the Shabab threat of retaliation, the American Embassy in Nairobi issued a warning on Saturday of potential attacks, particularly to Nairobi&rsquo;s popular shopping malls and nightclubs.        

Early Monday morning, a grenade exploded in Nairobi at a downtown nightspot, injuring at least a dozen people and instantly fueling fears that the Shabab were making good on their threat, though the police have not specified who was behind the attack.        

A chunk of Nairobi&rsquo;s usually bustling business district was cordoned off on Monday by the police and soldiers investigating the grenade attack, as a crowd craned their necks to catch a glimpse of what some Kenyans worried would be the first of more terrorist strikes.        

&ldquo;We have been expecting this,&rdquo; said Samson Njoroge, a businessman among the onlookers. &ldquo;This may be just the beginning of something else.&rdquo;        

Many here in Nairobi say they have expected an attack, but were taken aback nonetheless by the explosion Monday, which hit a local pub on a back-alley street.        

&ldquo;The other big buildings have security, so they take advantage of such back streets,&rdquo; Mr. Njoroge said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s scary.&rdquo;        

Inside the bar, a wall was cratered with pockmarks said to have come from grenade fragments. A video from the bar earlier in the day posted on YouTube showed pools of blood between a scramble of fallen beer bottles.        

Then on Monday evening at around 8 p.m., a second grenade attack struck a major transit point downtown where residents catch minibuses, killing at least one person and wounding at least seven others.        

The attacker was unknown, but before the blast the police had warned residents to avoid specific locations in Nairobi and Mombasa, including the area where the bus stop was attacked.        

The government also said it was canceling celebrations for Diwali, an Indian holiday, in which fireworks are commonly used, according to Kenyan television.        

Compared to some of Kenya&rsquo;s neighbors &mdash; including Ethiopia, Uganda and South Sudan &mdash; Kenya&rsquo;s military has scant experience waging war, and there are worries that the country has bitten off more than it can chew.        

&ldquo;They are not doing the right thing,&rdquo; said Thomas Gasheru, 30, a taxi driver in Nairobi, of the Kenyan military.        

&ldquo;They are not protecting, they are attacking,&rdquo; he said, adding, &ldquo;They are just jumping into confusion. We should choose another way.&rdquo;        
Maïa de la Baume contributed reporting from Paris; Mohammed Ibrahim from Mogadishu, Somalia; and a local journalist from Nairobi.
