
ROME &mdash; Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi called an urgent cabinet meeting on Monday, a day after German and French leaders urged Italy to quickly pass measures to help reduce pressure on the euro, but the meeting ended with no public decisions on any new efforts to spur the country&rsquo;s economic growth or cut its huge public debt.        

The silence appeared to be a sign that Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s weakening government remained deadlocked over major issues, despite increasing irritation from leaders of the effort to stabilize the euro. At the same time, that sense of waning European patience &mdash; which some Italians took to be verging on derision &mdash; set off anger within Italy.        

At a summit meeting in Brussels on Sunday to address the financial crisis facing the 17 European Union members that use the euro, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President Nicolas Sarkozy of France urged Mr. Berlusconi to get his cabinet to agree on new economic measures by Wednesday, when the euro zone leaders are scheduled to gather again under pressure to announce deals to stabilize Europe&rsquo;s fiscal infrastructure.        

Mr. Berlusconi issued a testy statement on Monday before the cabinet meeting, saying Italy would not take &ldquo;lessons&rdquo; from Europe.        

Italy has been meeting its &ldquo;public-debt obligations on time; we have a primary surplus stronger than our partners; we will reach a balanced budget in 2013,&rdquo; Mr. Berlusconi said in an e-mailed statement on Monday.        

&ldquo;No one has anything to fear about Europe&rsquo;s third largest economy,&rdquo; he wrote.        

On Monday night, the Italian news media reported that sources in the government were saying that at the meeting in Brussels on Wednesday, Mr. Berlusconi would present plans to promote economic growth, sell state assets and liberalize the country&rsquo;s labor market.        

The most controversial measure for Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s center-right coalition is a proposal to overhaul the country&rsquo;s pension system by raising the country&rsquo;s standard retirement age to 67 from 65. But the Northern League, a party in Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s coalition, opposes the move.        

Marco Reguzzoni, the leader of the Northern League in the lower house, told Italian television, &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve made alternative proposals, which we will discuss in cabinet and then in Parliament.&rdquo;        

Though Greece is the euro country in the greatest distress over its public debt now, Italy is also being scrutinized because of its much larger economy, low growth rate and mounting debts, and the threat that a Greece-like crisis in Italy would pose to the continent and the rest of the world. Italy&rsquo;s huge public debt of nearly $2.8 trillion, or about 120 percent of gross domestic product, is the second largest in Europe. The International Monetary Fund estimated last month that Italy&rsquo;s economy would grow by an anemic 0.6 percent in 2011.        

Mr. Berlusconi pushed $75 billion worth of austerity measures through a reluctant Parliament this summer, but a promised package of growth and revenue measures has stalled in the cabinet. Those measures were also requested by the European Central Bank, which agreed to buy Italian bonds to keep Italy&rsquo;s borrowing costs down.        

Some local commentators saw the reprimand that Italy must do more, issued by its European partners over the weekend, as evidence that Italy&rsquo;s international standing was suffering.        

&ldquo;Italy comes off as a borderline case of the irresponsibility of national governments towards collective European interests that is no longer compatible with monetary union,&rdquo; wrote Stefano Lepri in a front-page editorial in La Stampa, a newspaper in Turin.        

But Mr. Berlusconi brushed aside the criticism on Monday. &ldquo;No one in the E.U. can nominate themselves commissioner and speak in the name of elected governments,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;No one can give lessons to E.U. partners.&rdquo;        

Critics of Mr. Berlusconi and his government said the open reprimand of Italy at the summit meeting on Sunday was a sign the leadership was failing when the country was especially vulnerable to market speculators.        

Italians were particularly upset by an exchange of glances and what some took to be suppressed smiles between Mrs. Merkel and Mr. Sarkozy at a news conference on Sunday, when they were asked whether they thought Italy could satisfy the demands being made of it.        

In a front-page headline, Il Giornale, an Italian newspaper owned by Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s family, compared Mr. Sarkozy to Zin&eacute;dine Zidane, the French soccer player who head-butted an Italian player during a 2006 World Cup final, an act that was denounced as unsportsmanlike.        

&ldquo;We are considered the risk for Europe and the world, to the point to be derided in an unacceptable manner,&rdquo; Pier Luigi Bersani, the leader of the Democratic Party, the largest opposition group, told reporters Monday evening. &ldquo;Let it be clear that Italians are not Berlusconi.&rdquo;        

The Italian media reported later Monday that the French and German leaders had not intended to belittle Italy, and that according to the German government, the suppressed smiles were prompted by uncertainty over who would answer the question.        
