
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Robert S. Ford, the American ambassador to Damascus, who has been outspoken in criticizing Syria&rsquo;s crackdown on popular protests, has left the country because of what American officials called threats to his safety.        

Mr. Ford&rsquo;s departure, made public on Monday, appeared to prompt Syria to withdraw its own ambassador, Imad Moustapha, from Washington. The moves raised the tensions between the countries to their highest point since 2009, when the Obama administration sought to improve relations that had been all but severed under President George W. Bush.        

Though both countries left open the possibility of their envoys returning, the moves seemed to encapsulate each country&rsquo;s deep suspicion of the other. Syria has accused Mr. Ford of acting as a provocateur, and the State Department has called in Mr. Moustapha on suspicion that his embassy was conducting surveillance of Syrian dissidents in the United States.        

&ldquo;Syria recalled its ambassador as a way to prevent the United States from deporting him,&rdquo; a Syrian official in Damascus said Monday on the condition of anonymity.        

An official Syrian television channel, al-Ikhbariya, said Monday night that Mr. Moustapha would return to Damascus &ldquo;to hold consultations with Syrian leaders&rdquo; but offered no further details.        

While in Syria, Mr. Ford visited restive cities like Hama and attended a funeral for a slain activist, activities that made him a visible if controversial figure. Since the uprising in Syria erupted in March, Mr. Ford has been vocal in his criticism of government repression, even taking to Facebook and the embassy&rsquo;s Web site to castigate the government or offer his version of events.        

Haynes Mahoney, the newly arrived charg&eacute; d&rsquo;affaires, will act in Mr. Ford&rsquo;s place while he is out of Syria. Mr. Mahoney said Monday that Mr. Ford&rsquo;s departure, on Saturday, did not mean the American government had withdrawn him from the post. The Syrian official said the same applied to Mr. Moustapha.        

Mr. Mahoney declined to specify the threats against Mr. Ford, though he noted that Mr. Ford had been sharply criticized in state-run media and on al-Dunia, a television station that hews to the official line.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re focusing particularly on the incitement in the media &mdash; an incitement campaign, I should say, conducted by the Syrian regime &mdash; which we hope will stop,&rdquo; Mr. Mahoney said by phone. &ldquo;At this point, we can&rsquo;t really say when he will return. I hope it will be soon. But it will depend on our assessment of the incitement and the security situation.&rdquo;        

Though foreign satellite channels can be viewed in Syria, the state media still wield great influence with supporters of President Bashar al-Assad. A column in Al Baath, a newspaper that serves as a mouthpiece for the government, said about Mr. Ford earlier this month that &ldquo;as long as the ambassador believes that diplomacy is the art of instigation against national regimes, he should anticipate unpleasant treatment.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ford, a career diplomat and Arabic speaker who filled the ambassadorship this year after it had been vacant since 2005, traveled to Hama in July, when government forces had withdrawn from the city and hundreds of thousands of people were demonstrating in the streets. The visit apparently infuriated the government; weeks later, a released prisoner said interrogators had sought the names of Syrians seen escorting Mr. Ford&rsquo;s car.        

In September, dozens of pro-government Syrians attempted to assault Mr. Ford&rsquo;s delegation, attacking its motorcade as it traveled to a meeting with Hassan Abdel-Azim, an opposition figure in Damascus. Crowds then tried to break into an office where the meeting was being held, trapping Mr. Ford for 90 minutes.        

&ldquo;Syria&rsquo;s problems come not from foreign interference but from intolerance &mdash; the same kind of intolerance we saw in front of Abdel-Azim&rsquo;s office,&rdquo; Mr. Ford wrote afterward on the embassy&rsquo;s Web site, recounting the attack. &ldquo;Unfortunately, those problems now are growing worse and more violent.&rdquo;        

The White House said then that it had no plans to remove Mr. Ford for his safety.        

That assault was the second on American diplomats this year. In July, after Mr. Ford&rsquo;s visit to Hama, government supporters attacked the embassy compound and tried to break into Mr. Ford&rsquo;s residence nearby but were unable to enter.        

The role of diplomats and embassies has emerged as another arena of the Syrian uprising and crackdown, whose toll the United Nations has put at more than 3,000 lives. In July, the State Department summoned Mr. Moustapha over reports that the embassy was carrying out surveillance on Syrian dissidents. Syrian officials, meanwhile, have criticized European governments for failing to protect their embassies from attacks by protesters in Germany and Switzerland.        

&ldquo;If they don&rsquo;t provide security to our missions, we will treat them the same way,&rdquo; Walid al-Moallem, the Syrian foreign minister, told reporters this month.        

Mr. Ford&rsquo;s criticism of the Assad government stands in contrast to the relative silence of the American Embassy in Bahrain, an American ally, whose government cracked down violently on protests by the country&rsquo;s Shiite majority.        

The State Department&rsquo;s spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, said Mr. Ford would return to Syria soon, but the timing was not clear.        

Ms. Nuland cited accusations in the state media as part &ldquo;of the kind of malicious smear campaign that we think the regime is conducting here.&rdquo; She called on the Syrian government to halt what she described as a violation of diplomatic protections.        

&ldquo;I think that the kinds of falsehoods that are being spread about Ambassador Ford could lead to violence against him,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;whether it&rsquo;s by citizens, whether it&rsquo;s by, you know, thugs of one kind or another.&rdquo;        
Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Washington, and a New York Times employee from Damascus, Syria.
