
GENEVA &mdash; The United States and North Korea began two days of talks here on Monday that American officials have said will test the ground for a possible resumption of wider discussions on North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear program.        

A convoy of vehicles brought Kim Kye-gwan, North Korea&rsquo;s first vice foreign minister, to the United States mission in Geneva exactly on schedule at 10 a.m. for the first round of talks with a team of American negotiators led by President Obama&rsquo;s special envoy for North Korea policy, Stephen W. Bosworth.        

In a statement at the end of the first day of talks, Mr. Bosworth said: &ldquo;I think we are moving in a positive direction. We have narrowed some differences, but we still have differences that we have to resolve.&rdquo;        

His comments came after a working dinner with the North Korean delegation that he described as &ldquo;very positive.&rdquo; He added: &ldquo;I am neither optimistic nor pessimistic, but as I said, we have made some progress. But we have issues still to resolve, and we will work hard to do that.&rdquo;        

American officials said last week that the discussions were intended to determine whether North Korea was &ldquo;serious about engaging in talks and fulfilling its commitments under the 2005 joint statement of the six-party talks and its nuclear, international obligations, as well as take concrete steps toward denuclearization.&rdquo;        

North Korea agreed in September 2005 to abandon its nuclear programs in exchange for economic assistance and diplomatic incentives from other parties to the six-party talks, which include China, Japan, Russia and South Korea, in addition to North Korea and the United States.        

But the agreement collapsed in a dispute over how thoroughly North Korea should reveal its nuclear activities and subject its nuclear facilities to outside inspections. North Korea&rsquo;s continuing nuclear activities, its testing of missiles and the lethal shelling of a South Korean island &mdash; as well as the sinking of a South Korean naval vessel, which the South said was attacked by the North &mdash; all added to the chill in relations.        

The Geneva meetings nonetheless follow hints of a thaw, including talks in New York in July between American and North Korean officials. And on Friday, the Pentagon announced that officials had reached agreement on a resumption of the search for the remains of Americans killed in the Korean War of 1950-53.        

Also on Monday, China urged North Korea, an ally, to improve its strained ties with the United States and South Korea, state media reported Monday.        

The prospect of talks came amid a background of criticism that both the United States and South Korea were withholding aid for political reasons, tying it to progress in negotiations.        

North Koreans, especially children, urgently need outside aid to fight &ldquo;terrible levels of malnutrition,&rdquo; the top United Nations humanitarian official said Monday.        

&ldquo;Six million North Koreans urgently need food aid, but the outside world is not giving enough,&rdquo; the official, Valerie Amos, said in a news conference after a fact-finding trip to North Korea last week. &ldquo;We need to remember the most vulnerable people in North Korea are victims of a situation over which they have no control. They are suffering from no fault of their own.&rdquo;        

Nearly half of North Korean children were chronically malnourished and the situation has been &ldquo;getting worse,&rdquo; she said, with North Korea running a shortage of one million tons of food a year. Food aid was especially needed after summer flooding.        

In the past several months, Washington has asked nongovernmental agencies &mdash; and sent its own team in May &mdash; to assess the humanitarian situation. But it has yet to announce a decision on aid, months after five American relief agencies recommended urgent shipments.        

&ldquo;The United States, along with other nations, has made a modest contribution to flood assistance,&rdquo; a senior State Department official said on the condition of anonymity in mid-September, after Washington&rsquo;s decision to grant $900,000 in flood relief for the North.        

&ldquo;And I think it would be fair to say that we are still awaiting a clear signal&rdquo; from the North, the official said, &ldquo;about what their response is to our overall proposals.&rdquo;        

Officially, the United States and South Korea say they do not link humanitarian aid to political issues. In Seoul, officials noted pockets of malnutrition in North Korea, but doubted that there was a nationwide food crisis of the kind that killed many thousands in the mid-1990s.        

But David Austin, the North Korea program director for the relief group Mercy Corps, said his team had found those pockets &ldquo;throughout the country&rdquo; on recent trips, adding that people there &ldquo;are starving to death.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s all wrapped in a political process,&rdquo; he said of food aid.        

In April, the United Nations appealed for $218 million in emergency aid. Only one-third of that amount has been pledged, amid tension over North Korea&rsquo;s provocative behavior and questions about whether North Korea diverts food aid to its military and governing elite.        
Nick Cumming-Bruce reported from Geneva, and Choe Sang-Hun from Seoul, South Korea.
