
YOKOTA AIR BASE, Japan &mdash; China was never mentioned, but when a sailor in the Japanese Navy asked Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta here on Monday whether the United States planned to cut back its forces in Asia, Mr. Panetta knew exactly what he meant.        

&ldquo;I want to make very clear that the United States is going to remain a presence in the Pacific for a long time,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta responded. &ldquo;That means, just so you understand, that we are not anticipating any cutbacks in this region. If anything, we&rsquo;re going to strengthen our presence in the Pacific.&rdquo;        

Mr. Panetta&rsquo;s message, delivered the day before in Indonesia as well and certain to be repeated later this week when he travels to South Korea, is the new call of the Obama administration as it winds down the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and scrambles to project its power in Asia. But this eastward pivot, meant to shore up Asian alliances and send a clear signal that the United States opposes China&rsquo;s claims to island territories far beyond its shores, comes at a difficult time.        

Like everyone else, Asian allies see an ailing American economy and coming Pentagon budget cuts &mdash; at least $450 billion over the next decade &mdash; and a growing isolationism among Republicans eager for the White House. Just last week, Mitt Romney suggested at a debate that the United States should, in effect, outsource some of its foreign aid to China. &ldquo;It doesn&rsquo;t make a lot of sense for us to borrow money from the Chinese to go give to another country for humanitarian aid,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We ought to get the Chinese to take care of the people.&rdquo;        

Pentagon officials say there are no plans to reduce the 85,000 American service members in the Pacific or to cut back the 7 of 11 aircraft carriers based in the region. But they are concerned that a Congressional deficit reduction panel may fail in its mission to find additional budget cuts next month, setting off automatic across-the-board reductions of another $600 billion from the Pentagon. Defense officials say that it would be catastrophic and that it could force troop reductions in the Pacific. They argue that even a small drawdown of, say, 5,000 troops would be seen in the region as a symbolic retreat even as China rapidly expands its military capabilities.        

In China, analysts say a military modernization program for the People&rsquo;s Liberation Army is a delayed and essential upgrading after decades when the Communist Party subordinated military needs to civilian ones. In the Chinese military&rsquo;s view, the buildup is needed to defend against what it sees as a growing and potentially unfriendly American presence in the Pacific.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a serious threat and a potential threat,&rdquo; Sun Zhe, the director of Tsinghua University&rsquo;s Center on United States-China relations, said in an interview late last year, citing the seven American aircraft carriers and 18 American nuclear submarines in the region. &ldquo;If you say they are only targeting North Korea, nobody will believe it.&rdquo;        

In the United States, there are concerns that the Pentagon is using China&rsquo;s military buildup to justify expensive new weapons systems and that it is overlooking the larger economic, diplomatic and trading challenges posed by Beijing. &ldquo;We trivialize that challenge if we focus exclusively on the military modernization program,&rdquo; said Roy D. Kamphausen, a China expert at the National Bureau of Asian Research and a former China specialist at the Pentagon. &ldquo;Our Navy and Air Force need to modernize for their own reasons and not just on the basis of a nascent Chinese threat,&rdquo; he said in an interview on Monday.        

Mr. Panetta, who is on his first trip to Asia as defense secretary, is setting the stage for President Obama, who next month will host a summit meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation in Hawaii and will attend a regional conference in Indonesia. Mr. Obama&rsquo;s voice will be the loudest in the administration&rsquo;s message that over the next 10 years in the region, the United States needs &ldquo;a substantially increased investment &mdash; diplomatic, economic, strategic, and otherwise,&rdquo; as Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton put it in an essay this month on &ldquo;America&rsquo;s Pacific Century&rdquo; in Foreign Policy.        

Militarily, China is not equipped to mount a frontal challenge to the United States. China&rsquo;s total military budget last year was an estimated $160 billion &mdash; roughly a tripling since the 1990s. By comparison, the Pentagon spent more than $500 billion in 2010, or closer to $700 billion if the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan are included. Although the P.L.A.&rsquo;s estimated 1.25 million ground troops makes it the largest in the world (there are about 750,000 active-duty United States Army soldiers and Marines), American defense officials say there is a vast difference in training and ability.        

But nearly all of China&rsquo;s military spending is Asia-focused, while only a portion of American spending is. And in lessons learned from the Soviet Union during the cold war, American defense officials say the Chinese are not trying to compete comprehensively with the United States, but &ldquo;asymmetrically&rdquo; in the place where they have the advantage. As a result, they say, the Chinese are developing antiship ballistic missiles, potentially capable of attacking American aircraft carriers in the Pacific, and are in sea trials with their own aircraft carrier, a refitted Soviet era-carrier from Ukraine.        

The Chinese are also developing a new-generation stealth jet fighter, the J-20, which they conspicuously sent on its first test flight this year during a high-profile visit by Robert M. Gates to Beijing while he was still defense secretary. Not least, a recent Pentagon report on the Chinese military said that numerous intrusions into computer systems around the world last year appeared to have originated in China, and that developing capabilities for cyberwarfare &ldquo;is consistent&rdquo; with authoritative Chinese military writings.        

In response, the Pentagon has stepped up investments in a range of weapons, jet fighters and technology, including in a new long-range nuclear-capable bomber aircraft, which the Pentagon had stopped developing in 2009, as well as a new generation of electronic jammers for the Navy that are designed to prevent a missile from finding and hitting a target. The Pentagon has bolstered its cyberwarfare capabilities and is developing a highly classified war strategy for Asia, called AirSea Battle Concept, aimed at coordinating naval and air forces in the Pacific.        

Mr. Panetta is adding his own voice. &ldquo;China is rapidly modernizing its military,&rdquo; he wrote in an opinion article published on Monday in the Yomiuri Shimbun, Japan&rsquo;s largest newspaper, &ldquo;but with a troubling lack of transparency, coupled with increasingly assertive activity in the East and South China Seas.&rdquo;        
Michael Wines contributed reporting from Beijing.
