
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Police officers investigating the double murder of a couple who were stoned to death in a prominent case five months ago could hardly have asked for more abundant evidence.        

There were hundreds of witnesses. The date, time and place of the attack were well known, and so were the identities of the killers. The crime had even been captured on cellphone videos, and at least one of the recordings reached the authorities within days.        

Now one of those videos showing the full horror of the killings has been broadcast on Afghan television to the shame of Afghan authorities, who have yet to make a single arrest in the deaths of the 19-year-old woman, Siddiqa, and her fianc&eacute;, Khayyam, 25, who had tried to elope against their families&rsquo; wishes.        

The broadcast has suddenly prompted at least the appearance of action by the government. Over the weekend, a Ministry of Interior investigating commission arrived in Kunduz Province, where the stoning was carried out by the Taliban in a village that has since come back under government control.        

The police there admit that they now know the identities of the killers &mdash; so does nearly everyone in Kunduz Province &mdash; but claim that the chief perpetrators have all gone into hiding. But that claim has been questioned because most of the males in the village, Mullah Quli, in the Archi District, took part in the Aug. 15 attack.        

Back in August, President Hamid Karzai&rsquo;s spokesman said that Mr. Karzai was &ldquo;deeply saddened&rdquo; by the stoning deaths of Siddiqa and Khayyam, who each used only one name, as do many Afghans, and that the president was determined to see their killers punished.        

Outrage was expressed by many, including human rights groups and the governor of Kunduz Province, and the stonings were condemned as both illegal and inhumane. Even religious scholars who support stoning as a punishment say the way these killings were done was barbaric by any standard.        

Only the Taliban, who controlled the village at the time, publicly condoned the killing of Siddiqa and Khayyam, who had a wife and two children.        

Contrary to what many think, said Ahmad Nader Nadery of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, the stoning of adulterers had not been a common practice in Afghanistan &mdash; until the Taliban era. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve almost never seen it before in Afghanistan,&rdquo; he said.        

When it has taken place, it has been under strict religious supervision, after a fair trial, with limits set by religious scholars on the size of the stones &mdash; they must be small. The stone-throwers are prohibited from lifting their arms above the head to throw.        

&ldquo;It really saddened me to see this video,&rdquo; said Mollawi Abdullah, a religious elder from the Archi District. &ldquo;It is right to stone people for doing such things, but stoning has its own rules and laws based on Shariah, and it is not to be done without a legitimate court, and it is not right to stone people unjustly with big, big stones.&rdquo;        

The video shows the male crowd using not only many large stones, but some so large it is hard to lift them, and often throwing the stones with great force. Siddiqa, dressed in a full blue burqa, was put in a pit to be stoned, but even after a sustained barrage from the crowd pressing close to her, she was still alive and tried to crawl out. Then one of the men shot her three times in the head.        

Her fianc&eacute;, Khayyam, was attacked separately, apparently after Siddiqa, but the crowd stoned him so ferociously that he was soon dead.        

The Taliban commanders can be heard ordering the villagers to take part in the stoning, and some did so halfheartedly, while others pitched in with enthusiasm &mdash; even laughing at the victims&rsquo; ordeal.        

&ldquo;The incident happened in public, and everyone in Kunduz was aware of that, including the police,&rdquo; said Horia Mosadiq, an Afghanistan specialist with Amnesty International. &ldquo;The shocking thing is the Afghan police are only taking action after the international attention brought to this case.&rdquo;        

Mr. Nadery of the human rights commission said it was no surprise that the police made no effort to pursue the killers for months. &ldquo;There is this total state of impunity here, especially for anything to do with social crimes.&rdquo;        

The Kunduz police chief, Abdul Rahman Sayidkhili, said the police had not been able to act earlier because Archi had been under Taliban control. He said that changed only four days ago &mdash; the same day the new video of the stonings was broadcast on a host of Afghan television stations, and then picked up by the international news media.        

Others said the government had regained control of the village weeks or months ago.        

&ldquo;We strongly condemn this wild and cruel act,&rdquo; the police chief said. &ldquo;We have recognized the people, and we have the names of the main perpetrators of this stoning.&rdquo;        

Speaking in a telephone interview, Mr. Sayidkhili said the police were pursuing only the ringleaders, however, not all of the participants. &ldquo;We cannot arrest the whole village,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Just a few people in the video were Taliban; the rest of them were there by force and had to obey the Taliban.&rdquo;        

Mr. Sayidkhili broke off the interview abruptly when asked whether the investigators sent to Kunduz planned to look into why the police had moved so slowly in the case. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s enough questions,&rdquo; he said.        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul, and an Afghan employee of The New York Times from Kunduz, Afghanistan.
