
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; An American aid worker and two colleagues were kidnapped by Somali gunmen Tuesday in the Somali region of Puntland, a Danish organization said.        

Three staff members from the Danish Refugee Council &mdash; an American woman, a Danish man and a Somali man &mdash; were abducted near the town of Galkayo at around 3 p.m., the organization said, adding that it had suspended all of its activities in the area.        

&ldquo;We are keeping close contact with the family members, who are deeply concerned, just as we are,&rdquo; Ann Mary Olsen, head of the Danish Refugee Council&rsquo;s international department, said in a statement.        

The American and Danish aid workers were the fifth and sixth Westerners to be kidnapped in a series of abductions by Somali gunmen since September. The kidnappings occurred as the African Union, the Kenyan military and an assortment of militias were battling Islamist extremists in Somalia, hoping to stabilize a country that has lacked a functioning national government for 20 years.        

Kenya, which neighbors Somalia, sent hundreds of troops backed by tanks and gunships into Somalia this month to battle the Shabab, an Islamist insurgent group, after four Westerners were kidnapped from its territory by Somali gunmen. One of them, a 66-year old French cancer patient and paraplegic, died this month in captivity.        

Kenya&rsquo;s military offensive aims at shoring up Somalia&rsquo;s weak, American-backed government, which controls only pockets of Somali territory. Somalia is carved into a hodgepodge of semiautonomous regions, as well as areas run by clan-based militias and roving bandits.        

The kidnappings on Tuesday took place far from the scene of Kenya&rsquo;s offensive &mdash; in the semiautonomous region of Puntland, which is relatively stable compared to the rest of Somalia, though it still experiences kidnapping, piracy and human trafficking.        

Kidnapping is a lucrative business in Puntland. Two journalists, one British and one Spanish, were kidnapped there in 2008 and held for over a month before a ransom of about $1 million was paid.        

Few details emerged Tuesday about the abduction of the three aid workers, who were working for the Danish Demining Group, a subset of the Danish Refugee Council. Residents and community leaders in the area said that some of the aid workers&rsquo; bodyguards had been arrested in connection to the abduction but that the aid workers had not yet been found.        

&ldquo;We are aware of reports that a U.S. citizen has been kidnapped in northern Somalia,&rdquo; said a State Department spokesperson. &ldquo;We remain concerned about the individual&rsquo;s safety and well-being and are working with contacts in Kenya and Somalia to ascertain more information.&rdquo;        

Kenya has been on edge since the Shabab threatened terrorist attacks in retaliation for Kenya&rsquo;s offensive in Somalia. On Monday, two grenade attacks in Nairobi, Kenya&rsquo;s capital, left 1 dead and more than 20 injured.        

The Kenyan police said Tuesday that they had arrested a man with 13 grenades, 4 revolvers, an assault rifle and a machine gun, along with 700 rounds of ammunition.        

&ldquo;The operation in Somalia has a lot of local implications,&rdquo; said a police spokesman, Eric Kiraithe, who added: &ldquo;The fact that we have a threat from Al Shabab means that we must do more intelligence. Let us see where the investigations lead.&rdquo;        
