
ISTANBUL &mdash; Rescue teams continued on Tuesday to pull survivors from piles of twisted metal and chunks of concrete in eastern Turkey, a region devastated by a major earthquake on Sunday afternoon.        



A 2-week-old girl named Azra was found alive in the rubble of a collapsed apartment building in the town of Ercis, television networks reported. Her mother and grandmother were also pulled to safety.        

Late Tuesday, rescue workers freed an 11-year-old, Serhat Gur, from the destruction in a nearby city, Van. The nation was gripped by television images of his rescue, but hours later it was reported that he had not survived his ordeal.        

So far, more than 30 people have been found alive, trapped in the rubble in Van, the city hit worst by the earthquake, Ercis and other towns and villages in the region near the border with Iran. More than 2,260 buildings in Van and the vicinity were damaged or destroyed.        

Rescuers continued to hold out hope that there would be more survivors, but the widespread destruction and the deteriorating weather &mdash; the temperature in Van dipped below 30 degrees overnight &mdash; suggested that the death toll may continue to rise.        

At least 459 people were killed by the earthquake and its aftermath and more than 1,350 people were injured, the Disaster Coordination Center in Ankara said Tuesday. Tens of thousands appear to be homeless.        

Aerial photographs on Tuesday from the eastern province of Van showed devastation in Ercis, where more than 50 buildings on a main road had collapsed and rooftops were pancaked. In surrounding villages, many mud-brick buildings were demolished.        

Questions were raised about the quality of construction in the area, with some buildings having remained completely intact while those next door were destroyed. The region is officially designated as earthquake prone, along with many other areas of Turkey that contain active faults.        

&ldquo;We saw the construction material in many demolished areas to be merely sand, randomly mixed with pebble, that fell into pieces with minor force,&rdquo; an emergency worker said on NTV television. &ldquo;Here, you see,&rdquo; he said as he crumbled a large stone into dust in his hand.        

Thousands of tents have been distributed to people who are reluctant to return home, given the powerful aftershocks that have followed the magnitude 7.2 earthquake, or who have no homes to return to. In Ercis, a soccer stadium has been converted into a tent city. More than 15,000 tents have been distributed in and around Van.        

Deputy Prime Minister Besir Atalay said there was a need for more tents and other supplies.        

&ldquo;There is an evident shortage,&rdquo; Mr. Atalay said, addressing Parliament, which convened on Tuesday to address the earthquake relief work.        

More than 50 countries offered assistance almost immediately after the earthquake; the government initially declined the offers, saying it had sufficient resources. The only offer that was accepted came from Azerbaijan, which supplied two airplanes and more than 100 aid workers.        

Later, however, Turkey asked Israel for mobile homes and tents. Relations between the two nations were badly strained after Israeli commandos killed nine people on a Turkish flotilla that was trying to run the blockade of Gaza last year.        

An Israeli plane was scheduled to bring seven portable structures to Turkey on Wednesday, according to the Israeli Ministry of Defense. And the Iraqi Kurds have donated $1 million.        

On Tuesday, more than 200 specialists were busy assessing the damage in Van and neighboring communities. With large red cross marks, they noted structures they determined to be unstable. Many people were unwilling to return home, even if their houses had survived the destruction.        

&ldquo;There has been just another powerful aftershock,&rdquo; Fehmi Adiguzel, a resident of Van, said in a telephone interview as he sat in a restaurant with his wife. The couple spent Sunday and Monday nights in the lobby of a hotel.        

&ldquo;Electricity has been cut in fear of fires, and we are all staying outside, so it&rsquo;s of course hard to get tents for us all,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Not only tents, people also urgently need blankets. It is cold here at nights.&rdquo;        

The aftershocks also panicked inmates at a prison in Van, and they burned blankets and demanded to be let out. Some of the prison&rsquo;s walls collapsed on Sunday, allowing more than 150 inmates to escape. Fifty of them returned, NTV television reported.        
