
BANGKOK &mdash; Bangkok&rsquo;s flood defenses continued to fall on Wednesday as floodwaters pressed farther into the city after forcing the closing of the domestic airport. Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra warned that there could be as much as five feet of flooding in some areas.        



The prime minister spoke after declaring a five-day holiday that would shut down much of the city&rsquo;s business to allow residents to cope with the encroaching flood. Schools were closed until Nov. 7.        

The death toll in three months of heavy rains and flooding rose to 366 on Tuesday, with 113,000 people reported to be living in shelters and 720,000 to have sought medical attention for flood-related ailments.        

Floodwaters entered the domestic air terminal, Don Muang, in one of the most striking failures in the effort to defend Bangkok, the capital, from runoff flowing from the north. The international airport, Suvarnabhumi, is on higher ground, and it continued to function normally.        

In describing a worst-case situation, Ms. Yingluck said in a televised address that the water being flushed through the city to the Gulf of Thailand could back up against a high tide expected at the end of the week, increasing the threat to low-lying areas.        

She told residents to move their belongings to upper floors and prepare to evacuate if necessary. She said the government would protect the royal palace, power stations and other vital locations.        

In addition to seven northern districts that have been the most affected by the flooding, the governor of Bangkok, Sukhumbhand Paribatra, said 13 districts along the Chao Phraya River were now also at risk as water began overflowing its banks.        

Officials said the government&rsquo;s flood relief command, based at the domestic airport, was safe and would remain in place.        

The floods, the heaviest in half a century here, are part of one of the worst flood seasons in the region in decades. In an arc that includes Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam and the Philippines, the flooding and typhoons have taken the lives of nearly 800 people and affected more than eight million, according to a tally by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. An additional 100 people were said to have died in Myanmar, where reports are hard to verify.        

More than 200 have died in Cambodia alone. The tourist town of Siem Reap, adjacent to the ancient temples of Angkor, has been repeatedly inundated since August. Tourism has fallen sharply, shops and restaurants have been forced to close, and some hotels have used pumps to keep out water. In the midst of its own troubles, Cambodia, whose army has confronted Thailand in recent months in a border dispute, donated $50,000 to Thailand for disaster relief, and provided a similar amount to Vietnam.        

In the Philippines, where two successive typhoons took the lives of more than 100 people, mudslides were reported to have severely damaged the 2,000-year-old rice terraces in Ifugao Province.        

According to one report, more than 1,000 dogs and at least 500 cats were rescued from a temple in Nonthaburi, a suburb of Bangkok, where monks and lay people had been feeding them.        

Thailand is one of the world&rsquo;s chief exporters of crocodile products, and farms about 200,000 of the animals at 30 farms and 900 small breeding operations, according to the Fishery Department. About 100 were reported to be on the loose in Ayutthaya, to the north of Bangkok.        

The authorities put out a call for crocodile hunters and offered a bounty for their capture.        
