
GENEVA &mdash; United States and North Korean officials emerged from two days of meetings here agreeing they had narrowed their differences about negotiating on the North&rsquo;s nuclear program, but they parted without fixing a date for further bilateral or multilateral talks.        

Speaking outside the United States mission after the talks ended Tuesday, Stephen W. Bosworth, the American special envoy, called the talks &ldquo;very positive and generally constructive.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We narrowed differences on several points and explored our differences on other points,&rdquo; he reported. Where they made progress was in identifying &ldquo;what has to be done before we can both agree to a resumption of the formal negotiations.&rdquo;        

His North Korean counterpart in the talks, First Vice Foreign Minister Kim Kye-gwan, speaking across town at his country&rsquo;s diplomatic mission, said the two sides had made &ldquo;big progress&rdquo; in talks that focused intensively on trust-building but they had differences they couldn&rsquo;t overcome. &ldquo;We agreed to consider more and meet again,&rdquo; he said, according to an unofficial translation of his comments.        

Of the two negotiators, Vice Foreign Minister Kim sounded the more upbeat. The two sides would meet again &ldquo;as soon as possible,&rdquo; he said. Asked if that would be before the end of the year, he replied &ldquo;I hope so.&rdquo;        

Mr. Bosworth more cautiously avoided reference to the possible timing of future talks. The two sides would consider their positions and keep in touch through &ldquo;the New York channel&rdquo; &mdash; North Korea&rsquo;s mission to the United Nations, he said.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a long history of this relationship and we have many differences not all of which can be overcome quickly,&rdquo; Mr. Bosworth said. With &ldquo;continued effort&rdquo; he was confident they could reach a reasonable basis for formal negotiations about a return to the six-party talks.        

The final round of talks in Geneva came as Chinese media reported that North Korean leader Kim Jong-il had called for a resumption of multi-party negotiations on its nuclear program on the basis of a deal struck in six-party talks in 2005. Mr. Kim&rsquo;s comments, in a meeting Tuesday with Chinese Vice Premier Lee Keqiang, echoed remarks in a rare press interview he gave last week when he said the six-party talks should resume without preconditions.        

The United States has said that North Korea must halt a program of uranium enrichment it unveiled last year and give access to international nuclear inspectors before six-party talks could resume. Pyongyang has said its Yongbyon enrichment facility is intended for peaceful purposes and was thus outside the scope of the six-party talks.        

Under the 2005 deal, North Korea agreed to give up its nuclear program in return for economic and diplomatic incentives by all the parties to the talks. That agreement, hailed as something of a diplomatic triumph for China, soon came apart after North Korea conducted a nuclear test in 2006 and then pulled out of the six-party talks in a dispute over inspections and transparency of its nuclear program. Tensions on the Korean peninsula escalated sharply in 2010 when a South Korean naval vessel was sunk and the North shelled a South Korean island.        

The Geneva meeting followed a thaw in relations between Pyongyang and Seoul and talks between the US and North Korea in New York in July where American officials later reported there was &ldquo;a good atmosphere&rdquo; but South Korean officials have said difference on nuclear enrichment remain a major obstacle to progress.        
