
Nusrat Bhutto, a near-mythic figure in Pakistan&rsquo;s modern history, whose husband, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, was executed in 1979 after being deposed as prime minister in a military coup, and whose daughter, the former prime minister Benazir Bhutto, was killed by a suicide bomber while campaigning for office in 2007, died Sunday in Dubai. She was 82.        

Mrs. Bhutto, long a political force in her country, had cancer and Alzheimer&rsquo;s disease, family members told The Associated Press. A throng of mourners at her burial service in southern Pakistan on Tuesday was led by her son-in-law, Asif Ali Zardari, Pakistan&rsquo;s president.        

Mrs. Bhutto was the daughter of an Iranian soap manufacturer who fled Mumbai and resettled his family in Karachi after the partition of India and Pakistan in 1947 into majority Hindu and Muslim countries, respectively.        

When she became the second wife of Mr. Bhutto in 1951, she joined one of Pakistan&rsquo;s wealthiest and most influential families.        

Her American-educated husband, a scion of vast land holdings, served in the cabinet of one of Pakistan&rsquo;s early military-run governments and founded the Pakistan People&rsquo;s Party, a pro-democracy movement he rode to the presidency in 1971 and to election as prime minister from 1973 to 1977. She appeared at rallies in the party&rsquo;s early days.        

Her major role in Pakistani politics began in 1977, when her husband was deposed in a coup led by Gen. Mohammad Zia ul-Haq. Known until then mainly for her beauty and fashion sense, Mrs. Bhutto assumed control of the party her husband had founded and became a de facto leader of the democratic opposition.        

She was elected to Parliament in 1977. In the years leading to and following her husband&rsquo;s hanging in 1979, she became a tragic figure and a symbol of resistance to the military dictatorship. She and her daughter Benazir were frequently under house arrest for their opposition.        

&ldquo;She was a figure with immense popular appeal in the country, both as the mother in a family of great power and as someone who suffered greatly,&rdquo; said Stanley A. Wolpert, a historian.        

Mrs. Bhutto&rsquo;s son Shahnawaz Bhutto died at 27 under unexplained circumstances in France in 1985. The state-controlled Pakistani news media declared it a drug-abuse death, but Mrs. Bhutto said she believed he was poisoned because of his involvement in groups seeking to overthrow the military government.        

In 1996 another son, Murtaza Bhutto, a member of Parliament, was shot to death by the Pakistani police outside his home in Karachi. The circumstances, again, were murky, though in this case suspicions pointed to a feud within the Bhutto family.        

With his mother&rsquo;s backing, Murtaza Bhutto was vying for leadership of the People&rsquo;s Party against his sister Benazir, whom he described as having run a corrupt government as prime minister from 1988 to 1990 and from 1993 to 1996. In 2010 Fatima Bhutto, Murtaza&rsquo;s daughter, wrote a memoir, &ldquo;Songs of Blood and Sword,&rdquo; claiming that Benazir Bhutto and her husband, Mr. Zardari, were involved in her father&rsquo;s death.        

After the death of her second son, Mrs. Bhutto largely retreated from public view. In 1998 she moved to Dubai, where she lived with family members, including Benazir, whose return to Pakistan in 2007 after the lifting of a government-imposed exile led to her death at a campaign rally.        

Mrs. Bhutto was born on March 23, 1929. She is survived by a daughter, Sanam, of London, and eight grandchildren.        
