
MISURATA, Libya &mdash; After four days on public display in a meat locker here, the slowly decomposing corpses of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, one of his sons and his former defense minister were buried in a predawn funeral at a secret location on Tuesday, a top military official said.        

The official, Ibrahim Beitalmal, leader of the military intelligence branch in Misurata, said relatives of the three men, including a nephew of Colonel Qaddafi, Mahmoud Hamid, were permitted to attend the burials. Cellphone photos of the ceremony showed three bodies wrapped in white shrouds and placed in coffins of thin wood.        

Mr. Beitalmal declined to specify where the bodies of Colonel Qaddafi; his son Muatassim; and the former defense minister, Abu Bakr Younes, had been interred.        

Officials of the Transitional National Council, the interim government, had said they would not disclose the location of the graves, fearing that they would be desecrated or become a shrine for supporters of Colonel Qaddafi, who was killed Thursday. The three men were among those captured in Surt, the former leader&rsquo;s hometown on the Mediterranean coast, by fighters from Misurata. Colonel Qaddafi had sought refuge in Surt after the rebellion that toppled him in August.        

The burials, which were also attended by more than a dozen officials from Misurata, did not quiet the lingering questions about the men&rsquo;s final moments.&nbsp;        

All three apparently died in captivity under circumstances that have not been clarified &mdash; particularly in the case of Colonel Qaddafi, who was seen alive after his capture in cellphone videos that were posted on the Internet. Later photographs showed his corpse after he had apparently been shot in the head.        

Responding to international pressure, the Transitional National Council has said it would investigate his death: killing captives is considered a war crime.        

But there is little appetite among the Libyan revolutionaries for prosecuting the killer or killers of Colonel Qaddafi, whose death ended a brutal dictatorship and signified the end of the most violent of the Arab Spring&rsquo;s political uprisings.        

On Tuesday, the interim government released a long statement that amplified the mixed feelings about the deaths. The council said it would &ldquo;not tolerate&rdquo; prisoner abuse, but then went on to detail Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s crimes, including the killing of 1,270 prisoners at the Abu Salim prison in 1996 and the executions of Libyans overseas.&nbsp;        

&ldquo;We did not&nbsp;want to end this tyrant&rsquo;s life before he was brought to court, and before he answered questions that have deprived Libyans from sleep and tormented them for years,&rdquo; the statement said.        

Col. Ahmed Bani, a spokesman for the Transitional National Council&rsquo;s military wing, dismissed reports by Human Rights Watch and others of a massacre in Surt, possibly committed by anti-Qaddafi forces.        

The people who died in Surt &ldquo;were resisting our troops,&rdquo; he said at a news conference in Tripoli, the capital. &ldquo;They were killed during fighting.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Our fighters were just doing their duty,&rdquo; he added.        

A visit to Surt on Monday showed clear signs of a mass killing outside the Mahari Hotel, where volunteers were clearing dozens of bodies of people who seemed to have been executed days earlier. The hotel had been used by anti-Qaddafi fighters during their assault.&nbsp;        

Colonel Bani also brushed away a question about reports that Qaddafi loyalists had been mistreated, saying, &ldquo;Our Islamic values insist that we give the right treatment to prisoners.&rdquo;        

Echoing suggestions made Monday by Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, the chairman of the Transitional National Council, that Colonel Qaddafi might not have been killed by the fighters who captured him &mdash; although the graphic videos strongly suggest otherwise &mdash; Colonel Bani hinted that other forces might have been responsible.        

&ldquo;We will look into the reasons for the killing of Qaddafi and into who had an interest in seeing him killed,&rdquo; Colonel Bani said.        

The Transitional National Council previously said Colonel Qaddafi was shot in the head during a gunfight between his captors and loyalists in Surt, without specifying who might have fired the fatal shot.        

A fighter from Misurata who recorded video of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s capture offered another inconclusive narrative of what might have happened.        

The fighter, Ayman Almani, 24, said he saw another man shoot Colonel Qaddafi moments after he had been hauled out of a storm drain in Surt where he had been hiding.        

Mr. Almani would not identify the gunman who fired the fatal shot, and the images on his camera did not show the moment of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s death. He said he had not uploaded the video to the Internet and had refused to sell it to news organizations.        

The video, which he allowed a reporter to see, showed fighters slapping and shoving Colonel Qaddafi for about three minutes while he was seated on the hood of a vehicle. After the camera moves away from Colonel Qaddafi, gunshots can be heard, followed by images of him on the ground, seemingly unconscious, his shirt pulled up to show what appears to be a bullet wound to his abdomen.        

Asked why he would not identify the gunman, Mr. Almani said, &ldquo;I do not want to be remembered as the one who sold him out.&rdquo;        
Kareem Fahim reported from Misurata, and Rick Gladstone from New York. Adam Nossiter contributed reporting from Tripoli, Libya.
