
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; A Syrian opposition group called on Tuesday for international protection from the government&rsquo;s military crackdown on protesters, a day before an Arab delegation was scheduled to arrive in Syria in an effort to resolve seven months of unrest in the country.        

The delegation of Arab ministers, led by the prime minister of Qatar, is expected to meet Wednesday with President Bashar al-Assad and other top officials in Damascus, the Syrian capital, to discuss the possibility of starting a dialogue between the government and opposition forces.        

But the Syrian National Council, a prominent group that several parties and opposition figures formed this month, said in a statement Tuesday that there would be no dialogue as long as the government cracked down on demonstrators.        

Wounded antigovernment protesters have been beaten and denied care at state-run hospitals as security forces have pressed medical personnel into assisting in the crackdown, according to a report released Tuesday by Amnesty International.        

For months, human rights groups have accused the Syrian government of controlling access to medical facilities and sending security forces into hospitals to detain those suspected of taking part in demonstrations. The report, based on interviews with patients and medical workers, describes grisly scenes of abuse in at least four hospitals in three cities, including reports of wounded men tortured by security forces at their bedsides.        

The United Nations said in a statement this month that more than 3,000 people had been killed since the uprising against Mr. Assad started in mid-March and that thousands of others had been arrested, tortured and made to disappear.        

The Arab delegation&rsquo;s visit comes after officials at a meeting of the 22-nation Arab League in Cairo last week gave Syria until the end of the month to stop its oppression of protesters and start a national dialogue.        

The Arab League said at that time that if Syria failed to meet the deadline, Arab nations would meet again and discuss what measures they could take, including suspending Syria&rsquo;s membership from the league, according to a diplomat who spoke on the condition of anonymity.        

An official in Syria said that the government was reluctant to receive the delegation and that it had strongly criticized countries that have called for an end to the crackdown, warning them not to interfere in its affairs.        

Syria has blamed the unrest on a foreign conspiracy to divide the country and says it is battling against foreign militants who have killed more than 1,100 police officers and soldiers.        

In its statement, the Syrian National Council also called for &ldquo;international protection for civilians.&rdquo; It did not define the kind of protection but called for Arab and other international observers to be allowed into the country.        

Most Syrian opposition groups and figures object to any international military intervention in Syria, including a measure like the United Nations no-fly zone over Libya, which paved the way for NATO strikes that helped topple the government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

The council also called for a general strike to coincide with the delegation&rsquo;s visit and to start a new phase of civil disobedience.        

Villages in the southern province of Dara&rsquo;a have been on a strike for five days to protest the killings of several pro-democracy activists there. It was in Dara&rsquo;a that the first demonstrations against the government broke out, after teenagers there were arrested and tortured for scrawling anti-regime graffiti on walls.        

&ldquo;The regime says the crisis is finished, while we say it will start tomorrow with a new chapter when all of Syria will begin the first day of a general strike,&rdquo; said an activist from Dara&rsquo;a who gave his name as Ibrahim. &ldquo;It will be embarrassing for the regime to receive the Arab delegation while the country is on a strike.&rdquo;        

Another activist, who gave his name as Abu Ammar, said five buses loaded with security forces and plainclothes men loyal to the government carrying guns and sticks had arrived in the town of al-Jezah and arrested more than 200 men ages 18 to 50.        

He added that from the minarets of mosques, they had called on people to open their shops or else they would burn them, and to go to their jobs, but that people had not complied. The forces later set several houses and shops on fire and arrested minors who did not go to school, he said.        

Political observers in the region said they did not expect Syria&rsquo;s two biggest cities, Aleppo and Damascus, both financial hubs, to answer the call for a strike Wednesday. Both cities have remained largely quiet during the uprising.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and J. David Goodman from New York.
