
A Tibetan monk in western China&rsquo;s Sichuan province set himself on fire on Tuesday to express opposition to China&rsquo;s Tibet policies, becoming the 10th Tibetan this year to self-immolate as a form of political protest, an outside advocacy group reported.        

The group, Free Tibet, based in London, said the self-immolation occurred outside a monastery in Garze, which is known as Kandze in Tibetan, and that the monk&rsquo;s identity, condition and whereabouts were not known. The group did not explain how it had obtained the information.        

Garze is about 100 miles south of Aba, or Ngaba, where eight of the other nine self-immolations have taken place. At least five of the protesters have died, including the only women among the group, a nun, Tenzin Wangmo, 20, on Oct. 17. The others have been monks or former monks.        

Stephanie Brigden, director of Free Tibet, said in a statement that the self-immolations, coupled with protests in other parts of Tibet and adjoining Chinese areas populated by ethnic Tibetans, &ldquo;underlines that the crisis in Tibet is not driven by events in one town, but represents a wider rejection of China&rsquo;s occupation of Tibet.&rdquo;        

Chinese officials have denounced the self-immolations as a form of terrorism encouraged by outside groups that promote Tibetan independence. China has asserted sovereignty over Tibet since the 1950s, when it invaded the one-time Himalayan kingdom and forced the Dalai Lama, its spiritual leader, to flee.        

In China&rsquo;s view, it has liberated Tibet from a feudal system and brooks no tolerance for independence advocates, referring to them as &ldquo;splittist&rdquo; agitators inspired by the Dalai Lama, a Nobel laureate. The Dalai Lama, 76, who resides in Dharamsala, India, home of the Tibetan government in exile, has said he does not promote independence but opposes what he calls China&rsquo;s suppression of Tibetan religion and culture.        

The latest reported self-immolation occurred less than a week after the Dalai Lama and the exile government&rsquo;s recently elected prime minister, Lobsang Sangay, led a public prayer vigil in Dharamsala for the others who have protested in the same way. Mr. Sangay said, &ldquo;We pay homage to their courage and stand in solidarity with their indomitable spirit.&rdquo;        
