
ISTANBUL &mdash; Rescue teams extracted three more survivors from the rubble of Sunday&rsquo;s earthquake in eastern Turkey, news agencies reported, as the death toll hit 481 and as snow began to fall, probably complicating any further rescue attempts and adding to the misery of homeless survivors.        



In one of the successful rescue missions in the town of Ercis, where the worst destruction occurred on Sunday, Eyup Erdem, an 18-year-old college student, was found alive under the wreckage, NTV television reported.        

His rescue inspired more than 3,000 aid workers to keep digging, and they found a woman, Sediye Erdem, trapped under a five-story building in the same town. Her husband, who was in the same building when the earthquake hit, died.        

Later Wednesday morning, 27-year-old Gozde Bahar, a teacher from Dogubeyazit, a nearby town, was also pulled out of the rubble, NTV said.        

Ms. Bahar&rsquo;s heart stopped as she was being evacuated, but rescue workers were able to revive her, the report said.        

As desperation grew in the affected areas, TV news reports showed chaotic scenes of people grabbing supplies from relief trucks, and an official with the Turkish Red Crescent put the number of trucks that had been ransacked at 17, the Anatolian Agency reported.        

More than 50 countries offered assistance almost immediately after the earthquake; the government initially declined the offers, saying it had sufficient resources. But as the needs for tents and other supplies have become more clear, the government has begun reaching out for foreign aid.        

By late Wednesday, nine countries had agreed to send help, news outlets reported.        

Also on Wednesday, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said that his government would crack down on the poor construction that has been blamed for the scope of the disaster, saying the government would more strictly enforce building laws and demolish especially weak buildings.        
