
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; President Hamid Karzai has invited retired Gen. Stanley A. McChrystal, who led NATO troops here in 2009 and 2010, to Afghanistan, and General McChrystal plans to make the visit in the next few weeks, Afghan and American officials said.        

The general has not been in Afghanistan since he resigned his command in June 2010 after an embarrassing article in Rolling Stone magazine quoted members of his staff saying disparaging things about the Obama administration.        

Though his visit is being described as a private one &mdash; his wife, Annie, will accompany him &mdash; it may be the beginning of a return to the Afghan policy arena, where he was a significant player for much of the last 10 years, first as chief of clandestine special operations forces in Iraq and Afghanistan and then as NATO commanding general here.        

General McChrystal has remained in touch with senior Afghan officials, in particular Mr. Karzai, with whom he had built a strong relationship.        

The official relationship between Washington and Mr. Karzai has often been strained. As a result, American officials are interested in having people in the wings who could open back channels to the erratic Afghan leader. Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts has sometimes played that role.        

So the general&rsquo;s visit, coming while the United States is negotiating a strategic agreement that will chart the Afghan-American relationship after United States combat troops withdraw in 2014, will almost certainly be freighted with meaning by Afghan observers, whether policy is discussed or not.        

&ldquo;General McChrystal is coming with his wife, and they will be special guests of the president,&rdquo; said Aimal Faizi, the spokesman for Mr. Karzai. The invitation was formally extended more than a month ago, he said.        

Several Afghan and American officials said that Mr. Karzai appeared to have a good relationship with the two senior American officials in Afghanistan now &mdash; Gen. John R. Allen, the NATO commander, and Ryan C. Crocker, the ambassador &mdash; and that the invitation to General McChrystal was more of a tribute to him personally.        

Mr. Karzai and General McChrystal had a &ldquo;very good&rdquo; relationship, and &ldquo;they traveled to many provinces together,&rdquo; Mr. Faizi said.        

That connection was built in part on General McChrystal&rsquo;s effort to reach out to Mr. Karzai when the president&rsquo;s relationship with Mr. Crocker&rsquo;s predecessor, Karl W. Eikenberry, had reached its nadir. In a leaked diplomatic cable from late 2009, Mr. Eikenberry described the Afghan president as &ldquo;not an adequate strategic partner.&rdquo;        

At the same time, the relationship with other senior American diplomat, the special envoy Richard C. Holbrooke, had become so tense that Mr. Karzai no longer wanted to meet with him. A major area of contention was Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s refusal to take on endemic corruption in his government.        

American officials said General McChrystal&rsquo;s visit could benefit him, Mr. Karzai and the Obama administration.        

&ldquo;Karzai has always liked to feel he had a special relationship with the Americans beyond with the ambassador,&rdquo; said Bruce O. Riedel, who conducted the first review of Pakistan and Afghanistan policy for President Obama in early 2009.        

&ldquo;This could be a way to develop a useful back channel for Karzai, as well as a back channel for the administration. It could let McChrystal say things that might not be all that politic for Ryan Crocker to say.&rdquo;        

For General McChrystal, Mr. Riedel said, the visit &ldquo;is a little bit of redemption.&rdquo; He continued: &ldquo;The very fact Karzai asked him to come shows he&rsquo;s not your normal private citizen. McChrystal enjoys the confidence of the president of Afghanistan and of the administration, who are letting him go out there.&rdquo;        

But even during General McChrystal&rsquo;s yearlong command in Afghanistan, Mr. Karzai continued to make statements suggesting that he resented the United States&rsquo; presence and blamed the international community in Afghanistan for the electoral fraud during the 2009 presidential election.        

Several Afghans who are close to the government questioned whether General McChrystal&rsquo;s contact with Mr. Karzai in retirement had done much more than to keep lines of communication open.        

&ldquo;With a good relationship, you should be able to get things done. Like if you think that governance is a priority, then you should be able to leverage some changes, and that didn&rsquo;t seem to happen,&rdquo; said one Afghan businessman.        

Mr. McChrystal consulted senior American officials before accepting the invitation. Both the senior regional military official, Gen. James N. Mattis, head of Central Command, and the senior diplomat here, Mr. Crocker, assented. The White House is also aware of the trip, said a spokeswoman for the National Security Council, who added that the former general &ldquo;will not be carrying any particular message from the administration.&rdquo;        
Alissa J. Rubin reported from Kabul, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.
