
BUENOS AIRES &mdash; Brazil&rsquo;s embattled sports minister resigned on Wednesday amid accusations of corruption. He is the sixth minister to step down in disgrace since President Dilma Rousseff took office in January.        

The sports minister, Orlando Silva, a holdover from the previous government, was pressured to resign after accusations that he took kickbacks from nongovernmental groups chosen to work on sporting events.        

The scandal comes at a time when Ms. Rousseff&rsquo;s government is spending billions of dollars to prepare stadiums and other infrastructure for the 2014 World Cup and the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro.        

Mr. Silva had already come under fire from FIFA, the international governing body of soccer, for his role in the World Cup preparations, which the organization has said are lagging. Last week, Ms. Rousseff stripped Mr. Silva of decision-making authority related to the World Cup.        

Mr. Silva denied the corruption accusations on Wednesday and said he was the victim of a &ldquo;public lynching.&rdquo;        

Mr. Silva was the fifth minister to leave after being accused of corruption; the sixth, the defense minister, resigned in August after making disparaging remarks about fellow officials.        

David Fleischer, a political science professor at Bras&iacute;lia University, said the controversies had allowed Ms. Rousseff to clear her administration of the officials that she had been pressured to keep by the outgoing president, Luiz In&aacute;cio Lula da Silva, in exchange for his support.        

Mr. Fleischer said sidelining the sports minister was important, given that Ms. Rousseff had been pushing for fiscal austerity.        

&ldquo;If you are going after austerity, you can&rsquo;t tolerate this kind of leakage,&rdquo; Mr. Fleischer said, referring to the kickback accusations.        

Brazil&rsquo;s Supreme Court said Tuesday that it would investigate the accusations of irregularities in the Sports Ministry.        
