
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; &nbsp; A civic activist and vocal critic of President Lee Myung-bak rode a growing call for political change to become mayor of the South Korean capital, Seoul, winning a poll widely seen as a bellwether for the presidential election in December next year.        

The activist, Park Won-soon, an independent candidate who was supported by the main opposition Democratic Party, clinched the mayoral race by winning 53.4 percent of the 4 million votes cast, according to the country&rsquo;s Central Election Management Committee.        

His rival, Na Kyung-won, a candidate affiliated with President Lee&rsquo;s Grand National Party, won 46.2 percent.        

&ldquo;Citizens defeated political power,&rdquo; said Mr. Park, who refused to join a political party, billing himself as a &ldquo;citizens&rsquo; candidate.&rdquo; &ldquo;Through election, they defeated an outdated era.&rdquo;        

Ms. Na acknowledged her defeat: &ldquo;I humbly accept the citizens&rsquo; will reflected in the poll.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We are surprised that the margin was bigger than we had expected,&rdquo; the national news agency Yonhap quoted a senior aide to President Lee as saying.        

Sohn Hak-kyu, head of the Democratic Party, indicated the victory of Mr. Park as an independent would prompt all the liberal opposition parties to regroup toward &ldquo;a change of governments next year.&rdquo;        

The race in Seoul, home to one-fifth of the country&rsquo;s 50 million people, was also widely regarded as a referendum on President Lee ahead of the parliamentary elections in April.        

The result delivered a blow to Mr. Lee, who is struggling with declining popularity amid corruption scandals implicating his former aides. It also was a setback for Park Geun-hye, considered the governing party&rsquo;s most likely candidate to replace Mr. Lee in the presidential election next year; Ms. Park has actively supported Ms. Na.        

The poll, although confined to Seoul, drew nationwide attention by pitting a woman against a man, a political establishment star against an outsider &mdash; and Park Geun-hye against another possible candidate for next year&rsquo;s presidential election, Ahn Chul-soo, a Seoul National University professor whose meteoric rise to political stardom analysts said reflected a gathering storm for change.        

Mr. Ahn&rsquo;s backing was crucial to the victory of Mr. Park. Mr. Park won more than twice as many votes among the people in their 20s, 30s and 40s as Ms. Na did.        

Mr. Park, 55, is a former student activist expelled from his university in the 1970s for demonstrating against former President Park Chung-hee, who was assassinated in 1979. Mr. Park later became a human rights lawyer who led two of South Korea&rsquo;s most influential civic groups that exposed corruption in the country&rsquo;s powerful conglomerates and accused members of the conservative elite &mdash; including President Park &mdash; of collaborating with the Japanese during their colonial rule in Korea.        

He has called for reconciliation with North Korea and has argued that Mr. Lee&rsquo;s hard-line policy on the government in Pyongyang contributed to the North Korean provocations. His catchphrase is &ldquo;change.&rdquo;        

Running against him was Ms. Na, a star legislator. Rich and articulate, Ms. Na, 47, graduated from a top university, became a judge and won two consecutive parliamentary terms.        

Like the president, she championed a hard line on North Korea&rsquo;s military provocations, including the shelling of a South Korean island last November, and stresses &ldquo;stability.&rdquo;        

Behind the candidates&rsquo; contest were two iconic figures: Park Geun-hye and Mr. Ahn.        

Ms. Park represents the conservative establishment. She hopes for the presidency on the strength of her popularity among conservative South Koreans who revere her father, former President Park, who engineered South Korea&rsquo;s economic miracle.        

Trained as medical doctor, Mr. Ahn rose to national fame when he founded AhnLab, a highly successful company that makes antivirus programs for computers. Mr. Ahn, who is popular on the social-networking site Twitter, became the country&rsquo;s hottest political asset virtually overnight when a political pundit mentioned him as a possible mayor for Seoul and subsequent surveys showed him as a likely winner of not only the Seoul job, but the presidency.        

He did not run, but threw his support to the independent Park Won-soon. Mr. Park&rsquo;s popularity soared, and a candidate chosen by the Democratic Party was forced to drop out under public pressure to help consolidate antigovernment votes behind Mr. Park.        

South Korean news media reports are rife with speculation about whether Mr. Ahn will try for the presidency &mdash; especially after he urged South Koreans this week to kick out the old political order, saying they should act to effect change by following the example of Rosa Parks, the African-American woman whose refusal to yield her seat on the bus to a white passenger in 1955 propelled the American civil rights movement.        

Mr. Ahn&rsquo;s &ldquo;explosive popularity&rdquo; and Mr. Park&rsquo;s rise as an independent candidate &ldquo;reflected people&rsquo;s disillusionment with the existing political parties,&rdquo; said Lee Chung-hee, a political scientist at Hankuk University of Foreign Studies.        

&ldquo;People want a realignment of political parties&rdquo; to shake up the old system in which parties stoke regional biases and an ideological divide over North Korea to win power, said Kang Won-taek, a politics professor at Seoul National University.        

The Wednesday election was called after the former mayor, Oh Se-hoon, a member of the governing party, lost a referendum in August on the opposition&rsquo;s proposal of free lunches for all schoolchildren, and resigned.        

Meanwhile, in a controversial move, South Korea&rsquo;s Central Election Management Committee has begun policing the social-networking services that have emerged as a powerful channel of political debate. This week, it asked prosecutors to investigate 20 people accused of slandering the candidates by spreading unconfirmed or false rumors on Twitter or the Internet.        
