
GALWAY, Ireland &mdash; On an autumn evening beside the storied beauty of Galway Bay, with a chilly gust blowing off the Atlantic, Martin McGuinness breezed into a popular tourist hotel that looks out across the bay with the air of a man who has found a measure of peace after a lifetime gripped by Ireland&rsquo;s troubled past.        

And so, in effect, he has. He was an Irish Republican Army gunman at the age of 18, and by 21 an I.R.A. commander on Bloody Sunday, the grim day in 1972 when British troops killed 14 protesters in his native Derry, in Northern Ireland. Now 61 and deputy first minister in the power-sharing government in Belfast, Mr. McGuinness has set his sights on a new job &mdash; a goal that has him disavowing the violence of the past, and refuting accusations that he was responsible for ordering murders in his I.R.A. days.        

On Thursday, after a 40-day campaign as the candidate of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Republican movement, Mr. McGuinness will be one of seven candidates in an election for the largely ceremonial post of president of the Irish Republic. Although he is unlikely to win, his success in attracting significant levels of support &mdash; about 15 percent in last weekend&rsquo;s surveys, down from close to 20 percent in polls earlier in the campaign &mdash; has been taken by many in Ireland as a new sign of the winds of reconciliation blowing across the island.        

Should he upset heavy odds and win, Mr. McGuinness would move from his current base in Belfast, the Northern Ireland capital, to the Irish president&rsquo;s residence, an 18th-century mansion outside Dublin that was home to Britain&rsquo;s viceroys in Ireland. At a stroke, he would become a symbol of something that has been Sinn Fein&rsquo;s ultimate goal, the reunification of Ireland under a single government in Dublin.        

Irish commentators have seen his candidacy as part of a long-term plan to create a new &ldquo;normal&rdquo; in Ireland, slowly erasing the barriers between north and south. &ldquo;Clearly, the people of Ireland would see me as president for all the 32 counties,&rdquo; he said in an interview as he prepared for a speech in Galway to a hall packed with thunderously enthusiastic Sinn Fein loyalists.        

The winner will succeed Mary P. McAleese, the first Irish president from Northern Ireland, who is stepping down after 14 years. One of the Irish Republic&rsquo;s most popular figures, she is a major peacemaking figure in her own right. In May, Mrs. McAleese, 60, a former Belfast law professor who proclaimed the theme of her presidency as &ldquo;building bridges,&rdquo; achieved a long-held ambition when Queen Elizabeth II visited Ireland, the first such visit by a British monarch.        

In the latest polls, Mr. McGuinness trailed a distant third to the front-runner, Sean Gallagher, a 49-year-old Dublin businessman and TV personality who made his fortune selling homebuilding equipment during the property boom that preceded Ireland&rsquo;s economic collapse and its acceptance of a $90 billion international bailout last year. Mr. Gallagher&rsquo;s closest challenger, according to the polls, is Michael D. Higgins, 70, a former culture minister who is president of the Irish Labour Party.        

Like Mr. McGuinness, both men have pledged to promote investment in Ireland to help speed up the country&rsquo;s economic recovery. But neither has anything like the public profile of Mr. McGuinness, especially in the United States, where the former I.R.A. commander has been an energetic envoy for the Belfast peace pact, particularly among the 37 million Americans with Irish ancestry.        

Mr. McGuinness has pulled off improbable outcomes before, notably in helping to bring Sinn Fein, the I.R.A. and Northern Ireland&rsquo;s mostly Roman Catholic Republicans into the 1998 Good Friday peace agreement. That pact ended the 30 years of &ldquo;Troubles,&rdquo; which killed more than 3,500 people in Northern Ireland, 60 percent of them in I.R.A. shootings and bombings. Building on that record in the election campaign, he has vowed, as he said in an interview in Galway, to use the presidency as a platform to &ldquo;further stabilize the peace process.&rdquo;        

Mr. McGuinness has said he left the I.R.A. in 1974, shifting to Sinn Fein&rsquo;s electoral politics. But British intelligence officials have said he remained the I.R.A.&rsquo;s northern area commander &mdash; in effect, chief of staff of the I.R.A. in the six counties of Northern Ireland &mdash; into the 1990s. A British report last year into the events on Bloody Sunday said he had probably been armed with a Thompson submachine gun during the confrontations in the Bogside district of Derry, but found no evidence to support assertions by some witnesses that he had fired shots that led to the fatal fusillade.        
Douglas Dalby contributed reporting from Dublin.
