
VALSGARD, Denmark &mdash; Norbert Baars may not know much about art, but he knows what he likes. No one is going to mistake the big 90-foot pylon, part of a power line that crosses his dairy farm here in the hilly Danish countryside, for a Michelangelo or even a Calder.        



&ldquo;It&rsquo;s one big clump of metal,&rdquo; said Mr. Baars, 34, a Dutch dairy farmer who moved here several years ago because farmland is cheaper than in his native Netherlands.        

But the views of farmers like Mr. Baars are of no slight weight these days. With the spread of renewable energy sources, like wind and water power, the high-tension power lines that carry electricity to Danish cities and industries must be expanded and drawn anew. As in other countries, no one wants those pylons in his own backyard.        

So to break down that Nimby, the Danes hit on the idea about a decade ago of having industrial architects, if not artists, design new, pleasingly sculptured pylons, those huge steel towers that support the power lines. If the pylons looked more like, say, giant sculptures, the reasoning went, people might like them or at least be less resistant to having them nearby. The first such line went up some years ago, running roughly 10 miles on 80 pylons, and crosses this farming village of about 900 people, just south of Mr. Baars&rsquo;s farm.        

Erik Bystrup, an industrial architect from Copenhagen, won a competition organized by Energinet.dk, the state-owned utility that operates Denmark&rsquo;s energy grid to find the most attractive pylon. &ldquo;Not just first, but second and third prize as well,&rdquo; he boasted, seated among scale models of his pylons in his offices in a renovated factory building.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve been trying to make pylons that are lightweight and colorful,&rdquo; he went on. &ldquo;Our message is, we&rsquo;re bringing you power lines with arms that reach up &mdash; with green energy.&rdquo;        

Unlike traditional pylons, with their latticework of gray galvanized steel, the ones that went up over Valsgard consisted of a single post, capped by a cluster of stainless-steel rods to hold wires that gleamed in bright sunshine almost to invisibility.        

Obviously, there are limits to the artistry of pylons. They have to be tall and carry wires a certain distance apart, and they cannot be made of exotic materials that would bust the budget.        

So, while Mr. Bystrup&rsquo;s design may not impress a Picasso fan, it was well received by Energinet.dk &mdash; so much so, in fact, that when the company saw the need to build an even bigger line, 105 miles up the center of the Jutland peninsula in western Denmark, it picked Mr. Bystrup&rsquo;s architects to design the pylons, choosing a simple model, dubbed &ldquo;Eagle,&rdquo; consisting of a single pole with arms reaching out on both sides like wings to support the wires. Construction of the 600 pylons, about 125 feet tall, has just begun.        

The idea that started in little Valsgard is now gaining traction internationally. In Britain, the Department of Energy and Climate Change sponsored a competition this year to design attractive pylons for future power lines; this month, a design by Mr. Bystrup was declared the winner over five other finalists. Canadian energy experts are studying the Danish approach to overcome objections to planned new power lines, like one from Canada to Boston through the mountains of New Hampshire.        

Around Valsgard, popular feelings made a difference. &ldquo;It was public pressure that influenced the architecture,&rdquo; said Bjarke Jensen, who is responsible for environmental protection in the Mariagefjord district, of which Valsgard is a part. At public hearings, local farmers debated whether the proposed line would hurt the health of their families and their farm animals, the visual impact of the line and its effect on property values, which dropped as a result of the line&rsquo;s construction. Most people wanted the line underground, Mr. Jensen said, but the grid operator said it was too expensive.        

Despite these efforts, obstacles to beautifying the power lines linger. The use of stainless steel, which architects like Mr. Bystrup prefer over the galvanized steel traditionally used, causes problems.        

Stainless-steel parts on the line across Valsgard had to be repaired or replaced last year, at considerable cost, because the welds holding them together deteriorated. Moreover, designer pylons, like designer anything, cost more. &ldquo;It is much more expensive, perhaps double the price,&rdquo; said Christian Jensen, the project director at Energinet.dk, which operates the electricity grid.        

Selling his designs to Energinet.dk can be frustrating business for Mr. Bystrup. &ldquo;They are electrical engineers, and they think very differently,&rdquo; he said, sighing. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a money question all of the time.&rdquo; He added, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s very, very uphill.&rdquo;        

Regardless of the cost issues, people in towns like Valsgard betray a mix of skepticism and resignation. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s always nice to have something to look at, if they can make it more pleasant,&rdquo; said Jens Peter Mikkelsen, 42, who set up his trading company in a disused farm three years ago. Still, he said, &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t understand why they&rsquo;re not underground.&rdquo;        

Erik Gronlund, 53, has been dairy farming in the village since 1989, when his father bought a farm there with its 50 head of cattle. He now has 180 cows, and they graze regularly in the shadow of the pylons. &ldquo;Many people here in the hamlet, we said no,&rdquo; he said.        

&ldquo;But the authorities said O.K.&rdquo; Like most farmers hereabout, Mr. Gronlund received a lump-sum payment to compensate for the decrease in the value of his property because of the presence of the pylons.        

Waving a hand toward Mr. Bystrup&rsquo;s pylon only a few yards from his barn, he said, &ldquo;It was the best we could get.&rdquo;        

Mr. Baars tries to squeeze something positive out of the power line, noting its usefulness in navigating the area&rsquo;s narrow country roads at night.        

&ldquo;Sometimes I think, &lsquo;Oh, just follow the pylons,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; he said.        
