
ISTANBUL &mdash; An Israeli plane carrying emergency housing led a flow of international aid into the quake-stricken area of eastern Turkey on Thursday, as two more people were pulled alive from the rubble.        

Early on Friday, rescue teams freed a 13-year-old boy more than 100 hours after the powerful earthquake struck on Sunday afternoon, Turkey&rsquo;s state-run news agency reported. On Thursday, an 18-year-old was extracted alive.        

The Disaster Crisis Center said at least 523 people had been confirmed dead and some 185 rescued since the 7.2-magnitude earthquake struck Sunday.. Heavy machinery began moving into the stricken areas, suggesting that, with time reducing the likelihood of rescues, operations would begin shifting into cleanup and recovery.        

Dozens of countries offered assistance almost immediately after Sunday&rsquo;s earthquake, but the government initially declined, saying it had sufficient resources. But as the level of need for shelter and supplies has become more clear, the government began reaching out.        

Azerbaijan transferred a rescue team of 140 workers as well as thousands of other supplies like tents, blankets and generators while other countries &mdash; France Italy, Russia, Kazakhstan and Ukraine &mdash; contributed with hundreds of tents, the Disaster Crisis Center said.        

More housing supplies were expected from Japan, England, and Ireland. About 300 constructions specialists conducted a preliminary inspection to mark damaged buildings in the region.        

The Israeli plane delivered five prefabricated houses and other supplies, the statement added. The plane landed in Ankara, the capital, rather than a smaller airport nearer the hardest-hit area around the city of Van.        

The Foreign Ministry emphasized Turkey&rsquo;s appreciation for the Israeli assistance, but reiterated that humanitarian gestures during a natural disaster would not affect strained diplomatic relations.        

Turkey is demanding an official Israeli apology and compensation for the relatives of eight Turks and an American citizen of Turkish descent who were killed when Israeli commandos intercepted a Turkish aid flotilla attempting to break the blockade of Gaza last year.        
