
MOSCOW &mdash; Georgian negotiators said they had accepted a Swiss compromise that would clear Russia&rsquo;s path to join the World Trade Organization in December, bringing an end to Moscow&rsquo;s 18-year application process.        

Russia&rsquo;s top negotiator in Geneva said his country needed several days to consider the proposal. The negotiator, Maksim Y. Medvedkov, told the news service Itar-Tass that the Russian side would answer next week.        

Pressure on both sides has escalated in recent days. Georgia&rsquo;s potential veto power is the last remaining obstacle to Russia&rsquo;s accession to the W.T.O., and must be resolved within the coming days if Russia is to join before the end of the year, a goal set by Moscow and Washington.        

The talks had snagged on how to monitor trade that crosses from Russia into Georgian territory, a question that churns up raw issues from the brief war the two countries fought in 2008.        

After that conflict, Russia formally recognized two ethnic enclaves, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, as sovereign nations, and its negotiators have cast international monitoring of the border as a challenge to Russia&rsquo;s stance.        

The Georgian deputy foreign minister, Sergi Kapanadze, who leads Georgia&rsquo;s delegation to the talks, called Switzerland&rsquo;s proposal &ldquo;the final, final, final compromise.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We hope the Russian side is going to agree to it,&rdquo; Mr. Kapanadze said. &ldquo;I really, really hope it&rsquo;s going to work for them. This is an agreement that has everything they&rsquo;ve asked.&rdquo;        

The trade group accepts members through a consensus system, meaning that Georgia, which joined in 2000, could block Russia. Although the organization could technically admit Russia through a vote of the majority, that type of accession has occurred only once in the organization&rsquo;s history.        

Among the points of friction has been whether trade observers posted in Abkhazia and South Ossetia would represent government entities or private contractors.        

The Swiss compromise says private firms will place observers on both the Russian and Georgian sides of the border &mdash; though not inside the enclaves &mdash; to monitor cargo. The contractors will be hired by neutral third parties, like Switzerland or the European Union, said Giga Bokeria, secretary of Georgia&rsquo;s National Security Council.        

Late Thursday night, Russia&rsquo;s foreign minster, Sergey V. Lavrov, spoke on the telephone with his Swiss counterpart about the W.T.O. accession talks.        

Russian officials have repeatedly warned that Moscow will never agree to demands that soften its recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.        

&ldquo;The demands our neighbors are putting forward, they do not involve the W.T.O., but another question,&rdquo; said Arkady V. Dvorkovich, an aide to President Dmitri A. Medvedev. &ldquo;We cannot meet them, and we will never meet them.&rdquo;        

Russia has the largest economy of any country not in the 153-member trade group, and the World Bank says that as a member, Russia could bolster its annual gross domestic product as much as 11 percent over the long term, though uncompetitive industries might suffer.        

During a visit to Washington this month, a Russian official, First Deputy Prime Minister Igor I. Shuvalov, said, &ldquo;We have Americans working 24 hours a day on our application in order to persuade other W.T.O. members that Russia should get membership before the end of the year.&rdquo;        
