
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; An American drone strike on Thursday killed the brother of a top Pakistani Taliban commander and three other aides, officials said, in the latest targeting of militants based in the country&rsquo;s northwestern region.        

Two missiles hit a vehicle at 9 a.m. in Tura Gula village in the Azam Warsak district in South Waziristan, according to a security official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The strike killed Hazrat Umar, a 20-year-old brother of the commander, Maulvi Nazir Nazir, and Khan Muhammad, another top commander in the group.        

Mr. Muhammad was a member of Mr. Nazir&rsquo;s advisory group and an active member of the organization&rsquo;s 120-member peace committee, which negotiates with the Pakistani government. He was also a member the liaison committee between the group and Al Qaeda, the security official said.        

Mr. Nazir&rsquo;s group is based in the western part of South Waziristan, a semiautonomous mountainous tribal region straddling the border with Afghanistan. Mr. Nazir is considered one of the most influential Taliban commanders. He leads the Ahmadzai Wazir tribe and his loyalists regularly take part in attacks on American forces across the porous border with Afghanistan. Unlike other Taliban factions, Mr. Nazir&rsquo;s fighters do not attack Pakistani military or government targets and remain focused on the war inside Afghanistan.        

The strike also killed a cousin of Mr. Nazir, identified as Meraj Khan, the official said. The identity of the fourth victim was not immediately available.The drone strike came a week after the visit of Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton to the country, where she met with the top military and civilian leadership. Mrs. Clinton urged the Pakistanis to take action against the militant groups that mount attacks on American forces inside Afghanistan and have safe havens on the Pakistani side of the border.        

Drone attacks are hugely unpopular in the country and are believed to be responsible for a high number of civilian casualties. Mainstream politicians and Islamic religious parties portray drone strikes as violations of the country&rsquo;s sovereignty and have long demanded that they be halted. Officials of Inter-Services Intelligence, the Pakistani intelligence agency, say they have stopped cooperating with the Central Intelligence Agency&rsquo;s drone strikes and say Americans unilaterally choose their targets.        

In recent months, American drone strikes have targeted vehicles instead of houses and compounds in an apparent effort to limit the civilian deaths.        
