
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta cast doubt on Thursday on talks aimed at persuading North Korea to abandon its nuclear program despite more positive public comments from negotiators for both countries earlier this week.        

&ldquo;I guess the word skepticism would be in order at this time as to what may or may not happen in those discussions,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta told reporters in Seoul, where he met Thursday with the South Korean president, Lee Myung-bak.        

Although Mr. Panetta said there were some indications of progress in the negotiations, he said, &ldquo;We&rsquo;re not sure where those talks are headed at this point.&rdquo; He was referring to two days of talks between United States and North Korean officials this week that were aimed at restarting more formal six-nation negotiations about North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear ambitions. Mr. Panetta was also referring to the tortured six-nation talks themselves. Officials concluded this week&rsquo;s exploratory talks, held in Geneva, by saying they had narrowed their differences about future negotiations. But the officials parted without fixing a date for future talks of any kind.        

Nonetheless, on Tuesday the American special envoy to the negotiations, Stephen W. Bosworth, called the two-day talks in Geneva &ldquo;very positive and generally constructive.&rdquo; Mr. Panetta&rsquo;s more skeptical view mirrored that of American military officials here, who in a briefing to reporters on Thursday expressed strong distrust of North Korea&rsquo;s motives in the talks.        

The officials said North Korea had engaged in the exploratory talks &mdash; and had been more accommodating in recent months &mdash; because its leaders were eager for food, fuel, currency and economic aid to help support national celebrations planned for 2012. The celebrations are for the 100-year anniversary of the birth of the late Kim Il-sung, the founder of North Korea.        

The military officials, who asked for anonymity under ground rules imposed by the American military command in Korea, said they feared that the North Koreans were talking simply to extract concessions without planning to give up their nuclear weapons, a view shared by some policy makers in Washington. &ldquo;We can&rsquo;t approach the negotiation from the perspective of not having any hope of its success,&rdquo; one of the officials said. &ldquo;But I think there&rsquo;s a great deal of skepticism.&rdquo;        

In a 2005 deal during six-party talks, North Korea agreed to give up its nuclear program in return for economic and diplomatic incentives. But that agreement came apart after North Korea conducted a nuclear test in 2006.        

&ldquo;There is a history here of accommodation and provocation,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta said. &ldquo;And there are periods when we are hopeful that we might be able to achieve some diplomatic progress in eliminating their nuclear program. And then, for whatever reason, we&rsquo;re not successful, and suddenly we enter a period of provocation in which they take steps that threaten not only the security of Korea but threaten the security of the United States.&rdquo;        

In January, Robert M. Gates, then the defense secretary, warned that North Korea was within five years of being able to strike the continental United States with an intercontinental ballistic missile. Neither Mr. Panetta nor American military officials elaborated Thursday on Mr. Gates&rsquo;s statement, but they said that North Korea was continuing to develop both conventional and nuclear weapons.        

The American military officials said Thursday that they believed that North Korea was engaged recently in cyberattacks on the South Korean banking industry via computers in China. But they acknowledged that they could not be certain of the attacks&rsquo; origin.        

Mr. Panetta joined other administration officials in urging China, North Korea&rsquo;s ally, to put more pressure on North Korea to abandon its nuclear ambitions.        

&ldquo;There are moments when we think that they are urging North Korea to engage,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta said, speaking of Chinese officials. &ldquo;But frankly, I think China can do more to try to get North Korea to do the right things.&rdquo;        

In matters closer to home, Mr. Panetta said that the Pentagon would submit a five-year defense budget next year that would have about $250 billion in cuts. The Pentagon and White House agreed this year to $450 billion in defense budget cuts over the next decade. Mr. Panetta declined to say where those cuts would come from, although he reiterated that there would be reductions in the number of American forces.        
