
MOGADISHU, Somalia &mdash; Islamist militants rallied hundreds of supporters outside Somalia&rsquo;s capital on Thursday to call for attacks on Kenya, saying, &ldquo;We want huge blasts,&rdquo; while Kenyan authorities reported an assault inside Kenya, with at least four people killed in an ambush near the Somali border.        

While it remained unclear who was responsible for the attack &mdash; in which a rocket-propelled grenade was shot at a car in northern Kenya &mdash; it comes just days after twin grenade attacks rocked Kenya&rsquo;s capital, Nairobi, which the police say were linked to the Somali Islamist militants known as the Shabab.        

Kenya sent hundreds of troops, backed by tanks and gunships, into Somalia this month in a premeditated military campaign against the Shabab, who have threatened terrorist attacks in Nairobi in retaliation, warning Kenyans to &ldquo;not let the flames of this war spill over into your country.&rdquo;        

The threats have left Kenyans and the United States jittery, with the American Embassy in Kenya warning of credible terrorist threats, specifically to shopping malls and nightclubs.        

But the recent attacks in Kenya have hit small targets with small weapons. The grenade attacks this week hit a local pub and a bus stop, leaving one dead and more than 20 wounded.        

On Thursday, a Kenyan government official in Nairobi suggested to local news organizations that Kenya would negotiate with the Shabab and halt its military offensive if the Shabab denounced violence.        

&ldquo;If the Al Shabab would like to discuss and engage with the Kenyan government, our channels are very open,&rdquo; Richard Onyonka, the assistant foreign affairs minister, told The Daily Nation.        

But in Somalia on Thursday, Shabab leaders called for the group&rsquo;s supporters and cells in Kenya to hit back harder.        

&ldquo;Hit the enemy with big things that can make them suffer,&rdquo; Sheik Muktar Roobow Abu Mansor told hundreds of supporters and residents in the Shabab-controlled area of Elasha Biyaha, about 12 miles south of the capital, Mogadishu. &ldquo;Big bites.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Kenyans have been talking about closing the Kismayu port, and their jets fired the port,&rdquo; said Sheik Mansor, referring to the Shabab&rsquo;s commercial stronghold on the Indian Ocean. &ldquo;I am telling the mujahedeens that Kenya is your port; go to their banks, guests, and go to all the places they keep their treasury. Take from them in return.&rdquo;        

Nations from across the world have sought to subdue the Shabab, which have sworn allegiance to Al Qaeda, but the fight notched into a higher gear since the group claimed responsibility for terrorist attacks in Uganda last year that left more than 70 people dead.        

The most recent push includes two main fronts, one by the Kenyans aimed at Kismayu, and the other a gruesome street battle in the Mogadishu neighborhood of Deynile.        

The fighting across Somalia has been slow and tough. An unknown number of Burundian soldiers in the African Union peacekeeping force were killed in Deynile last week, possibly scores, their bodies wantonly laid out for public viewing.        

Though the Shabab are losing ground, as well as domestic support, as the battles continue, Thursday&rsquo;s rally &mdash; just next door to the war zone of Deynile &mdash; offered a flash of resolve.        

&ldquo;We will fight against you; there is not any other option left for us,&rdquo; Sheik Mansor said. &ldquo;Defeating the Christians is here, and more victories.&rdquo;        

While Kenya is well equipped and well trained, many have voiced concerns that the military has virtually no experience in fighting conventional wars outside its borders. On Thursday, Kenya&rsquo;s military engaged in its first face-to-face land battle with the Shabab near the town of Bilis Qooqaani, killing nine Shabab fighters while sustaining two injuries, the military said in a statement.        

In a country that has proved almost impossible for any one entity to control for nearly two decades, even the simple element of rain can change the dynamics of battle. Kenya said that it launched an airstrike on Thursday on the village of Anole, and that ground troops were prepared to capture another.        

&ldquo;All three sectors continue to experience heavy rains impeding military movement,&rdquo; Kenya said in a statement. &ldquo;However, clear skies,&rdquo; it continued, &ldquo;allows for air action.&rdquo;        
