
MOSCOW &mdash; When Russia&rsquo;s president, Dmitri A. Medvedev, abruptly dismissed Moscow&rsquo;s powerful mayor last year, he violated a &ldquo;keep your friends close but your enemies closer&rdquo; precept that has long prevented the rise of dangerous opponents in Russian politics.        

The reasons to regret that decision now seem to be multiplying.        

In recent weeks, the former mayor, Yuri M. Luzhkov, has delivered a series of verbal broadsides at the Kremlin and the governing party, United Russia, apparently in an effort to echo public frustrations with Russia&rsquo;s ruling elite and to present himself as a political martyr.        

In one recent interview, he condemned high-ranking officials in United Russia, a party he once belonged to, as &ldquo;feeble and gray,&rdquo; singling out the party&rsquo;s chairman, Boris V. Gryzlov.        

&ldquo;Gryzlov is not a leader, but a person who has always served and who is incapable of independently taking a position,&rdquo; Mr. Luzhkov said in an interview with Radio Liberty published last week. &ldquo;Not only in debates with the upper leadership, which don&rsquo;t exist, but also in debates&rdquo; with his colleagues, he said.        

His toughest attacks have been against Mr. Medvedev, who will step down next year and probably become prime minister.        

&ldquo;Medvedev is not prepared to govern in a high-ranking capacity either as president or prime minister,&rdquo; Mr. Luzhkov said in the interview. &ldquo;Medvedev as a premier will be very weak.&rdquo;        

A few days after that interview, Mr. Luzhkov, who is currently outside Russia, was summoned for questioning in an embezzlement investigation involving the Bank of Moscow, an institution sponsored by the Moscow government that prosecutors suspect illegally transferred money into his billionaire wife&rsquo;s accounts while he was mayor.        

He has only been named as a witness in the case so far, but there have been indications he could soon face charges. Speaking to reporters this week, Sergei Naryshkin, the head of the presidential administration, said the former mayor&rsquo;s tenure was defined by &ldquo;an outrageous level of corruption allowed by Luzhkov and his circle.&rdquo;        

In response to those remarks, Mr. Luzhkov filed a defamation lawsuit on Thursday, seeking about $33,000 in damages, the Interfax news agency reported.&nbsp;        

The confrontation, which has consumed the Russian news media, could prove problematic for the Kremlin before parliamentary elections in December. Though hardly loved in Russia, Mr. Luzhkov has been able to marshal the news media&rsquo;s fascination with him to amplify his criticism of the government. In the past two weeks, he has given interviews to no less than six Russian-language media outlets, firing off critiques that have ricocheted through the blogosphere.        

In his latest interview, published Thursday in the newspaper Izvestia, he accused the Kremlin of orchestrating a campaign of political repression against him.        

&ldquo;We live in a sick government, which has a law enforcement system filthy with corruption and a lack of an objective judicial system,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And unfortunately, we live in a country lacking real presidential authority. And this is the most frightening thing.&rdquo;        

Natalya Timakova, the Kremlin&rsquo;s spokeswoman, said Mr. Luzhkov&rsquo;s claims of political repression were &ldquo;laughable&rdquo; and endowed &ldquo;a little too much honor on a retired politician,&rdquo; the news agency Itar-Tass reported.        

Mr. Luzhkov&rsquo;s critics have long accused him of manipulating Russia&rsquo;s often ambiguous legal system to his advantage. With his proletarian peaked cap and folksy speech, Mr. Luzhkov was Moscow&rsquo;s colorful frontman for nearly two decades, though he is most likely to be remembered for the corruption that opponents say reached extremes during the latter years of his tenure.        

Critics and now government officials point to the enormous wealth of those close to Mr. Luzhkov, including a deputy mayor who was said to favor a million-dollar diamond watch. Mr. Luzhkov&rsquo;s wife, a real estate developer named Yelena Baturina, rose from obscurity to become Russia&rsquo;s richest woman.        

Mr. Luzhkov has denied all wrongdoing.        

By presenting himself as a crusader for political rights now, Mr. Luzhkov could also be trying to curry favor with Western governments should he need asylum, like several fallen officials in the past, said Kirill V. Kabanov, director of the National Anti-Corruption Committee, an advocacy organization based in Moscow.        

Mr. Luzhkov&rsquo;s whereabouts abroad are unclear, but he may be in Austria, where his family is said to own a home. He has vowed to return for questioning in the Bank of Moscow case in November.        

His opponents, possibly including Mr. Medvedev, would prefer to see him stand trial. But for the Kremlin, dangers may lurk in giving the witness stand over to a former official who had access to embarrassing information.        

&ldquo;I think that the president has decided to send the former mayor to prison,&rdquo; Stanislav Kucher, a political analyst, told Kommersant FM radio on Thursday. &ldquo;And if he does, Luzhkov could drop a bomb.&rdquo;        
