
BANGKOK &mdash; The main river in Thailand&rsquo;s capital swelled to a record high on Friday, spilling over its banks and sending water rippling into the grounds of the Grand Palace, with its temples and gilded spires, the city&rsquo;s primary historical monument.        

The amount of water entering the palace grounds was small, but the breach was symbolically significant as Bangkok enters a crucial period when high tides to the south are pushing back at runoff from the north that has breached the city&rsquo;s outer defenses.        

&ldquo;The crisis we&rsquo;re facing today is the most critical natural disaster that ever happened in Thai history,&rdquo; Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra said.        

Chinatown, not far from the palace, was flooded, and concerns grew that floodwaters could reach the commercial center of the city, with its banks and shopping malls and five-star hotels.        

The commercial center was quiet on Friday as Bangkok residents continued to flee by the thousands after the government warned that there was little more that it could do to stop the coming deluge.        

&ldquo;What we&rsquo;re doing today is resisting the force of nature,&rdquo; the prime minister had said on Thursday. &ldquo;We cannot resist all of it.&rdquo;        

A huge mass of water has coursed down from the north over recent weeks, following an unusually heavy monsoon season, taking a steep economic toll as it has inundated cities and industrial complexes. Several feet of stagnant water continue to paralyze the ancient capital of Ayutthaya, to the north of Bangkok.        

With bad news continuing, and the prospects for recovery becoming an increasingly steep challenge, the Bank of Thailand cut the country&rsquo;s economic growth forecast for 2011 to 2.6 percent from 4.1 percent.        

&ldquo;The widespread flood, now affecting not only agricultural production but also manufacturing activity, is likely to weigh on the fourth quarter&rsquo;s growth substantially,&rdquo; the central bank said Friday in its quarterly report.        

Floodwater breached the defenses of the domestic airport, Don Muang, earlier this week in a major setback, and the airport director, Kanpat Mangkalasiri, said Friday that 90 percent of the airport was now flooded.        

The main international airport, Suvarnabhumi, continued to function normally.        

Seven districts on the northern outskirts of Bangkok, among the city&rsquo;s 50 districts, are now flooded, with residents moving to upper floors or leaving the area. Transportation is mostly by boat, as it was in the early history of Bangkok, once a city of canals that was known as the Venice of the East.        

Residents continued their daily lives as they could, and scenes of people wading through waist-high water holding their belongings above their heads began to look almost normal. Dogs took refuge on the steps of pedestrian overpasses.        

Overflow from the city&rsquo;s main waterway, the Chao Phraya River, has for days lapped at the great white walls of the Grand Palace, about 330 feet from the river bank. Sandbags guard its entrances and soldiers work to pump out the floodwater.        

The city governor, Sukhumbhand Paribatra, said that Friday&rsquo;s record level was 8.1 feet above mean sea level. The previous record, 7.5 feet, was set on Monday. Before the current flooding, the river reached its highest point, 7.4 feet, in 1995, another major flood year.        

The Grand Palace is the former seat of Siamese kings and one of Thailand&rsquo;s central tourist attractions. Inside a vast temple chamber is the Emerald Buddha, a jadeite statue, that is now wrapped in its gold rainy-season cloak, one of three that are changed by royalty as the seasons change.        

The current king, Bhumibol Adulyadej, 83, has made his residence elsewhere, but for the past two years has lived in a hospital because of a lung ailment and other illnesses, and has made few public appearances.        

On Friday, the army chief, Gen. Prayuth Chan-ocha, who is reported to have been in contact with the royal family during the floods, said the king was concerned that royal residences not be given special consideration in directing the flow of floodwaters.        

&ldquo;His majesty is very worried about the Thai people,&rdquo; the general said in remarks published in the Thai news media. &ldquo;He always has been and always will be. That&rsquo;s him. He doesn&rsquo;t want anything special, and he said the water must be allowed to flow naturally.&rdquo;        
