
MOSCOW &mdash; The interior of the newly restored Bolshoi Theater was resplendent with sable and d&eacute;colletage and claret-colored damask on Friday, as Russia&rsquo;s new aristocrats leaned out from their balconies with opera glasses, hoping for a glimpse into the czar&rsquo;s box, where the president was sitting.        

But if you wanted to understand the significance of the event, it was more useful to stand outside, where a few hundred people not lucky enough to get tickets were watching the gala on two large screens. It was a cold, miserable night, and the whole thing was covered live on television, but they stood there anyway, and when columns of ballerinas appeared to the adagio from &ldquo;Swan Lake,&rdquo; there were audible sighs of delight.        

The reopening of the Bolshoi is freighted with political significance; the six-year restoration has turned the clock back to the late 19th century, replacing thousands of Soviet hammer-and-sickle signs with imperial double-headed eagles. More simply, though, it fills a vacuum in a country besotted by art.        

A cleaning woman, Olga Kuznetsova, stood outside the theater in the embrace of her husband, a chauffeur. The two were swaying to the music, and when she heard &ldquo;Swan Lake&rdquo; she looked as if she was going to cry.        

&ldquo;I had problems at work today,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Then I thought &mdash; I can go to the Bolshoi.&rdquo;        

The restoration has been dogged by delays, scandals, firings and resignations and huge cost overruns. Two years into the process, officials said they discovered that the oak pilings that made up the building&rsquo;s foundation had weakened so badly that they had to be removed by hand, in pieces; workers joked that the building was probably being held up by its electrical wiring.        

In September, prosecutors opened a criminal investigation for possible embezzlement, saying federal officials had paid one contractor three times for the same work. Russia&rsquo;s accounting chamber has said the final cost of the project &mdash; $760 million, according to the Ministry of Culture &mdash; is 16 times the original estimate.        

The interior looked glorious on Friday night, a blitzkrieg of crimson and gold leaf. Vera Babich, whose company assisted with the reconstruction, said artisans confined themselves to the oldest of methods. To apply gold to moldings, they first coated the surface with a mixture that included clay, whale grease and rotten egg whites. They then used a brush made from squirrels&rsquo; tails to wash the surface with vodka, and then to apply thin leaves of gold. When the gold dried, she said, they used animal teeth to smooth and polish it.        

&ldquo;I think there is a delight in the details here that is an indicator of culture,&rdquo; said Olga Sviblova, the director of Moscow&rsquo;s Multimedia Art Museum, running her fingers along the molding as she left the theater.        

&ldquo;This is what was lost in the Soviet time,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;You cannot understand how happy it makes me unless you saw how it was before.&rdquo;        

The reconstruction reversed many changes made by the Soviets after the 1917 revolution. Because it was the largest hall within walking distance of the Kremlin, Soviet leaders had used it as a political venue. They replaced upholstered chairs, which seated 1,740 theatergoers, with more compact ones that fit 2,185. They painted over frescoes with white paint and cut out czarist symbols from the textiles that line the walls and boxes.        

Artisans restored 2,400 feet of the fabric to its original form, a task so painstaking that they could complete only a little over 3 feet of fabric a day, said Mikhail Sidorov, the adviser to the president of the Summa Group of companies, which oversaw the restoration. During a tour for journalists, he pointed out a gilded monogram of Czar Nicholas II, saying the signs &ldquo;appeared to have been lost forever.&rdquo;        

Not everyone is gushing over the project. The ballet dancer Nikolai Tsiskaridze savaged the job in a television interview earlier this month, saying that it is &ldquo;as if you are in Turkey at a hotel, and that the hotel resembles the shape of the Bolshoi Theater.&rdquo; He disdained the moldings as &ldquo;gold-colored plastic,&rdquo; and said the ceiling in the rehearsal rooms was too low.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s impossible to lift a ballerina,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;She&rsquo;s going to hit her head on the ceiling.&rdquo;        

His complaints are not likely to reduce the public&rsquo;s interest. In recent weeks, the line for tickets has been long and tense. The Moscow Times reported that scalpers have hired homeless men to take places in line at the crack of dawn, and that theatergoers had begun scuffling with people they suspected of the practice. This situation is bound to get worse next week, when tickets go on sale for &ldquo;The Nutcracker.&rdquo;        

For many people in Moscow, trips to the Bolshoi were a highlight of their childhood; Ms. Sviblova, now an elegant museum director, had slipped a Soviet-branded chocolate bar into her clutch purse, because she had eaten one when she was 4 years old and first attended a performance.        

&ldquo;When I was 4, that chocolate was a real event,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;And the sandwiches.&rdquo;        

Natalya Tsytsyna, 85, stood in the theater&rsquo;s entrance hall, beaming. Glamorous people were swanning up the staircase, wearing tuxedos, gold lam&eacute; waistcoats and mink stoles over bare shoulders, their hair lacquered into immovable waves or teased into jewel-encrusted Raphaelite clouds. There were gusts of perfume. Ms. Tsytsyna, for her part, was wearing a sweater and a sensible skirt, and she looked blissful.        

&ldquo;The Bolshoi remains the Bolshoi,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;This is our miracle.&rdquo;        
