
DUBLIN &mdash; Michael D. Higgins, a veteran politician and author, was on course Friday to score a come-from-behind win in the race for president of the Irish Republic as his main rivals conceded defeat before the final tallies were counted.        

Mr. Higgins secured nearly 40 percent of votes after the first round of counting, with a lead over his rivals that analysts considered unassailable. His main contenders were Sean Gallagher, an independent who had been expected to win, and Martin McGuinness of Sinn Fein.        

Mr. Gallagher had nearly 29 percent of the votes in the preliminary tally and Mr. McGuinness about 14 percent.        

The formal result in the battle for the largely ceremonial post is not expected until early Saturday. The election has attracted special attention abroad because of the candidacy of Mr. McGuinness, a former leader of the Irish Republican Army who has disavowed the violence of the past. Sinn Fein party strategists had hoped the election would increase its support by reinforcing its status as the main alternative to the southern establishment parties.        

Ireland&rsquo;s presidential electoral system is based on proportional representation, with voters able to rank several candidates by order of preference. The weakest candidates are eliminated first; several rounds of counting are then required to assign the votes of the eliminated candidates to those still in the running.        

The preliminary results Friday recorded first preference votes.        

Mr. Higgins is the president of the Labour Party, the junior partner in the government coalition. Fine Gael, the senior government party, performed badly; its candidate Gay Mitchell managed to win only 6.4 percent of first-preference votes cast despite his party&rsquo;s continued popularity since it was elected in February. It was unclear if the performance was in part a reflection of people&rsquo;s unhappiness with government austerity measures.        

Mr. Gallagher had been favored to win the presidential election until a televised debate on Monday in which Mr. McGuinness undermined his status as an independent. Mr. Gallagher had been an official with the Fianna Fail party until January but has since tried to distance himself from the party, which lost its hold on power in February amid the country&rsquo;s economic troubles.        

Mr. Higgins, 70, has been an advocate for human rights across the world and has been critical of United States&rsquo; foreign policy, particularly under President Ronald Reagan. He is highly regarded as a poet, author and broadcaster and has served in Parliament since 1981.        
