
LONDON &mdash; Officials at St. Paul&rsquo;s Cathedral said Friday that they would go to court to force the removal of hundreds of protesters who have camped outside the cathedral for two weeks, demonstrating against economic inequality and corporate greed.        

In response to the encampment, which led church authorities to close the famed cathedral for the past week, a senior London official suggested that the city consider using high-powered sprinklers to prevent protesters from setting up similar encampments in other prominent public spaces.        

Outside the cathedral, a major London tourist attraction, hundreds of protesters have been camping in dozens of tents. Among other amenities are a clothing stall, a makeshift restaurant and a meditation space.        

Church officials said in a statement on Friday that they had previously asked the protesters to leave the grounds of St. Paul&rsquo;s. &ldquo;This has not yet happened and so, following the advice of our lawyers, legal action has regrettably become necessary,&rdquo; they said. It was not clear how long it might take to obtain a court-ordered eviction.        

The closing of the cathedral was the first time its doors had been locked since World War II. Church officials said that about $32,000 in donations were lost every day it was shut. The cathedral reopened for two services on Friday, but parts of the building remained off limits.        

A senior priest at the cathedral, the Rev. Giles Fraser, who supported the protest movement, resigned his position Thursday, which raised speculation that there was a rift within the church over how to deal with the encampment.        

Citing the situation at St. Paul&rsquo;s, London&rsquo;s deputy mayor for policing, Kit Malthouse, said Friday that he would like to see &ldquo;high-powered sprinklers&rdquo; installed in the square outside the Houses of Parliament and in other public places. He suggested that they could be timed to douse the areas very early each morning.        

&ldquo;We do not want any more of these things springing up,&rdquo; Mr. Malthouse said. &ldquo;There is a difference between protesters and people taking the opportunity to camp in a public space.&rdquo;        

Outside the cathedral, tourists stopped to snap pictures of its soaring dome behind the improvised shantytown, while the protesters remained stoic. &ldquo;He&rsquo;d just get a lot of wet people holding umbrellas, because we&rsquo;re not going anywhere,&rdquo; said Kai Noitulover, 20, of Denver, referring to the deputy mayor&rsquo;s remarks.        

Instead of taking legal action, Mr. Noitulover said, the cathedral &ldquo;should invite us in, to put our tents inside. It should be supporting us, not employing these bully boy tactics.&rdquo;        

As dusk fell, people filed out of the church after the evening service. Some, like Paul Langton, 53, an arts consultant, had come to worship and also to support the protesters.        

&ldquo;I would like to see the tents and the church stay together,&rdquo; Mr. Langton said. &ldquo;This is what the church should be preaching, anyway, and nobody is doing any harm here. I am happy to be able to see both things.&rdquo;        
