
SIRNAK, Turkey &mdash; Portraits of Mevlude Gungen&rsquo;s two eldest children hang just above the television, the only piece of furniture in her spare living room. On a recent day, the set was tuned to the station run by a Kurdish militant group, bringing her news of the conflict that has haunted her country &mdash; and her family &mdash; for years.        



Her daughter Emine ran away to join the militants two years ago, at age 14. Her son Ramazan, now 20, was drafted last year into the Turkish Army.        

That has left the family, like so many others in this Kurdish corner of the country, stuck in the middle &mdash; caught between a guerrilla movement fighting for minority rights and local autonomy and a central government that says it wants to make peace, but fears carving up the country.        

&ldquo;My other children do not understand where either of them are,&rdquo; said Ms. Gungen, 35, who has six younger children. &ldquo;Sometimes I hear them saying, &lsquo;What happens if they face each other? Do you think Emine will kill Ramazan, or that Ramazan will kill Emine?&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

She chastises them for voicing such thoughts, but says she wonders herself. She at least hears from her son, who writes and calls. But she has not heard from her daughter since the day Emine ran away to a militant training camp with her distant cousin and best friend, Heybet Gungen, who was also 14. Heybet&rsquo;s brother Salih is also serving in the Turkish armed forces.        

Ms. Gungen&rsquo;s anxiety rises and falls with the frequency of the clashes between the government and the guerrillas, known as the Kurdistan Workers&rsquo; Party, or P.K.K.        

Fighting has increased since June, rising to a pitch recently when a particularly deadly militant attack led the government to send thousands of soldiers to hunt down the fighters. Ms. Gungen pictures her daughter in danger &mdash; and alone. In late September, she watched in horror as the P.K.K.&rsquo;s Denmark-based TV channel broadcast news that her daughter&rsquo;s friend Heybet had been killed during a firefight with Turkish soldiers near the Iraq border, just an hour from home. She was 15.        

&ldquo;It was like I lost my own daughter that day, too,&rdquo; Ms. Gungen said. &ldquo;They were always together.&rdquo;        

Turkey and its Kurdish citizens have a long and acrimonious history. For decades, the central government, bent on a strict assimilation policy, cracked down on Kurds for expressions of their cultural identity, such as reading publications in Kurdish or listening to Kurdish music. That set the stage for an armed uprising that began in 1984, when the P.K.K. effectively declared war on the state.        

Since then, more than 40,000 people have been killed in a series of militant attacks and government reprisals that drove hundreds of thousands of Kurds from rural villages. Turkey, the United States and the European Union designated the P.K.K. a terrorist group.        

In recent years, the government &mdash; in an attempt to join the European Union &mdash; has made some concessions to the Kurds, but promised constitutional changes have yet to be made, and many people remain wary.        

The struggle for Kurdish rights has been emotionally messy. Many in the Kurdish southeast are partisans of the P.K.K.; others remain sympathetic to the group and its ambitions but are, at the same time, weary of war and eager for a peaceful resolution.        

Families find themselves similarly torn, especially since military service is mandatory for Turkish young men, including Kurds. The young men who feel the most passionate about the rebels run away to join them. Those who disagree with their methods, or are unwilling to live their lives as fugitives, are forced to take up arms for a country from which many feel deeply excluded &mdash; and sometimes to take up arms against those they know, or love.        

Some Kurdish nationalists and analysts claim that the government has chosen in recent years to deploy more Kurdish conscripts in their home region, where they are more likely to fight the P.K.K., in an attempt to prove the rebels are cold killers and to gain Kurds&rsquo; support.        
Sebnem Arsu contributed reporting from Istanbul.
