
MITROVICA, Kosovo &mdash; For three months, this gritty mining town has been a hot spot of Balkan ethnic tension ominous enough to prompt new deployments of armed NATO peacekeepers and action by the European Union to slow Serbia&rsquo;s long-sought bid for membership.        

In the long siege at makeshift gravel barricades, ethnic Serbs hurled rocks toward ethnic Albanians on the other side of the Ibar River, and this summer, hooded men in shorts and sneakers firebombed a border-control station, stoking fears among Western powers that ethnic clashes could spin out of control in northern Kosovo.        

As is often the case in this impoverished region, the truth is complicated. In this instance, the authorities say, a furious effort to protect a lucrative oil-smuggling operation has turned into an international episode stirring troubling memories of the Balkan ethnic carnage of the &rsquo;90s.        

But with the trade estimated to run as high as $100 million annually, many observers say it has actually fostered a rare ethnic easing of tensions built around smuggling routes that run across divided territory.        

&ldquo;Ethnicity doesn&rsquo;t play a role when it comes to money,&rdquo; said Johan van Vreeswijk, the top European Union prosecutor in Kosovo for three years, who departed in June. &ldquo;If the Serbs and Albanians can make money from crime, they will do a joint venture.&rdquo;        

Hatred lingers in divided Mitrovica, but according to more than a dozen local police officers and international monitors, it is not the real cause of the current border protests. Instead, they blame Zvonko Veselinovic, an ethnic Serb in his 30s with a shaved head, a withering gaze and enough power that some people, in local Serbian restaurants, refuse to whisper his name.        

He has described himself in the Serbian news media as an honest fuel importer and a construction company owner who has never smuggled a &ldquo;liter of gas.&rdquo; His supporters insist he is a scapegoat for the West, which, they say, demonizes ethnic Serbs who do not accept Kosovo&rsquo;s 2008 declaration of independence from Serbia. In July, Serb protesters, confident in Serbia&rsquo;s unstinting support, erected barricades at border checkpoints after the Kosovo government, which is dominated by ethnic Albanians, took control of customs inspections.        

&ldquo;Like all Serbs in northern Kosovo, I do not recognize any institution in the Republic of Kosovo,&rdquo; Mr. Veselinovic said in an e-mail response to written questions. &ldquo;There is no network of smuggling. Citizens are protesting to protect themselves and their rights, their homes.&rdquo;        

However, local Kosovo police officers, Western diplomats and the customs authorities say that Mr. Veselinovic is the kingpin of an underworld business threatened by customs controls, and that he was a central organizer of a dozen barricades that NATO recently started demolishing, dispersing furious demonstrators with pepper spray.        

Prosecutors for the European Union peacekeeping mission in Kosovo issued a warrant seeking his arrest on smuggling and tax evasion charges this year, and they say they want to question him in connection with the checkpoint attacks and the killing by a sniper of an ethnic Albanian police officer in Kosovo, according to a ranking international investigator who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the investigation remained confidential.        

&ldquo;This is just a fight over a fence because they are losing their illegal profits,&rdquo; Mr. van Vreeswijk said. &ldquo;They shout about politics, but this is really about crime in a lawless territory.&rdquo;        

Smuggling, a tradition in the Balkans, peaked in the &rsquo;90s when traffickers in heroin and humans exploited the chaos of war to create what came to be known locally as the &ldquo;wild business.&rdquo;        

In the three years since Kosovo broke away from Serbia to form a new state with Western support, oil has dominated illicit trade.        

Ethnic Albanians are the majority in the Kosovo population of almost two million, but in the north, the 55,000 Serbs outnumber the Albanians and protested when Kosovo declared independence in 2008. Some set two customs gates on fire, and controls were never fully restored, despite nominal inspections by the international authorities.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Smugglers seized the opportunity, transporting oil tax-free from a Serbian refinery, buying oil at half-price for export and then selling it to consumers at 40 percent discounts. According to law enforcement officials, ethnic Serb gangs, often working with Albanian counterparts, diverted the fuel deeper into Kosovo, where they diluted low-grade diesel and sold it from makeshift gasoline stations.        

&ldquo;The young ones can see how the older ones make money. This is the fastest way to get more, and that&rsquo;s what created Zvonko,&rdquo; said Bestim Hoti, a spokesman for the Kosovo Police. &ldquo;For some, this is the last stand.&rdquo;        

According to locals and investigators, Mr. Veselinovic got his start as a so-called bridge watcher, part of a group that monitors the main Ibar bridge for ethnic Albanians and is known to get tough, publicly delivering beatings, nicknamed &ldquo;Kosovo kisses,&rdquo; to journalists and others.        

As he rose to become an underground leader, locals and investigators related, his arrest by ethnic Albanian Kosovo police officers in 2005 on auto theft charges provoked street demonstrations.        

According to an international monitor, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he feared reprisals against his agency&rsquo;s employees, Mr. Veselinovic forged connections to local political parties and politicians.        

To protect the smuggling business, investigators say, Mr. Veselinovic became deeply involved in the construction of barricades, paying protesters as much as $70 daily &mdash; an allegation that he scorns as the &ldquo;biggest lie I&rsquo;ve ever heard.&rdquo;        

Four of his heavy trucks were spotted knocking down television surveillance cameras by the main bridge, according to investigators. In late September, another truck blocked a rugged road used as an alternative smuggling route, and guards permitted only the chosen to enter.        

&ldquo;I am God here,&rdquo; a middle-aged man shouted, ordering away an unrecognized car that tried to enter.        

Ethnic Serb leaders defend Mr. Veselinovic, saying the Western powers have exaggerated smuggling for political ends and are also throwing mud at leaders of the demonstrations.        

&ldquo;They say I am the leader of the mafia in northern Kosovo,&rdquo; said Milan Ivanovic, a physician who is the leader of a political party called the Serb National Council and is part of a group of local leaders helping to organize peaceful demonstrations. &ldquo;They are trying to discredit us.&rdquo;        

For his part, Mr. Veselinovic insisted that he and his family had been on vacation in nearby Montenegro during the shooting and violent flare-ups, and that he had played a minimal role: &ldquo;I only attend and support the barricades.&rdquo;        

The Western authorities and NATO peacekeepers acknowledge that Mr. Veselinovic offers a model of forging ethnic solidarity, of a sort.        

The authorities say he reached an understanding with a man whom the police identified as his less powerful ethnic Albanian counterpart, Mentor Beqiri, 32, who was arrested in 2009 on charges of oil smuggling by the Kosovo police that were later dropped for insufficient evidence.        

According to investigators, the two men cooperated to distribute smuggled oil across divided Mitrovica. Mr. Beqiri, who owns a chain of gasoline stations, declined, through one of his gas station managers, to be interviewed. Mr. Veselinovic insists that no such cooperation existed: &ldquo;I never had contact with this gentleman.&rdquo;        

But according to one investigator, when Mr. Veselinovic needed to talk to Mr. Beqiri, they typically met in a wooded Serb enclave. It was a secluded zone with no mobile telephone reception.        

Western forces are cautious about moving against Mr. Veselinovic, though he insists he is &ldquo;available at any time, and I am ready to defend my innocence.&rdquo;        

The European Union and NATO peacekeepers, with troops from France, Germany, Italy and the United States, have mixed reasons for caution. His followers are heavily armed, witnesses are fearful, and he is allied with ethnic Serb police officials who attended his son&rsquo;s christening last year, according to international monitors.        

Pressure instead takes other forms, like the arrest of 13 drivers of Mr. Veselinovic&rsquo;s trucks last month on suspicion of entering the country illegally and helping to mount barricades.        

And Western officials hope that even in its twisted way, the smuggling trade provides a Balkan lesson. &ldquo;There is a lot of contact between Albanians and Serbians when it comes to crime,&rdquo; said Andy Sparkes, the deputy head of the European Union peacekeeping mission. &ldquo;We need to see that cooperation growing instead in areas which can benefit society.&rdquo;        
