
CAIRO &mdash; The government of Egypt&rsquo;s authoritarian president, Hosni Mubarak, shook Monday night, as the Egyptian Army declared that it would not use force against protesters demanding his ouster and, in an apparent response, Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s most trusted adviser offered to talk with the opposition.        

Those statements, along with the damage to Egypt&rsquo;s economy, appeared to weaken Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s grip on power just two weeks after a group of young political organizers called on Facebook for a day of protest inspired by the ouster of another Arab strongman, in Tunisia.        

Hundreds of thousands have turned out into the streets over the last six days, and organizers called on millions of Egyptians to protest on Tuesday.        

Within hours on Monday, the political landscape of the country shifted as decisively as it had at any moment in Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s three decades in power. The military seemed to aggressively assert itself as an arbiter between two irreconcilable forces: a popular uprising demanding Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s fall and his tenacious refusal to relinquish power.        

How far Mr. Mubarak is offering to bend in negotiations remains to be seen, and given the potential ambiguities of both statements it is too soon to write off the survival of his government.        

But the six-day-old uprising here entered a new stage about 9 p.m. when a uniformed military spokesman declared on state television that &ldquo;the armed forces will not resort to use of force against our great people.&rdquo; Addressing the throngs who took to the streets, he declared that the military understood &ldquo;the legitimacy of your demands&rdquo; and &ldquo;affirms that freedom of expression through peaceful means is guaranteed to everybody.&rdquo;        

A roar of celebration rose up immediately from the crowd of thousands of protesters still lingering in Tahrir Square, where a television displayed the news. Opposition leaders argued that the phrase &ldquo;the legitimacy of your demands&rdquo; could only refer to the protests&rsquo; central request &mdash; Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s departure to make way for free elections.        

About an hour later, Omar Suleiman, Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s right-hand man and newly named vice president, delivered another address, lasting just two minutes.        

&ldquo;I was assigned by the president today to contact all the political forces to start a dialogue about all the raised issues concerning constitutional and legislative reform,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and to find a way to clearly identify the proposed amendments and specific timings for implementing them.&rdquo;        

The protesters in the streets took Mr. Suleiman&rsquo;s speech as essentially a capitulation to the army&rsquo;s refusal to use force against them. &ldquo;The army and the people want the collapse of the government,&rdquo; they chanted in celebration.        

Even some supporters of Mr. Mubarak acknowledged that events may have turned decisively against him once the military indicated its support for the protesters, especially given the historical independence of the Egyptian military.        

&ldquo;The army is not a puppet in the hands of anybody,&rdquo; said Mahmoud Shokry, a former Egyptian diplomat and a friend of Mr. Suleiman. &ldquo;It is not a puppet in the hands of Mubarak. It is not a puppet in the hands of Omar Suleiman. It is not a puppet in the hands of the defense secretary.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The army does not want to confront the youth,&rdquo; Mr. Shokry said. &ldquo;If they think this will make a kind of civil war, they will ask Mr. Mubarak to leave the country, I am sure.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s previously unquestioned authority had already eroded deeply over the preceding three days. On Friday, hundreds of thousands of unarmed civilian protesters routed his government&rsquo;s heavily armed security police in a day of street battles, burning his ruling party&rsquo;s headquarters to the ground as the police fled the capital. On Saturday, Mr. Mubarak deployed the military in their place, only to find the rank-and-file soldiers fraternizing with the protesters and revolutionary slogans being scrawled on their tanks.        

And on Sunday, leaders of various opposition groups met to select Mohamed ElBaradei, the Nobel Prize-winning former director of the International Atomic Energy Agency, to negotiate for them in anticipation of talks with Mr. Mubarak about forming a transitional unity government &mdash; an idea Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s surrogate embraced Monday.        
Reporting was contributed by Mona El-Naggar, Kareem Fahim, Anthony Shadid, and Robert F. Worth from Cairo, and Nicholas Kulish from Alexandria.
