
MOGADISHU, Somalia &mdash; Islamist militants mounted heavy attacks against African Union and Somali troops in Mogadishu on Saturday. At least a dozen people were killed, witnesses said, although there were conflicting reports on the number of casualties.        

The Shabab rebels, armed with grenades, bazookas and suicide vests, attacked an African Union peacekeeping base in the capital near Mogadishu Stadium, where government troops are also based. The African Union said the Qaeda-linked militants deployed two suicide bombers.        

Witnesses said at least seven soldiers, possibly including African Union troops, had been killed, along with six Shabab militants. The Shabab said they had killed scores of peacekeepers, though the group has been known to exaggerate its military achievements.        

The African Union said that it had beaten back the assault, defending a main artery in Mogadishu, and that the strike had failed. At least 10 peacekeepers were wounded, &ldquo;some of them seriously,&rdquo; according to a statement.        

The African Union&rsquo;s peacekeeping force has been able to retake most of the capital over the last few months, but Shabab militants have continued to carry out attacks.        

&ldquo;What we are doing now is defending ourselves,&rdquo; said a Shabab spokesman, Ali Mohamud&nbsp;Rage. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not something strange. Every day is fighting, killing.&rdquo;        

A firefight between African Union peacekeepers and the Shabab in a Mogadishu neighborhood about a week ago left a number of Burundian peacekeepers, possibly dozens, dead. A suicide attack by the Shabab on a university this month killed at least 100 people.        

The Shabab took over much of the country in 2006, putting in place a harsh version of Islamic law, banning music, soccer and bras, but they have been steadily losing power and support.        

Two weeks ago, Kenyan troops crossed the border, vowing to drive the Shabab out of southern Somalia. On Saturday, the Kenyan military said it was &ldquo;within sight&rdquo; of the Shabab stronghold, the port city Kismayu.        

&ldquo;We are coming from the north, from the south, from the central,&rdquo; said Maj. Emmanuel Chirchir, the Kenyan military spokesman. Kenya&rsquo;s military also has a fleet of naval vessels offshore, and has conducted airstrikes on Kismayu and other cities. &ldquo;We have done targeting,&rdquo; Major Chirchir said. &ldquo;Now we are just confirming the casualties.&rdquo;        

On Friday, Kenyan troops overtook the Shabab-controlled coastal city of Burgavo, about 85 miles south of Kismayu, killing 18 pirates, who sometimes cooperate with the Shabab. Kenyan aircraft also struck the inland city of Anole, killing 19 Shabab militants. Military observers in Somalia estimate that 1,500 to 3,000 Kenyan troops are now in Somalia.        

But the offensive, which Kenya says it planned in advance and began after Somali gunmen carried out several kidnappings of Westerners in Kenya, has provoked a spate of retaliatory attacks by the Shabab in Kenya.        

On Friday, several Kenyan soldiers were wounded when an improvised bomb hit their vehicle about 60 miles from the Somali border, Kenya said. On Thursday, four Kenyans were killed when a rocket-propelled grenade struck a vehicle on the Somali border. On Monday, twin grenade attacks in Nairobi left one dead and more than 20 wounded.        

On Saturday, the Shabab claimed responsibility for those attacks, saying the fighting against Kenya as well as the African Union only strengthened their resolve.        

&ldquo;The Kenyan government is the one who is responsible,&rdquo; Mr. Rage said in a telephone interview. &ldquo;There was no problem in Kenya for a very long time. They are the ones who started attacking people here, disrupting other people&rsquo;s peace.&rdquo;        

Analysts say they believe there could be thousands of Shabab sympathizers in Kenya.        

Hundreds of thousands of Somali refugees have fled to Kenya, where they are creating instability and other problems, Kenya&rsquo;s president, Mwai Kibaki, said Friday.        

&ldquo;Kenya can no longer bear the burden of hosting the massive number of refugees,&rdquo; he said in a speech at the Commonwealth summit meeting in Australia, according to the local news media, &ldquo;and calls upon the Commonwealth to support efforts to facilitate their return to Somalia or relocation to another country.&rdquo;        

A government spokesman, Alfred Mutua, said that Mr. Kibaki had no plans to close the Dadaab refugee camp, which, with more than 400,000 Somalis, is the world&rsquo;s largest such camp. But, he added, &ldquo;We cannot just let this be.&rdquo;        

On Friday, a Kenyan court sentenced a Kenyan citizen to life in prison after he confessed to being complicit in one of the Nairobi grenade attacks, which struck a local pub and a busy bus stop.        

The man, Elgiva Oliacha, 28, who also goes by the alias Mohamed Said, admitted to being a member of the Shabab and grinned broadly in front of flashing cameras after the sentence was handed down.        

&ldquo;I am happy, and I have no regrets,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I am actually happier.&rdquo;        
Mohamed Ibrahim contributed reporting.
