
DWARKA, India &mdash; Shubhrangshu Barman Roy and his childhood friends are among the winners in India&rsquo;s economic rise. They have earned graduate degrees, started small companies and settled into India&rsquo;s expanding middle class. They sometimes take vacations together and meet for dinners or parties, maybe to celebrate a new baby or a new business deal.        

More Photos &#x00bb;


Yet in August, Mr. Roy and his friends donned white Gandhi caps, boarded a Metro train in this fast-growing suburb of the Indian capital and rode into New Delhi like a band of revolutionaries to join the large anticorruption demonstrations led by the rural activist Anna Hazare. They waved Indian flags, distributed water to the crowds and vented their outrage at India&rsquo;s political status quo.        

&ldquo;I could feel that people really wanted change,&rdquo; Mr. Roy, 36, recalled proudly.        

It may seem unlikely that middle-class Indians would crave change. They mostly live in rapidly growing cities and can afford cars, appliances and other conveniences that remain beyond the reach of most Indians. Theirs is the fastest growing demographic group in the country, and their buying power is expected to triple in the next 15 years, making India one of the most important consumer markets in the world.        

But buying power is not political power, at least not yet in India. The wealthier India has become, the more politically disillusioned many of the beneficiaries have grown &mdash; an Indian paradox. The middle class has vast economic clout yet often remains politically marginalized in a huge democracy where the rural masses still dominate the outcome of elections and the tycoon class has the ear of politicians.        

Elsewhere in Asia, emerging middle classes once helped topple authoritarian governments in South Korea and Taiwan, as rising incomes brought demands for greater democratic rights &mdash; an equation still simmering in China. But India had democracy before it had vast wealth, and the dissatisfaction of the middle class here has focused on the failings of the country&rsquo;s democratic institutions.        

For several years, the question of what, if anything, could awaken the middle class has hovered over Indian politics. Often dismissed as apathetic toward electoral politics, the middle class sometimes seemed to have in effect seceded from the nation &mdash; living in private compounds, using private schools and hospitals, and showing little interest in voting &mdash; minimizing, when possible, its contact with the state.        

&ldquo;People have completely lost hope in all political parties and personalities,&rdquo; said Arvind Kejriwal, a prominent activist and key adviser to Mr. Hazare. &ldquo;They believe that every five years, you just change the faces and the parties but nothing is going to happen. There was a huge sense of despair.&rdquo;        

A generation ago, the Indian middle class was smaller and centered around civil servants who lived in government housing and sent their children to government schools. Today&rsquo;s middle class is a creature of the economic reforms of the 1990s and is tightly wedded to the private sector. Its success is celebrated in Bollywood movies, and the Indian news media serve as a bullhorn for its views.        

If the earlier middle class saw some politicians as heroes, idolizing Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru, this middle class mostly regards politicians with contempt, placing more faith in business leaders or, in some cases, in nongovernmental organizations. Government is no longer regarded as a provider or enabler, but as an obstacle.        

&ldquo;This middle class is less about &lsquo;what the state can do for me&rsquo; than &lsquo;the state is preventing me from doing what I want to do,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said Devesh Kapur, director of the Center for the Advanced Study of India at the University of Pennsylvania.        

The Hazare movement rattled India&rsquo;s political establishment because it offered a glimpse of what could happen if the middle class was mobilized across the country. Professionals and college students provided the organizational spine, and money, that brought hundreds of thousands of people of all backgrounds onto the streets in what many described as a political awakening.        
Sruthi Gottipati, Nikhila Gill and Hari Kumar contributed reporting from New Delhi.
