
SANA, Yemen &mdash; For the first time since fighting broke out here in the Yemeni capital, Sana International Airport came under direct attack on Sunday night, in a possible move by opposition forces to escalate the conflict with the government.        

A Yemeni official who would speak only on the condition of anonymity confirmed that shells hit the airport on Sunday night, but that there was &ldquo;no damage done to any of the structures of the airport and no casualties.&rdquo; The official provided no other details        

An airport employee said that the airport closed Sunday evening and flights were diverted to the southern port city of Aden.        

Sana&rsquo;s airport is a strategic target for Yemen&rsquo;s armed opposition because in addition to commercial flights, it is used as the military airport and its landing strip is the only one in the capital. In addition, its location, just north of Sana, is particularly vulnerable because it is surrounded by areas where opposition forces are either in control or engaged in battles with the government.        

Armed conflict ignited in mid-September after government forces fired on an opposition protest march, killing at least 24 demonstrators. Since then, Sana&rsquo;s northern districts have been turned into a war zone, as the government battles troops loyal to a military commander who defected, as well as rebel tribesmen in the area. Shelling has continued for the past two days, despite the announcement by the Yemeni government late last week that a cease-fire agreement had been reached.        

Yemen&rsquo;s embattled president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, has clung to power despite 10 months of antigovernment demonstrations, the loss of international support and a deadly attack on his presidential palace in Sana that left him severely wounded. The country, which is home to one of Al Qaeda&rsquo;s most active branches, has been unraveling through loss of central government control, the outbreak of war in several cities and a severe economic crisis.        
Yasser Alarami contributed reporting.
