
TEHRAN (AP) &mdash; Iranian lawmakers said Sunday that they were preparing to summon President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad for questioning over an economic scandal and his policies, in the latest salvo in a deepening political battle.        

Mr. Ahmadinejad would be Iran&rsquo;s first president to be hauled before Parliament, a potential blow to his standing in a conflict involving him, Iran&rsquo;s legislators and the country&rsquo;s powerful clerics.        

At least 73 lawmakers signed a petition to question Mr. Ahmadinejad, with a quarter of the 290 members required by Iran&rsquo;s Constitution needed to call in a president. The Parliament&rsquo;s presiding council acknowledged receiving the completed petition Sunday.        

Earlier, Parliament found Mr. Ahmadinejad&rsquo;s economy minister guilty in relation to a $2.6 billion fraud case, considered the largest in Iran&rsquo;s history.        

This is just one of several economic misconduct cases against Ahmadinejad allies. The president has been struggling with members of Parliament and the clergy as crucial elections have drawn closer, including voting for Parliament in March and a presidential election in 2013.        

Mr. Ahmadinejad has come under increasing attacks in recent months from the same hard-liners who brought him to power, most notably the country&rsquo;s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, whom he has publicly challenged.        

Dozens of Mr. Ahmadinejad&rsquo;s political backers have been arrested or hounded out of the public eye by hard-line forces in recent months. His prot&eacute;g&eacute; and top aide, Esfandiar Rahim Mashaei, has been effectively blackballed, by a series of reputation-killing accusations, from his goal of succeeding Mr. Ahmadinejad in 2013 elections. Those include allegations that he leads a &ldquo;deviant current&rdquo; seeking to challenge theocratic rule, and that he is linked to the bank fraud case.        

That case, in particular, reinvigorated lawmakers&rsquo; efforts to bring Mr. Ahmadinejad in for questioning.        

At a session of Parliament broadcast live on state radio Sunday, a report was read saying that a parliamentary investigation has found top government officials guilty in the case, described as the nation&rsquo;s biggest financial scam. Economy Minister Shamsoddin Hosseini is set to be impeached Tuesday over the case.        

Hossein Sobhaninia, a member of the presiding council, said a special parliamentary committee would question a representative of the president before Mr. Ahmadinejad is summoned before the house.        

Dozens of Iranian legislators signed a similar petition last year, but later, several of them withdrew their signatures, killing the move.        
