
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; President Hamid Karzai moved quickly over the weekend to make amends for appearing not to express condolences for the deaths of foreign military personnel killed by a suicide bomber on Saturday.        

At a national security meeting on Sunday with two American officials, Gen. John R. Allen, the NATO commander, and Ambassador Ryan C. Crocker, the president &ldquo;expressed his heartfelt condolences and sympathies to the family and relatives of those foreign troops and Afghan civilians who were killed,&rdquo; said a statement issued by the presidential palace.        

&ldquo;Afghan people are grieved by the NATO loss of lives and share the pain and sorrow with the families and friends of the troops killed,&rdquo; the statement added.        

In a statement Saturday, Mr. Karzai had expressed condolences only to the families of the four Afghan victims and made no mention of the 13 NATO personnel who were killed, most of them Americans.        

The gaffe came a week after Mr. Karzai, in an interview with Geo Television, a Pakistani network, said his country would fight on the side of Pakistan if Pakistan was attacked by the United States. A transcript on his Web site omitted those remarks, however, and aides have told diplomats here that Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s remarks were taken out of context.        

&ldquo;Karzai personally apologized to both Ambassador Crocker and General Allen for the oversight,&rdquo; said a Western diplomat, speaking anonymously in line with diplomatic ground rules. The officials were satisfied that the oversight had not been intentional, the diplomat said.        

Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s spokesman, Aimal Faizi, also said the president had not intended to slight the military victims. &ldquo;I would like to clarify that our first statement was issued in the afternoon of Saturday after the suicide attack, and by that time there was not any official statement by NATO/ISAF or the U.S. Embassy in Kabul about the exact number and the nationalities of those who had died,&rdquo; Mr. Faizi said in an e-mail.        

Early reports from military sources said all 13 foreign victims had been American soldiers. Later, officials modified the list to four American soldiers, one Canadian soldier and eight contractors who had been working along with the soldiers as military trainers. Five of the contractors were American, two were British, and one was a Kosovar.        

The attack was NATO&rsquo;s worst loss of life in Kabul during the Afghan war.        
