
OSH, Kyrgyzstan &mdash; A former prime minister, Almazbek Atambayev, was set to win a presidential election in this strategically important Central Asian nation with more than 63 percent of the vote, the Central Election Commission reported Monday.        

But, as feared, several of his opponents declared the vote illegitimate and vowed to bring their supporters into the streets in protest. Backers of some of the losing candidates held small demonstrations on Monday, including here in Osh, a volatile city on the ancient Silk Road where ethnic clashes last year left nearly 500 people dead.        

The calls for protest raised the specter of further instability in Kyrgyzstan, which has seen two violent coups in the last six years. In April 2010, in the capital, Bishkek, a mob armed with rocks, sticks, assault rifles and even a commandeered armored personal carrier ousted the president, Kurmanbek S. Bakiyev, and forced him to flee to Belarus, where he remains.        

The protests on Monday here and elsewhere were short-lived and sparsely attended, but several losing candidates said they had no intention of backing down.        

&ldquo;I do not recognize this election,&rdquo; Kamchybek Tashiyev, one of Mr. Atambayev&rsquo;s main opponents, said at a press conference in Bishkek, the  24.kg online news agency reported. &ldquo;The people will not tolerate lies. The first responses to this start today.&rdquo;        

The interim government that took over after Mr. Bakiyev&rsquo;s ouster had hoped to avoid this outcome. Last year, the country&rsquo;s caretaker president, Roza Otunbayeva, ushered in reforms designed to divert some of the president&rsquo;s powers to an emboldened Parliament.        

Paramount power in Kyrgyzstan is now shared among five factions, an arrangement intended to minimize the political enmity of the past, particularly between elites from the rival northern and southern regions. Mr. Atambayev hails from the north, while his main opponents are from the south.        

Though presidential power has been diminished, Mr. Atambayev will still retain control of the military and security services. His main task, he said Monday, will be to unite his people.        

&ldquo;I participated in this electoral marathon with one goal: to consolidate the people of Kyrgyzstan,&rdquo; Mr. Atambayev said, according to 24.kg. &ldquo;I will work so that in several years the divisions among the people of Kyrgyzstan and the danger of schism finally becomes a thing of the past.&rdquo;        

Meanwhile, Western observer missions noted some irregularities with the election, such as the seeming absence of significant numbers of people from voter registration lists and some cases of ballot stuffing and vote buying.        

But Western groups also praised the election as peaceful and largely democratic, a rarity in this part of the world, where elections tend to be a sham and authoritarian strongmen rule for decades.        

&ldquo;I hope this election will be a step towards breaking the vicious cycle of corruption, lack of implementation of the rule of law and ethnic tensions,&rdquo; said Nursuna Memecan, the head of a delegation from the Council of Europe&rsquo;s Parliamentary Assembly. &ldquo;We call on all political actors to continue doing their utmost for the stability of the country by protecting the human rights of all its citizens and respecting democratic standards.&rdquo;        
