
BAGHDAD &mdash; The government of Iraq continued to respond vigorously on Monday to a tip from the new interim leaders in Libya that former members of Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s military and Baath Party were plotting a coup &mdash; so much so that critics are now saying that the information has become a pretext for arresting its political opponents.        

As the overwhelming majority of high-ranking Baathists were Sunnis, the mass arrests by the Shiite-controlled government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki is fanning sectarian tensions, just six weeks before the United States military is scheduled to withdraw its last soldiers.        

Former Baathists, who made up much of the professional class as well as the military and political leaders under Saddam Hussein have said they are deeply concerned by the turn of events, particularly now that the American military can no longer guarantee their safety.        

&ldquo;Frankly, I am very scared and expect to be arrested at any moment,&rdquo; Haji Abu Ahmed, a former Baathist in the southern city of Basra, said in an interview.        

&ldquo;The current practices are the same as the practices of Saddam,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There seems to be no difference between the two systems. Saddam was chasing Dawa, and now Dawa is chasing Baathists.&rdquo; Dawa is Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s political party.        

When the government revealed last week that it had received the information in October, gleaned from the ruined headquarters of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s intelligence headquarters in Tripoli, the authorities detained more than 200 people.        

By Saturday, the number of arrests of suspected members of what Mr. Maliki has characterized as an underground group made up of the vestiges of the disbanded Baath Party had more than tripled to 615, according to government figures.        

Dozens of arrests have been reported since, with some suspects pulled from their houses before dawn, relatives said.        

A senior official in the Iraqi government said last week that Libya&rsquo;s interim leader, Mahmoud Jibril, revealed the plot to Mr. Maliki during a surprise visit to Baghdad in October.        

In addition to the mass arrests in the supposed plot, the government is purging former Baathists in higher education. Last month, the government fired 145 employees of Salahudin University in Tikrit, north of Baghdad, for being former Baathists.        

The leaders of Iraq&rsquo;s Sunni minority are now, as they have been in the past, extraordinarily sensitive to efforts to arrest or extricate members of the former Baath Party from public life. That process, called de-Baathification, was introduced by the United States immediately after the 2003 invasion and contributed, in the minds of its many critics, to the formation of the insurgency.        

Sunnis already nervous about the American withdrawal reacted to the arrests and firings with protests and threats that they will seek to spin off predominantly Sunni provinces as autonomous regions. In a largely symbolic vote, one local council in Tikrit, the hometown of Mr. Hussein and a Baath Party stronghold, decided to begin the process of gaining greater independence by forming an autonomous region similar to Kurdistan.        

The council in Anbar, the Sunni-dominated western desert region that was an epicenter of the insurgency, issued an ultimatum that if the detainees were not freed, it would also vote to seek greater autonomy. Street protests erupted after Friday Prayer in Tikrit and Ramadi, another Sunni city.        

In a television address over the weekend, Mr. Maliki defended the government&rsquo;s actions, saying, &ldquo;We do not have space in our government for those plotting against our government.&rdquo;        

He denied that the arrests were singling out political opponents, saying they were a &ldquo;nonsectarian operation.&rdquo; As proof, he pointed to Baathist conspirators who had been detained in the predominantly Shiite areas of southern and central Iraq and included Shiites. He said legal processes were respected and arrest warrants obtained.        

&ldquo;We should differentiate between the Baathists who work in departments and institutions of the state, who harmonized with the political process and who fought terror, and the Saddamist Baathists, who cooperate with Al Qaeda and work to overthrow the political process,&rdquo; Mr. Maliki said.        

The arrests are also apparently helping Mr. Maliki to shore up support among factionalized Shiite parties who find common cause only in persecuting their former oppressors.        

As one example, Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s uneasy partner in the governing coalition, Moktada al-Sadr, the anti-American Shiite cleric, endorsed the firings of alleged Baathists professors at Salahudin University. &ldquo;The brother minister of higher education should go on with this uprooting,&rdquo; Mr. Sadr said in a statement. &ldquo;This is good for us and good for them.&rdquo;        
