
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash;Libya&rsquo;s provisional leaders named an engineer as its new prime minister Monday, taking the first step toward assembling a new transitional government after the killing of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and the formal end to the uprising that ended his nearly 42 years in power.        

Libya&rsquo;s Transitional National Council said Monday that its members voted to name as prime minister Abdel Rahim el-Keeb, whom officials described as an electronics engineer and Qaddafi critic who spent most of his career abroad. For the purposes of Libyan politics, however, Mr. Keeb is considered a resident of the western city of Tripoli, the capital, offering regional balance to the interim president, Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, who is from the east.        

Mr. Keeb did not play any conspicuous role in the revolt against Colonel Qaddafi, but leaders of the revolt from Tripoli, the Western mountains and the coastal city of Misurata cheered his selection. He succeeds Mahmoud Jibril, who announced his resignation after the capture of Tripoli. Anti-Qaddafi forces from Misurata had led a drive to oust Mr. Jibril, in part because he had worked for about five years as head of an economic development office under Mr. Qaddafi.        

Mr. Keeb &ldquo;starts with a clean slate,&rdquo; said Mohamed Benrasali, a spokesman for the local council governing Misurata. &ldquo;He will not be troubled by his past, unlike Mr. Jibril.&rdquo;        

Under a &ldquo;constitutional declaration&rdquo; issued by the Transitional National Council, Mr. Keeb is expected to form a cabinet that will run the government until the election of a national assembly in about eight months. He was named on the same day that NATO&rsquo;s general secretary, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, visited Tripoli to mark the last day of the organization&rsquo;s mission here, which formally ended Monday at midnight. &ldquo;We acted to protect you,&rdquo; Mr. Rasmussen said in speech at the Rixos Hotel, once the hub of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s propaganda machine. &ldquo;Together we succeeded. Libya is finally free.&rdquo;        
