
The Tunisian government has issued a warrant for the widow of the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat in connection with a corruption investigation, the Tunisian state-run news agency reported on Monday.        

The agency said the warrant for Suha Arafat, issued quietly last week, summoned her for questioning as part of an investigation into high-level corruption by government officials, including Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, the country&rsquo;s ousted president. Mr. Ben Ali is living in exile in Saudi Arabia.        

A spokesman for the Justice Ministry did not provide details about the investigation, according to the local news site Tunisia Live. But news reports said it appeared to be connected with the International School of Carthage, which was founded in 2006 by Mrs. Arafat and Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s wife, Leila Trabelsi.        

The Tunisian government donated a desirable tract of land and gave a $1.5 million grant to Ms. Trabelsi for the school in the summer of 2007, according to a United States diplomatic cable obtained by WikiLeaks.        

Another diplomatic cable&nbsp; described the falling-out between the two women over the forced closing of an existing school, Louis Pasteur-Bouabdelli, which would have been in direct competition with the new school. Mrs. Arafat had opposed the school&rsquo;s closing and believed her dispute with Ms. Trabelsi had directly resulted in her loss of Tunisian citizenship, which was revoked by government decree in 2007. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t believe what she&rsquo;s has done to me,&rdquo; Mrs. Arafat is quoted as saying to the American ambassador, Robert F. Godec, in the diplomatic cable dated in November 2007. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve lost everything!&rdquo;        

The Associated Press said the type of warrant that was issued did not indicate whether Mrs. Arafat would be questioned as a suspect or as a witness.        

Reached by telephone on Monday in Malta, Mrs. Arafat said she had no current connection to the school or any involvement in corruption, according to Agence France-Presse.        

&ldquo;I am ready to face this affair, to present documents, and I have charged a Tunisian lawyer with presenting the documents,&rdquo; she told the French news agency, which first reported the issue of the warrant over the weekend.        

Mrs. Arafat, who has French citizenship and was born in Jerusalem, lived in Tunisia for many years and became a naturalized citizen there after her husband&rsquo;s death in 2004. After her Tunisian citizenship was revoked, she left the country and has lived in Malta since then, according to news reports.        

Reviled by many Tunisians, Mr. Ben Ali is regarded as having presided over a corrupt administration that enabled Ms. Trabelsi, a former hairdresser who also lives in exile in Saudi Arabia, to enrich herself and those around her. In June, a Tunisian court sentenced Mr. Ben Ali and Ms. Trabelsi in absentia to 35 years in prison for embezzlement and misuse of public money.        

The warrant for Mrs. Arafat comes at a time of shifting political sands in Tunisia after an election last week that set the stage for a governing coalition led by the country&rsquo;s moderate Islamist party.        
Hend Hassassi contributed reporting from Tunis.
