
NAKAGAMI, Japan &mdash; In a widely expected judicial move that could widen a rift in the country&rsquo;s governing party and fuel opposition calls for a new election, Ichiro Ozawa, the party&rsquo;s power broker, was indicted Monday on accusations that he misreported political funds.        

Mr. Ozawa  engineered the governing Democratic Party&rsquo;s historic election victory in late 2009, but he also symbolizes the murky money politics that many Japanese want to leave behind.        

The prospect of an indictment had already divided party members over whether to demand Mr. Ozawa&rsquo;s resignation from the party or force him to testify in Parliament about financing irregularities. Prime Minister Naoto Kan, who largely excluded Mr. Ozawa&rsquo;s supporters from his cabinet, had earlier hinted that Mr. Ozawa should resign if indicted.        

The indictment could also strengthen public support for the opposition Liberal Democrats, who have vowed to use their control of the upper house to block legislation and force Mr. Kan to call an early election. Mr. Ozawa&rsquo;s money scandals have sapped the Democrats&rsquo; popularity and helped force the abrupt resignation last year of Mr. Kan&rsquo;s predecessor, Yukio Hatoyama.        

So far, Mr. Ozawa has vowed to fight any charges, and has refused calls from within his party to testify in Parliament. Several of his former aides have already been charged in connection with a 400 million yen, or $4.9 million, real estate deal that prosecutors say was used to hide political funds.        

While Mr. Ozawa remains a potent political figure, the scandal has turned many in his party against him and made him into something of a pariah in the local news media. A grand-jury-like panel of lay citizens ruled last year that Mr. Ozawa should be indicted after prosecutors had twice found insufficient evidence to press charges.        

A similar  scandal two years ago forced Mr. Ozawa to resign as the head of the party, costing him a chance of becoming prime minister. Mr. Ozawa was not charged.        
