
ATHENS &mdash; The government of Prime Minister George Papandreou teetered on the verge of collapse on Tuesday, threatening Greece&rsquo;s adherence to the terms of a new deal with its foreign lenders and plunging Europe into a fresh bout of financial turmoil.        

Several lawmakers in the governing Socialist Party rejected Mr. Papandreou&rsquo;s surprise plan for a popular referendum on the Greek bailout, raising the possibility that he will not survive a no-confidence vote scheduled for Friday that depends on his holding together a razor-thin parliamentary majority.        

An emergency cabinet meeting convened by Mr. Papandreou ended at nearly 3 a.m. Wednesday, with the cabinet saying that it unanimously supported the prime minister&rsquo;s call for a referendum, local news outlets reported. The opposition and some members of his own party, however, were calling for new elections immediately.        

The impasse in Athens seemed likely to delay &mdash; and perhaps scuttle &mdash; the debt deal that European leaders reached after marathon negotiations in Brussels last week. Financial markets cratered on Tuesday for the second straight day, wiping out the gains since the Brussels deal was announced last week. Some analysts said that Greece was now coming closer to a messy default on its debt, and perhaps a departure from the zone of 17 countries that use the euro as their common currency.        

Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President Nicolas Sarkozy of France, apparently caught off guard by Mr. Papandreou&rsquo;s call for a referendum and then by the disarray in his party, said they would hold emergency talks on Greece with euro zone leaders on Wednesday. They said they also planned to meet with representatives of the Greek government before a critical meeting of the Group of 20 advanced and emerging economies on Thursday, and they defended the terms of the bailout package as &ldquo;more necessary than ever today.&rdquo;        

The chairman of the euro zone finance ministers, Jean-Claude Juncker, warned that the plan to hold a referendum endangered an $11 billion loan that Greece was to receive under the bailout deal, and that Greece urgently needed to avoid a default. Mr. Juncker, who is also the prime minister of Luxembourg, added that Greece could face bankruptcy if it votes &ldquo;no&rdquo; on the bailout.        

The big fear is that a decisive turn against the bailout package in Greece could undermine European efforts to enforce deep budget cuts in other heavily indebted European countries, especially Italy, which is mired in its own political crisis and has a far larger economy and much more debt than Greece.        

Political analysts and several advisers to Mr. Papandreou said the prime minister had decided to announce a popular referendum on Monday night as his last best hope to shore up his eroded political standing. They said he wanted to put Greece&rsquo;s fate back in the hands of the Greek people and to force his many opponents &mdash; both inside his government and in the opposition &mdash; to coalesce around the idea that what is at stake is Greece&rsquo;s membership in the euro.        

He wanted Greek voters &ldquo;to take a position, to see the choice before us in its starkness, hoping they will back the lesser of two evils, instead of letting irate reactions in the streets dominate the debate,&rdquo; said one adviser to the prime minister.        

But on Tuesday, it appeared that his move may have backfired. A lawmaker in his governing coalition left the Socialist Party to become an independent, another said she would not vote confidence in the government unless the prime minister formed a coalition government, and an additional six leading Socialists wrote a letter calling on Mr. Papandreou to resign and schedule early elections for a new government with greater political legitimacy. Together, the developments made it doubtful whether his government would survive a confidence vote, because the loss of even two supporters threatened his parliamentary majority.        
Dimitris Bounias contributed reporting from Athens, and Stephen Castle from Brussels.
