
LONDON &mdash; After a trial that many saw as a turning point for the game of cricket, a jury found two former members of Pakistan&rsquo;s national team guilty Tuesday of conspiracy to cheat in a contest with England last summer at Lord&rsquo;s, the London ground that is regarded as the spiritual home of the game.        

The verdict, after a monthlong trial and 17 hours of deliberations, underscored the power of betting syndicates in the Indian subcontinent that have flourished in cricket&rsquo;s new era of wealth and popularity around the world.        

Many in the cricket world have warned that the syndicates and their grip on key players could destroy a game that has grown in recent decades from a gentlemanly, tradition-bound diversion played in impeccable white uniforms to a bare-knuckle, big-money sport centered in India and Pakistan. Matches there take place before crowds exceeding 100,000 and tens of millions on television.        

The two men convicted were Salman Butt, 27, who lost his captaincy of the Pakistan team as a result of the scandal, and Mohammad Asif, 28, one of the world&rsquo;s great bowlers. Both were also found guilty of conspiracy to cheat and conspiracy to accept corrupt payments.        

A guilty plea by a third player, Mohammad Amir, a fast bowler who was under 18 when the offenses were committed, was unsealed after the verdict.        

Amir was considered &nbsp;one of the brightest hopes of Pakistan cricket in many years, and his lawyers told the court that he had come under huge pressure &ldquo;at a vulnerable age&rdquo; from others in the team who should have been caring for his wellbeing.        

Prosecutors said they expected that Butt and Asif would serve prison time. Cricket officials have said they expect the two to be barred from the game for life, breaking with a pattern in which some players found guilty of corruption have served terms of suspension and returned to the game.        

One prosecutor, Aftab Jafferjee, told the court that the revelations in the case &ldquo;revealed a depressing tale of rampant corruption at the heart of international cricket.&rdquo; Witnesses at the trial spoke of hundreds of thousands of dollars being paid as bribes to players for &ldquo;spot fixing&rdquo; &mdash; predetermining passages of play or individual incidents &mdash; in the contests known as test matches, games played between national teams that are regarded as the pinnacle of the sport.        

The investigation involved a peculiar twist. It grew out of a sting operation run by The News of the World, the tabloid newspaper that was closed this summer by Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s News Corporation because of an unrelated scandal involving covert, unethical and illegal practices in the paper&rsquo;s newsroom, including voice-mail hacking and paying the police for information.        

An undercover reporter for The News of the World, Mazher Mahmood, posed as an agent for betting syndicates to meet an agent for the Pakistan cricketers, Mazhar Majeed, 36. The reporter made secret video recordings of their deal &mdash; struck at a hotel near the Lord&rsquo;s ground &mdash; to fix parts of a match between England and Pakistan.        

Additional evidence presented by the prosecution included the results of a Scotland Yard probe of 9,000 telephone calls and text messages between Pakistani players and individuals said to have been linked to betting syndicates in the United Arab Emirates and India.        

Prosecutors showed that Majeed, who claimed at the encounter to have control of several players on the Pakistan squad, had taken &pound;150,000 (about $240,000) to arrange for Pakistani bowlers to deliver three &ldquo;no-balls&rdquo; at prearranged moments.        

A no-ball in cricket occurs when a bowler, at the moment of releasing the ball toward the batsman, oversteps the chalk line known as the crease. A no-ball counts as an automatic run for the team that is batting. The vast menu of betting options now available means that gamblers can bet not just on who wins a match, but on individual incidents &mdash; like when a no-ball will be bowled.        

Evidence showed that the three no-balls were delivered exactly as Majeed had promised &mdash; in particular overs, the six-ball sequences into which cricket divides the bowling, and on particular balls within those overs.        

Cricket statisticians called to give evidence said that the chances against the no-balls&rsquo; being delivered at those moments by coincidence, with the Pakistan bowlers having no knowledge of the spot-fixing deal, as the two defendants at the trial contended, were about 10 million to 1.        

Trial evidence showed that some of the marked notes that the News of the World reporter delivered to Majeed were found in a suitcase belonging to Butt, the former Pakistan captain, by the police.        

Defense lawyers told the court that the cash involved &mdash; &pound;30,000 (about $48,000) and $12,000 in United States banknotes &mdash; was given to Butt to help finance an investment in an ice cream parlor.        

The betting syndicates behind the London trial have grown up in the shadow of the sport&rsquo;s new profile, with huge sums at their disposal that dwarf the earnings of most international players. Allegations that have swept over the cricket world for years have pointed to top international matches having been fixed outright, one of them a test match in Sydney last year in which Pakistan, with a seemingly unassailable lead, collapsed on the final day&rsquo;s play, handing an improbable victory to the Australians.        

The police investigations of that match have been inconclusive, and the pattern followed by the syndicates appears to have been to focus on narrower aspects of each game, including the timing of no-balls and the number of runs scored by batsmen in a specified sequence of play. Investigators have said that this spot-fixing is easier, since it can be accomplished by a conspiracy that involves fewer players, allows the players who take payments to continue to fight for a win and is harder to detect.        

A former Pakistan captain, Asif Iqbal, told the BBCthat that the verdicts would send a &ldquo;huge message&rdquo; to the sport. A former England test match player, Angus Fraser, said the trial &ldquo;shows young cricketers that there is a consequence to their behavior,&rdquo; and that life bans for Butt and Asif would help cricket in its fight against corruption.        
