
TOKYO &mdash; A nuclear reactor in western Japan began starting back up on Tuesday after a month&rsquo;s hiatus, the first reactor in the country closed for any reason to win approval from a local government to resume operations since the Fukushima nuclear disaster.        

Since the March 11 earthquake and tsunami that set off the nuclear disaster, a popular backlash against nuclear power has halted the reopening of reactors closed because of damage at the time or unrelated glitches, or for routine inspections. Regulations require reactors to close at least every 13 months for checks, meaning more and more reactors have gone out of service, with none allowed to restart &mdash; until Tuesday.        

Only 10 of Japan&rsquo;s 54 reactors are now generating electricity, a sharp reduction for an industry that once supplied 30 percent of the country&rsquo;s electricity. The shortfall in supply forced the Tokyo Electric Power Company to tell companies to slash energy use by 15 percent this summer.        

The government has been keen to soothe local jitters about nuclear energy and enable reactor restarts. But power companies must submit results of &ldquo;stress tests&rdquo; that evaluate a reactor&rsquo;s defenses against earthquakes, tsunamis, station blackouts and the loss of water for cooling &mdash; and they must get a go-ahead from local the government.        

Yasushi Furukawa, the governor of Saga Prefecture, has wavered on whether to allow restarting two idle reactors at the Genkai Nuclear Power Plant. Seen as a bellwether for the rest of Japan, Mr. Furukawa had appeared to be moving toward allowing two of the reactors to restart but his decision was put off after revelations of a scandal over faked supportive e-mails sent by employees of the local Kyushu Electric Power Company posing as pro-nuclear citizens.        

Then early last month, a third reactor shut down at Genkai after a worker mistakenly pulled out a cable from the unit&rsquo;s condenser vacuum, causing the turbine to stop. The full details of the case have not been made public.        

Kyushu Electric called it a small error and said that the automatic shutdown it triggered had gone smoothly. But some critics warned that the episode constituted a serious safety lapse and pointed to a more widespread problem at other plants.        

Since then, however, the utility has submitted &mdash; and Japan&rsquo;s nuclear regulators have checked and approved &mdash; operation manuals for that reactor, paving the way for a restart.        

&ldquo;If this is a decision reached by the central government after ample checks, we accept,&rdquo; Mr. Furukawa told reporters Tuesday before the restart.        

The reactor at the Genkai plant was started up around 11 p.m. local time and was set to reach 100 percent generating capacity on Wednesday, Kyushu Electric said. But the reactor&rsquo;s run will be brief: the same reactor must be stopped in mid-December for routine maintenance.        

It is still unclear when the plant&rsquo;s other two idle reactors will be allowed to restart. But Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda has indicated he will push for their restart.        

In a statement, the Japanese arm of the environmental group Greenpeace, criticized the decision to restart the reactor.        

&ldquo;In the aftermath of the Great East Japan earthquake and triple meltdown at Fukushima Daiichi, it is unthinkable for any nuclear plant to be restarted before proper safety checks or consultation with the public is conducted,&rdquo; said Junichi Sato, the group&rsquo;s executive director for Japan.        

&ldquo;Kyushu Electric must keep this reactor shut,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and bring forward the regular maintenance planned next month.&rdquo;        

Also on Tuesday, Japanese news media reported that a government official drank treated water from the Fukushima plant on a dare from a freelance writer. The company that operates the plant has been struggling to deal with large volumes of waste water, some of which has been released into the ocean.        

The writer had asked earlier for the government to prove the water was safe by having someone drink it, the daily Asahi Shimbun said.        

Waste water at the plant was created when the company sprayed water on reactors and spent fuel pools to keep them from dangerously overheating after crucial cooling systems were knocked out by the tsunami.        
