
MOSCOW &mdash; For several weeks, Russian television has followed the story of two 12-year-olds in the Siberian city of Kopeysk: pale, light-eyed Anya, who is being raised by a Tajik man according to the precepts of Islam; and black-haired Irina, the beloved daughter of an ethnically Russian blond woman.        

They would have remained so if Irina&rsquo;s father had not been convinced that he had been cuckolded. His refusal to pay alimony led to a DNA test, which led, in turn, to the revelation that two girls, born within 15 minutes of each other to teenage mothers in adjacent hospital beds, had been delivered to the wrong women. Their story has spilled out on television, Jerry-Springer-style.        

On Monday, a judge in the Chelyabinsk region awarded each family compensation of 3 million rubles, or about $100,000, an unusually high judgment in Russia. Yulia A. Belyayeva, who has raised the dark-haired girl as her own, said they would use the money to build houses next to each other, so they can look after the children together.        

&ldquo;You know what I wanted to say in my closing statement?&rdquo; Ms. Belyayeva told reporters, after the verdict was read. &ldquo;Give our children back to us, the way they should have been. Then we would have no need for money. No amount of money can be compared with the gaze of a child on her mother.&rdquo;        

The case has stirred up complaints about Russia&rsquo;s &ldquo;birth houses,&rdquo; high-volume operations where women are often treated brusquely. After Ms. Belyayeva&rsquo;s first interview, on the talk show &ldquo;Let Them Speak,&rdquo; commentaries poured into the show&rsquo;s Web site from women who said they had caught nurses mixing up babies. One said she and another woman had become lifelong friends after they were delivered each other&rsquo;s babies for feeding and began yelling simultaneously.        

&ldquo;You may laugh, but when I was giving birth to my first daughter, I kept a black marker in my hand, and as soon as she was born, I put a mark on her hand,&rdquo; wrote a woman named Yelena. Another viewer, also named Yelena, said she was not allowed to see her baby until a day afterward, and then she found him tagged with the wrong name. &ldquo;I was yelling, &lsquo;Where is my baby?&rsquo; and the answer I got was, &lsquo;Come on, Kopelevich, Korolevich, what&rsquo;s the difference?&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

Though similar cases have surfaced in recent years, courts have granted much smaller awards. The story of Irina and Anya stands out because the girls&rsquo; parents have spoken compellingly about it. Naymat Iskanderov said when Ms. Belyayeva contacted him this fall, he at first refused to consider the possibility that Anya was not his biological child, but when he saw a photograph of Irina he &ldquo;almost fainted.&rdquo; He showed up, carrying flowers, to meet Ms. Belyayeva.        

&ldquo;We sat in a pizzeria and wept and tried to figure out what to do,&rdquo; Ms. Belyayeva said. Later, when she laid eyes on her biological daughter, Ms. Belyayeva said she &ldquo;wanted to grab her and run away as fast as I could.&rdquo;        

Neither wanted to exchange daughters. They have come to a tentative understanding, though Ms. Belyayeva testified in court that &ldquo;according to Shariah law, we Russians are unbelievers, and women, according to Shariah law, are a lower race of Muslims, who are raised to become married, bear children and teach them bake bread.&rdquo; Mr. Iskanderov, for his part, has said that &ldquo;for so many years I&rsquo;ve been raising her in the Muslim tradition. To change it all of a sudden would be unbearable suffering.&rdquo;        

When the case was first made public, the midwife who oversaw the ward when the two girls were born told a television reporter that she could never have done such a thing, though she went on to say that the babies&rsquo; &ldquo;last names were almost identical.&rdquo; A gynecologist at the Kopeysk maternity ward made a television appearance to give his side of the story, and he seemed reluctant to assign full responsibility to the hospital.        

&ldquo;To be honest, it is very difficult for me to understand how, after you have received your baby, after it was brought to your breast, how could you accept another baby that is brought to you,&rdquo; said the doctor, Aleksandr Andryenko, before he was shouted down by the studio audience.        
