
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Syria said Tuesday that it had reached agreement with an Arab League delegation on a road map to end more than seven months of bloodshed and start a dialogue between the opposition and the government of President Bashar al-Assad.        

Details about the agreement were scant, but Syrian state television reported that it would be announced Wednesday at Arab League headquarters in Cairo.        

&ldquo;Syria and the Arab League are in agreement over the final paper concerning the situation in Syria,&rdquo; Syrian television and the official SANA news agency said Tuesday evening.        

Although Syria said it had accepted the road map, the league&rsquo;s deputy secretary general, Ahmed Ben Heli, told Al Arabiya, a television news channel, that the group was still awaiting Syria&rsquo;s response.        

With Syria deeply isolated, Arab League mediation was viewed as one of the last diplomatic initiatives under way to end the uprising and crackdown, in which the United Nations says more than 3,000 people have been killed.        

Opposition figures have accused Syria of embracing the league&rsquo;s mediation to buy time, but the proposal has attracted the attention of diplomats in the region.        

The Arab League called on Mr. Assad to withdraw security forces from the streets, release prisoners who had been detained since February and allow Arab monitors to enter the country. The initiative also calls for Syria to negotiate with the opposition, though terms of the talks remain unclear. Syria has resisted negotiating outside Damascus, its capital, fearing that a foreign locale will give the opposition more credibility.        

And questions persist over precisely what opposition it would recognize &mdash; figures it has cultivated within the country who have stopped short of calling for Mr. Assad&rsquo;s fall, or an exiled opposition that has claimed to speak on behalf of the uprising.        

&ldquo;Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s comments suggest that he is against the Arab proposal,&rdquo; said Samir Nachar, a prominent figure with the exiled opposition. &ldquo;Until now all the indications are negative. I think this is an attempt to buy time on behalf of the regime.&rdquo;        

Most Syrian opposition figures have rejected dialogue with the government as long as it continues its brutal crackdown on activists and protesters.        

Reaction abroad to reports of an agreement broke along predictable lines.        

Russia, which provided a crucial veto last month of a United Nations resolution on sanctions, expressed hope that the mediation could provide an end to one of the bloodiest Arab revolts. Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov said the Arab League proposal offered both sides in Syria the chance to &ldquo;decide their own future through national dialogue, national reconciliation, peacefully without resorting to violence.&rdquo;        

The United States reacted coolly to reports of an agreement.        

&ldquo;We have had a lot of promises of reform, and only violence in terms of the action that we have seen from the Assad regime,&rdquo; the State Department spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, said at a briefing in Washington. &ldquo;So let&rsquo;s wait and see: a) whether we really have a deal here, and b) whether that deal is implemented.&rdquo;        

The purported agreement comes amid persistent violence in the country. Opposition activists reported Tuesday that security forces killed at least nine people across Syria.        

Syria has become more assertive in trying to articulate its point of view to the world in recent weeks, reflecting what many diplomats see as growing confidence on the part of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government that it can stanch and perhaps subdue the uprising.        

Mr. Assad told Russian television on Sunday that he would cooperate with the opposition. In another interview, with The Sunday Telegraph in London, he warned Western powers that they would cause an &ldquo;earthquake&rdquo; if they intervened in Syria.        

&ldquo;It is the fault line, and if you play with the ground, you will cause an earthquake,&rdquo; Mr. Assad said. &ldquo;Do you want to see another Afghanistan, or tens of Afghanistans?&rdquo;        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and Alan Cowell from London.
