
ISTANBUL &mdash; In the largest meeting of its kind to date, representatives of Afghanistan and 12 nearby countries gathered in Istanbul on Wednesday to discuss regional efforts to rebuild security and stability in and around Afghanistan as NATO-led forces prepare to pull out of the country by the end of 2014.        

In adopting a strategy known as the Istanbul Protocol, the foreign ministers of countries including China, India, Iran, Kazakhstan, Pakistan and Russia committed to cooperate in combating terrorism, drug trafficking and insurgent activities, as well as in other areas.        

&ldquo;Regional cooperation is not only theory,&rdquo; Afghanistan&rsquo;s foreign minister, Zalmai Rassoul, said in a joint news conference with his Turkish counterpart, Ahmet Davutoglu.        

One American official said the most important accomplishment of the meeting was that it happened at all, bringing so many countries in the region together.        

&ldquo;This wasn&rsquo;t somebody from outside saying you ought to behave this way,&rdquo; the official said in a briefing in which the ground rules granted him anonymity. &ldquo;This was a way for the region itself to say, &lsquo;This is our vision; this is how we would like to go forward,&rsquo; and I think that&rsquo;s a significant thing.&rdquo;        

The wide range of measures adopted on Wednesday included few specifics, and diplomats will begin working on practical plans to meet their goals.        

Those plans are expected to be presented at a meeting in Kabul next year.        

While diplomats expressed hopes that regional solutions could help stabilize Afghanistan, it is also clear that powerful strains remain.        

India and Pakistan were both at the meeting, for instance, although they are vying for influence in Afghanistan. American officials say the Pakistanis support the Haqqani network, a militant group responsible for much of the violence in Afghanistan, in order to have a proxy to blunt India&rsquo;s influence there.        
