
CAIRO &mdash; Syria accepted an Arab League plan meant to halt violence and lead to dialogue with the opposition within two weeks, league officials announced Wednesday, but government opponents and others voiced doubt that Damascus could or would change tactics so abruptly.        

The plan calls for the government of President Bashar al-Assad to remove all tanks and armored vehicles from the streets, to halt violence aimed at protesters and to release political prisoners, estimated at about 70,000 by the Arab League. The league would then initiate dialogue with the opposition at its headquarters in Cairo.        

The immediate reaction came from antigovernment protesters gathered outside the Arab League headquarters near Tahrir Square, who chanted: &ldquo;No dialogue! Leave, Bashar!&rdquo;        

As the league&rsquo;s foreign ministers met in Cairo, violence continued apace in Syria itself, with two cases of what appeared to be mass sectarian killings that left 20 dead. If confirmed, the episodes could be the most serious sectarian bloodshed since demonstrations broke out in March, suggesting that simmering tensions within country&rsquo;s long brutalized population might be beginning to boil over.        

The Arab League effort on Syria was evidently an attempt to avoid repeating the pattern set by Libya. The league expelled the Libyans and called for international action, after which the United Nations Security Council issued a resolution that led to NATO&rsquo;s bombing campaign.        

&ldquo;We are happy to have reached this agreement, and we will be even happier once it is implemented,&rdquo; said Sheik Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani, the Qatari foreign minister, who announced the agreement at a news conference here. Foreign ministers had met for two hours to hear the Syrian response to the league proposal. Syria was represented not by its foreign minister but by its ambassador to the league, Youssef Ahmed.        

Syria had been seeking to hold the dialogue with the opposition in Damascus, where it could choose who attends. But even if the immediate violence is halted, it was unclear whether the Syrian opposition would unite behind the talks.        

Adib Shishakli, an opposition figure based in Saudi Arabia, said that the Syrian government had lost all credibility and that even if the Syrian National Council accepted the Arab League proposal, protesters and activists would reject it. Mr. Shishakli also said that the council had not received the proposal yet.        

&ldquo;We have reached the point of no return,&rdquo; Mr. Shishakli said by phone. &ldquo;This regime keeps promising but on the other side suppression and violence increase.&rdquo;        

The opposition in exile, which has been trying to maintain the united front it formed recently in Turkey, consists of different religious and political factions that, while disagreeing on many issues, have generally been opposed to negotiating with the government, as have some activists inside Syria. In contrast, the Damascus-based opposition generally accepts the idea.        

The Assad government has maintained that it faces an internal armed insurrection that must be put down with force. Sheik Hamad said that if the plan was not implemented, the Arab foreign ministers would reconvene to consider other steps, but he said he would not want to issue any threats at this point.        

The United Nations estimates that some 3,000 people have died in the uprising. The Syrian government disputes this figure and maintains that &ldquo;armed gangs&rdquo; have killed more than 1,100 police and soldiers.        

With most outside journalists barred, Syrian rights activists have been the source of most reports of government abuses. On Wednesday, they reported the sectarian killings.        

In central Syria, they said, the bodies of 11 civilians, bound and gagged, were discovered in a village northwest of the restive city of Homs, near the Lebanese border. They said that the victims, whose bodies bore signs of torture, were killed when attackers struck their small factory and shot everyone inside in the head. Some said the factory manufactured bricks, others said tissues.        
Neil MacFarquhar reported from Cairo, and Nada Bakri from Beirut, Lebanon. Anthony Shadid contributed reporting from Beirut, and Heba Afify from Cairo.
