
LONDON &mdash; A British court ruled Wednesday that Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder, can be extradited to Sweden for questioning over allegations of sexual abuse made against him by two women there last year. He will seek a final appeal at Britain&rsquo;s highest court, according to a person close to him.        

Two of Britain&rsquo;s most senior judges dismissed all four arguments raised by Mr. Assange&rsquo;s defense team. The decision makes it increasingly likely that Mr. Assange will face his accusers in Sweden.        

He has at least 14 days to ask for permission to bring his case before Britain&rsquo;s highest court, the Supreme Court, for a final appeal. The court hears only cases of constitutional or general public importance.        

The 43-page ruling was the latest twist in an 11-month legal battle that has included multiple court appearances and brought out throngs of supporters, and it comes as WikiLeaks has been temporarily shuttered because of continuing financing troubles. Mr. Assange was briefly jailed last December, as Swedish authorities filed an arrest warrant demanding he return to face accusations made by two WikiLeaks volunteers in Stockholm in August 2010. He is accused of two counts of sexual molestation, one count of unlawful coercion and one count of rape based on their allegations that consensual sex became nonconsensual.        

He vehemently denies the allegations and has engaged a series of high-profile lawyers to fight the extradition warrant, arguing, among other things, that he could not get a fair trial. Mr. Assange has given interviews condemning Sweden&rsquo;s strict sexual crimes laws, calling the country &ldquo;the Saudi Arabia of feminism.&rdquo;        

Wednesday&rsquo;s ruling marks the second time a British court has rejected his appeals. After the ruling Mr. Assange and a coterie of advisers and friends huddled in the courthouse to discuss their options, flanked by security guards.        

&ldquo;We will consider our next steps in the coming days,&rdquo; he said in a brief statement to the throng of reporters gathered outside. But a person close to Mr. Assange said he would appear in court again to seek permission to appeal. If the court does not allow him to move his case forward, Mr. Assange will be extradited to Sweden within 10 days of the court&rsquo;s decision.        

Mr. Assange appeared for an initial interview with the police in Sweden in 2010, but flew to London before further questioning could be completed, a court here was subsequently told.        

He has told friends that he has refused to return to Stockholm to face questioning because he fears that the country is run by a cabal of interconnected people who are aligned against him.        

Mr. Assange&rsquo;s lawyers have also argued that if he were extradited from Sweden to the United States, he could face the death penalty over the leaking of classified American documents, citing comments by conservative politicians, including the former governor of Alaska, Sarah Palin, who said he should be hunted down as an anti-American operative. In addition, Mr. Assange has hinted that he believes world powers might be behind the sexual abuse charges, seeing them as a way of silencing him and halting embarrassing leaks.        

The WikiLeaks release of hundreds of thousands of United States military documents on the Iraq and Afghanistan wars and State Department diplomatic cables dominated the front pages of newspapers across the world last year. Mr. Assange has hoped that releases of such documents would reshape the very nature of government. WikiLeaks cables in which American diplomats reported on the corruption of Tunisia&rsquo;s rulers did, in fact, help fuel the uprising that overthrew Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, jumpstarting the Arab Spring.        

WikiLeaks has foundered since Mr. Assange was briefly jailed last December, before being placed under virtual house arrest at the country mansion of a wealthy friend in eastern England. Mr. Assange told a press conference in London last month that WikiLeaks would cease its publishing activities because it lacked money following a blockade on donations by credit card companies like Visa and MasterCard, and the payments services Western Union and PayPal.        

The organization has also been severely weakened by a spate of defections from its core of computer-programmer volunteers, insiders have said. Many, tired of what they described as Mr. Assange&rsquo;s imperiousness, have formed their own document-leaking sites.        
