
TOKYO &mdash; Nuclear workers at the crippled Fukushima power plant raced to inject boric acid into the plant&rsquo;s No. 2 reactor early Wednesday after telltale radioactive elements were detected there, and the plant&rsquo;s owner admitted for the first time that fuel deep inside three stricken reactors was probably continuing to experience bursts of fission.        

The unexpected bursts &mdash; something akin to flare-ups after a major fire &mdash; are extremely unlikely to presage a large-scale nuclear reaction with the resulting large-scale production of heat and radiation. But they threaten to increase the amount of dangerous radioactive elements leaking from the complex and complicate cleanup efforts.        

The disclosures raise startling questions about how much remains uncertain at the plant, the site of the world&rsquo;s worst nuclear disaster since Chernobyl. The Japanese government has said that it aims to bring the reactors to a stable state known as a &ldquo;cold shutdown&rdquo; by the end of the year.        

On Wednesday, the plant&rsquo;s operator, the Tokyo Electric Power Company, said that gas from Reactor No. 2 indicated the presence of radioactive xenon and other substances that could be byproducts of nuclear fission. The presence of xenon 135 in particular, which has a half-life of just nine hours, seemed to indicate that fission took place very recently.        

Trade Minister Yukuo Edano censured Japan&rsquo;s nuclear regulator, the Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency, for failing to report the discovery to the prime minister&rsquo;s office for hours, according to local media reports.        

The developments added to disquiet over how information related to the disaster has been handled. For almost two months after the March 11 earthquake and tsunami knocked out vital cooling systems, setting the stage for disaster, both company and government officials declared it was unlikely that any meltdowns had occurred. They finally conceded that melted fuel had likely breached containments in three reactors, and that it was likely pooled at the bottom of the vessels.        

A 12-mile exclusion zone is still in effect around the plant. More than 80,000 households were displaced.        

On Wednesday, Tokyo Electric said that the amount of xenon detected was small, and there was no rise in temperature, pressure or radiation levels at the reactor. Researchers were double-checking the data to make sure there were no errors, the company said. Experts concurred that it was possible that Tokyo Electric had made a simple error in its measurements.        

But the urgent injection of boric acid underscored that the company was operating on the assumption that the measurements were valid. A naturally occurring element, boron, soaks up the neutrons released when an atom is split so that those neutrons cannot go&nbsp;on to split other atoms when material &ldquo;goes critical&rdquo; in the process of fission. Nuclear power plants harness the energy released in the form of heat to produce electricity.        

It is impossible to determine exactly what state the fuel is in, given that even an intact reactor can offer only gauges for temperature, pressure and neutron flow, not visual observation. That lack of clarity is one of the most resonant lessons of the Fukushima disaster, when those trying to guide the response and assess the danger had to operate by what amounted to educated guesswork.        

&nbsp;In reactors of the design used at Fukushima, the nuclear chain reaction is normally stopped when the operator gives a command to insert control rods, which rise up from the bottom of the core and separate the fuel assemblies. But the fuel in the cores of the three reactors is presumably a haphazard mass, without a strict gridlike geometry, so control rods cannot be inserted. Further, some experts believe some of the fuel has escaped the vessels and is in spaces underneath.        

&nbsp;The jumble of material and conditions in the damaged reactors seem very unlikely to be able to produce sustained fission, but some experts have long suspected intermittent criticalities. In other accidents, nuclear material has burst into fission, but the released energy then rearranges the damaged fuel into a configuration that no longer support fission. Gradually, the material re-forms in a way to support another burst.        
Matthew L. Wald contributed reporting from Washington, and Kantaro Suzuki from Tokyo.
