
CANNES, France &mdash; Prime Minister George A. Papandreou of Greece emerged from a meeting with Europe&rsquo;s leaders here on Wednesday pledging to hold a referendum on a new European debt deal on Dec. 4 or 5.        

After the talks, held before a summit meeting of the Group of 20, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, President Nicolas Sarkozy of France and others said that they regretted that Greece had reached this point but that it was best to clear up the uncertainty.        

In a news conference late Wednesday night, Mrs. Merkel and Mr. Sarkozy also said that the comprehensive package to protect the euro, agreed to last week in Brussels by all 17 nations that use the currency, had to be upheld. It was up to the Greek people, they said, to decide whether they want to commit to the agreement &mdash; which includes banks&rsquo; taking a 50 percent loss on the face value of their Greek debt &mdash; and to continue to use the euro.        

Mrs. Merkel said the referendum &ldquo;in essence is about nothing else but the question, does Greece want to stay in the euro zone, yes or no?&rdquo;        

The two leaders also said that no more aid would be given to Greece until after the referendum. This would include the next $11 billion installment of aid; Greek officials have said that without the additional funds, the country will run out of money by mid-December.        

Mr. Papandreou expressed confidence that the Greek people would back a referendum, though he did not specify what question would be posed. He added, however, that Greece would either stay in the euro zone, with all the obligations that this entailed, or leave. It remains unclear whether the Greek Parliament will approve a referendum.        

In a feverish day of political maneuvering in Athens, there were signs that Mr. Papandreou was firming up his political support. It appeared that one independent legislator and several others from his governing Socialist Party, who had been critical of Mr. Papandreou, may have relented, giving the prime minister a greater chance of surviving a no-confidence vote scheduled for Friday with his razor-thin two-vote majority.        

If he were to lose the vote, his government would probably fall and the country would go to early elections, which could be held in a matter of weeks. That would add more uncertainty into an already volatile equation that is roiling financial markets and threatening to drag a heavily indebted Italy into a debt crisis that the European Union might be powerless to reverse.        

Europe has put pressure on Greece to hold the referendum as soon as possible, because a &ldquo;no&rdquo; vote might push Greece closer to a disorderly default.        

It is also unclear exactly how Mr. Papandreou would phrase the question to be put to the voters. He has said it will be on the deal reached last week to write down Greek debt in exchange for austerity measures, but Finance Minister Evangelos Venizelos has also suggested it might be on whether Greece would stay in the euro zone.        

Some analysts and politicians predict that Mr. Papandreou will pass the confidence vote on Friday but may lose a subsequent vote on the motion to hold a referendum.        

&ldquo;I believe that the referendum won&rsquo;t go through,&rdquo; said Panos Kouroumplis, a former Socialist member of Parliament who was ousted from the party when he voted against the midterm program of austerity measures. &ldquo;The government will win the vote of confidence, but the M.P.&rsquo;s who are opposing the referendum will vote against it when they&rsquo;re asked to vote for its implementation.&rdquo;        

Amid the general confusion, the strategy of Greece&rsquo;s center-right New Democracy opposition appears to be to wait for the Socialists to implode. The opposition leader, Antonis Samaras, repeated calls on Wednesday for early elections.        

Mr. Samaras called Mr. Papandreou &mdash; his former roommate at Amherst College &mdash; &ldquo;desperate, panic-ridden and dangerous&rdquo; and said snap polls would bring &ldquo;deliverance&rdquo; to the debt-wracked country. &ldquo;We do not want elections purely because of the indisputable discord between the people and the government but because danger is stalking this country,&rdquo; he added.        

Mr. Papandreou&rsquo;s political fate now lies with his fellow members of the Socialist Party, which is divided between reform-minded politicians who think he has failed to deliver promised changes; his die-hard supporters; and traditionalists loath to dismantle the welfare state they helped build.        
Steven Erlanger reported from Cannes, and Rachel Donadio from Athens. Niki Kitsantonis and Dimitris Bounias contributed reporting from Athens. 
