
MOSCOW &mdash; A Russian negotiator announced late on Wednesday that Russia had reached an agreement with Georgia that would clear the path for Russia to join the World Trade Organization after 18 years of delay, ambivalence and frustration.        

Maksim Y. Medvedkov, Russia&rsquo;s envoy to the talks in Geneva, said Moscow had agreed to a Swiss-mediated proposal that would allow for the monitoring of trade flow between Russia and Georgia, the Itar-Tass news agency reported. Mr. Medvedkov said the monitoring plan &ldquo;does not depart from the framework of Russia&rsquo;s principled position.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We are pleased that Georgia supports the project, and that an agreement has finally been reached,&rdquo; he said.        

Envoys from the two countries will meet on Thursday in Geneva to confirm that they are in agreement, and a formal document could be signed next week, said Georgia&rsquo;s deputy foreign minister, Sergi Kapanadze. &ldquo;We have been waiting for the Russian response,&rdquo; said Mr. Kapanadze, preparing to board a late-night flight to Switzerland from Tbilisi.        

If Georgia and Russia sign an agreement, Russia&rsquo;s entry to the trade organization could be approved at the group&rsquo;s ministerial meeting in December.        

Russia has come close to accession several times, only to have the process derailed by geopolitical shocks, like its 2008 war with Georgia, or by surprise announcements, like Russia&rsquo;s declaration that it would join only as part of a trade union with Belarus and Kazakhstan.        

The project was approached with new energy last year as an element of the reset in relations between the United States and Russia, though its outcome has remained uncertain.        

Among the central questions has been whether Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin actually wanted Russia to join. Conservatives in his inner circle have opposed accession, in part because industries may face stiffer competition. Last month, when he was asked about the costs and benefits of membership, Mr. Putin&rsquo;s response was &ldquo;50-50, but over all there are probably more pluses than minuses.&rdquo;        

The announcement on Wednesday suggests that he has been convinced by the arguments of liberal economists that membership will bring long-term benefits. It also suggests that despite his bristling language, Mr. Putin has a lasting desire to integrate Russia into the world&rsquo;s great power alliances, a choice that could affect the country&rsquo;s long-term trajectory.        

Because accession to the trade group is a consensus process, Russia had to gain the consent of Georgia, a member, overcoming the hostility that has divided the two countries since they went to war in 2008. Russia has built military bases in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, two separatist enclaves that make up a large portion of Georgia&rsquo;s territory, and Moscow has recognized them as sovereign nations.        

In exchange for its consent, Georgia sought transparency of trade on its border with Russia, a delicate issue because two sections of that border abut Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Russian leaders said Georgia&rsquo;s demands were political, and urged Western governments &mdash; in particular, the United States &mdash; to pressure Georgia into giving its consent.        

The trade monitoring proposal put forward by Switzerland would station observers in three places: at the main crossing from Russia into Abkhazia; at the Roki Tunnel, which cuts through the Caucasian Ridge into South Ossetia; and at a mountainous crossing into central Georgia, Mr. Kapanadze said.        

Though Georgia initially sought observers representing governments or public entities like the European Union, its negotiators last week said they would accept private contractors hired by public entities. After Georgia signed on to the plan, Russia asked that Switzerland oversee the contractors, Mr. Kapanadze said.        

Observers will be stationed on the Russian and Georgian sides of the border, though not inside the enclaves, Mr. Kapanadze said. He said on Thursday morning that he had not spoken with Mr. Medvedkov, but that he assumed that any unresolved issues were minor.        

&ldquo;It has to be the same deal; there is only one paper,&rdquo; he said. He said it was early to reflect on the progress: &ldquo;I will understand it when the signature has been sealed. Until then, I cannot speculate.&rdquo;        

The formal announcement of a deal, if it occurs in the coming days, is likely to meet with criticism on many fronts. A popular Russian daily newspaper, Moskovsky Komsomolets, published an article on Tuesday with the headline, &ldquo;World Trade of Reputation: Russia Can Join the W.T.O. in December if It Compromises Its Sovereignty.&rdquo;        

In the United States, the House speaker, John A. Boehner, Republican of Ohio, said last week that the White House should not support Russia&rsquo;s accession until it respected Georgia&rsquo;s borders, including withdrawing troops from Abkhazia and South Ossetia.        

It remains to be seen whether Russia, as a member, will adhere to the group&rsquo;s commitments.        

A senior Obama administration official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said United States leaders were &ldquo;encouraged by the progress that Russia has made both in the last two years and in the last few weeks.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;President Obama has made Russia&rsquo;s W.T.O. membership a top priority for U.S.-Russia relations in 2011,&rdquo; the official said. &ldquo;Completing this negotiation will demonstrate that the U.S. and Russia continue to work together to produce results that benefit the American and Russian people.&rdquo;        
