
ABU GHRAIB, Iraq &mdash; On a recent day off, Hussam Saad stood at a roadside vegetable stand across the highway from the prison where he says he works.        

&ldquo;I can still remember guarding the prison at night, and hearing the voices and the shouting while people were being tortured,&rdquo; said Mr. Saad, recalling the time when the Americans were in charge at Abu Ghraib.        

Even so, he claims, it is worse there now.        

&ldquo;It would be better,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;if the Americans were still in charge of the prison.&rdquo;        

It is difficult to verify Mr. Saad&rsquo;s claims; the government denies harming any inmates although the State Department says cases of torture throughout the country have been documented by Iraq&rsquo;s own government watchdogs. But as an indication of what type of country the United States is leaving behind, Mr. Saad&rsquo;s comments were striking.        

Given the legacy of the torture scandal at the prison, this would seem as likely a place as any for the imminent departure of American troops to be greeted with unabashed happiness.        

The ambivalence reflects how much is left to be done to reinvent this ethnically fractured country as a functioning democracy. Efforts to bring Sunnis into the Shiite-led government have been haphazard at best. Laws for splitting precious oil dollars among ethnic groups and regional fiefs remain unwritten. And nearly two years after a national election, the country&rsquo;s bitterly divided political blocs cannot agree on who should run the Defense and Interior Ministries.        

The town of Abu Ghraib was once more famous for its yogurt and cheese than its prison. Under Saddam Hussein, it was a prideful Sunni tribal area. Today, its people seem as fearful of the local army brigade as they are of insurgents.        

As for the departing Americans, whose scandal cast a lingering stain on the community, residents express the same ambivalence felt all over Iraq &mdash; a combination of joy at the end of the occupation after eight years and fear of what could come next. Around the country, the announcement last month that American forces would pull out by year&rsquo;s end has prompted not widespread celebration &mdash; although there is some of that &mdash; but mostly muted introspection.        

&ldquo;Is that right, are they really going to leave?&rdquo; said Ali Sattar, who owns an electrical supply shop behind the prison and complained about harassment from the local security forces.        

&ldquo;What will the Iraqi Army do when they leave Iraq?&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s what we are afraid of.&rdquo;        

Even at a village elder&rsquo;s home, where many of the household&rsquo;s men spent time over recent years in American-run detention facilities here and elsewhere, the imminent end of the American war has brought forth the same ambiguous sentiments.        

One of the men, Ahmed Ali Dawood, has welcomed the end of the American military role in Iraq, but worries about the ability of Iraqis to overcome their own anger. His friends and family, as in so many other communities, were divided between those who joined the insurgency and others who welcomed the Americans. &ldquo;It created hatred among the people,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;You can&rsquo;t say that people have healed yet. They still don&rsquo;t trust the government.&rdquo;        

Mr. Dawood spent three months in the Abu Ghraib prison, while the Americans still ran it in 2006, on terrorism charges he said were false. &ldquo;They were treating me like an animal,&rdquo; he said. He later spent &ldquo;three years and one month and 12 days&rdquo; in Camp Bucca, an American prison in southern Iraq, before being released.        

For the United States, the end of its military role is seen as the fulfillment of a promise President Obama made as a candidate and the turning of the page on a painful and costly chapter in recent history &mdash; one many Americans have largely moved on from anyway.        
Yasir Ghazi contributed reporting from Baghdad.
