
CAIRO &mdash; As hundreds of Egyptian protesters filled Tahrir Square on Monday, many calling for their president to go into exile, one of the two state-owned television stations had its cameras focused elsewhere, capturing the steady flow of traffic on a Cairo bridge.        

It was one of two scenes Nile News has favored over the last few days. The other was a static shot of the street below the offices of the station, empty except for some tanks. The channel&rsquo;s viewers did not see the thousands of people fleeing the country or the hundreds of thousands of protesters, including one in the square on Monday holding up a sign saying &ldquo;No to the lying Egyptian media.&rdquo;        

The channel did not completely ignore the recent news. It ran extensive reports on the thousands of criminals who had been mysteriously released from the jails, along with calls from terrified viewers who said looters had been seen in their neighborhoods and also made some mention of the protests.        

Anchors and religious figures offered advice to Egyptians in a difficult time.        

But the effect of the programming &mdash; and maybe its intent, analysts say &mdash; was to link the protesters to a growing sense of lawlessness, while the channel delivered regular bulletins on steps the military and the government were taking to restore order. While no one expected the state media to amplify the views of the protesters, what was more surprising was how important &mdash; some say brazen &mdash; a role that the media played in the government&rsquo;s effort to survive.        

&ldquo;I was watching Al Jazeera and BBC, and very occasionally I would switch over to state television, get thoroughly disgusted and switch back,&rdquo; said Hani Shukrallah, who edits the English Al Ahram Web site, part of the state-owned media company that takes a more critical line than the Arabic-language newspaper of the same name. &ldquo;There is a complete blackout of the main demands the street is making,&rdquo; he said.        

But there have been some recent signs of cracks in the state media, or perhaps just a realization that a reckoning seems imminent. Mr. Shukrallah said about 30 Al Ahram reporters had signed a letter asking the paper&rsquo;s editor to distance it from the government.        

By the end of the day on Monday, the state channels seemed to be taking on a new role, as windows into the country&rsquo;s shifting power balance between military and civilian rule.        

Those windows, though, were murky. On the air, a spokesman for the army said the military would not attack protesters. Later, the country&rsquo;s new vice president, Omar Suleiman, announced concessions to the opposition. And then, to make matters more intriguing, one of the channels lingered on video of a demonstration in support of President Hosni Mubarak.        

Whoever was in control had a powerful tool, a fact highlighted during segments on television filled with symbolism: when army tanks rolled into Cairo, one of the first sites they secured was the state television building. Later, Nile News ran pictures of the defense minister, Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, greeting troops in front of the building.        

&ldquo;There is some panic on the part of the managers at the station,&rdquo; said Hisham Kassem, a publisher and analyst. &ldquo;They realize that this is big and they don&rsquo;t know how to handle it.&rdquo;        

Instead, as the demonstrations grew larger last week, the government worked to eliminate alternative sources of information, cutting off Internet service, which has yet to be restored. It also shut down the local offices of Al Jazeera and removed their signals from a state-owned satellite service.        

&ldquo;A few gentlemen from the government told us to stop transmission and to stop our cameras,&rdquo; said Salah Negm, the director of news for Al Jazeera English. &ldquo;The order came from the minister of information.&rdquo;        

In response, Al Jazeera started showing its own coverage and the state television coverage on a split screen. &ldquo;There are many things they don&rsquo;t cover,&rdquo; Mr. Negm said.        

For most of the weekend, the state channels featured programming that was at once patriotic, panic-inducing and soothing.        

On Saturday, the channel featured a segment on Islamic Cairo. It was the day after violent clashes between protesters and central security forces in Cairo and other cities around the country. During a call-in show, residents asked about the looters.        

That talk continued on Sunday, when a man called from the suburbs. &ldquo;Thank you for this channel,&rdquo; he said, and spoke of his neighborhood. He said someone had sprayed graffiti that said, &ldquo;Down with the high cost of drugs.&rdquo; And he mentioned men in cars with weapons.        

A newscaster said, &ldquo;The citizens join the army to take control of the situation.&rdquo;        

The caller said: &ldquo;We are standing behind Mr. President. Medinat Nasr is completely secure,&rdquo; talking about where he lived.        

&ldquo;We are with this guy,&rdquo; he added, meaning Mr. Mubarak. &ldquo;We are with him until the end. We&rsquo;ve known this guy since forever.&rdquo;        

The channel announced that Zahi Hawass, the chairman of the Supreme Council of Antiquities, had called on Egyptian citizens not to believe the &ldquo;lies and fabrications&rdquo; of Al Jazeera and Al Arabiya channels. Mr. Hawass was back on the air on Monday, when he was appointed to Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s cabinet.        

In the past few days &mdash; the most tumultuous for Egyptians in a generation &mdash; broadcasts also included an idyllic piece on life along the Nile and a slick commercial that showed Egyptians of various ages set against the country&rsquo;s flag.        

The state-owned daily Al Ahram covered the news more thoroughly, but it also got off to a slow start. In its Jan. 26 edition, the day after more than 10,000 antigovernment protesters chose the Police Day holiday to gather in Tahrir Square, the lead item in the newspaper was protests &mdash; in Lebanon.        

A smaller item below that story noted that citizens exchanged &ldquo;chocolate and flowers&rdquo; with policemen to mark the day.        
Dawlat Magdy and Anthony Shadid contributed reporting.
