
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; The present and future are daunting enough for the wobbly authorities here, but then there is the tormented past to consider as well: four decades of state crimes whose wounds demand attention.        

With mass murders, disappearances and public executions, the victims of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s People&rsquo;s Court, Internal Security Agency and State Security Court number in the tens of thousands, human rights advocates here and abroad say. How will Libyans come to terms with their past?        

Already, the provisional leaders are pondering options for exposing the long catalog of killings and torture, looking to models from South Africa, Europe and Latin America. They are motivated by a conviction, they say, that a new nation cannot be built unless light is shed on the dark corners of the old.        

The specifics are being worked out, like so much else in a country that appears to be shaking itself awake after a long, bad dream. But the interim minister of justice, a veteran of legal jousting with the Qaddafi government from within and without, said there was a tentative plan: investigation, public hearings and prosecution, with the inquiry reaching all the way back to the earliest days of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s rise to power in 1969.        

&ldquo;We look to Chile, Argentina, South Africa &mdash; we take part of South Africa,&rdquo; said the interim justice minister, Mohammed al-Alagi, referring to the approach of that country&rsquo;s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which emphasized fact-finding and accountability rather than punishment.        

Most important, Mr. Alagi suggested in an interview in the empty and echoing Justice Ministry here, was the imperative for Libyans to confront Qaddafi-era crimes in a country where there were no independent media to report them.        

That priority should trump even prosecution and punishment, said Mr. Alagi, a former leader of the bar association here, as well as a onetime high-ranking official in a so-called human rights foundation during the Qaddafi era, according to Human Rights Watch.        

A Libya expert suggested, however, that Mr. Alagi had advanced human rights causes at the foundation, at some danger to himself. &ldquo;It was to Alagi that a lot of the lawyers would go for help,&rdquo; said the expert, Heba Fatma Morayef, a researcher with Human Rights Watch. &ldquo;He would take the risk of actually giving me information.&rdquo;        

Mr. Alagi said in the interview this week that an investigative committee would be established &ldquo;to show the public what happened, the reality.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Then,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;fair trials for everyone.&rdquo;        

He provided no details about the committee, saying only that it was proposed in a draft law now under consideration by the interim government, the Transitional National Council.        

Of course, with no institutions, a court system that needs a top-to-bottom overhaul and militias all over the country that have not yet disarmed, a legal reckoning with the past is necessarily some way off. In addition, there have also been instances of revenge killing. Yet there are already indications that when the time comes, the crimes of the Qaddafi era will not be swept under the rug: Libyans are outraged by them, even if they do not know all the details, and officials like Mr. Alagi have shown that they are thinking about them as well.        

&ldquo;To rebuild society, people should know all of the truth,&rdquo; Mr. Alagi said. &ldquo;You can&rsquo;t imagine how people suffered over 42 years. They raped the women in front of their fathers and brothers.&rdquo;        

But he was careful to state that the emphasis should not be on retribution, an indication of the persisting links between the old and new orders, and the fact that some in the transitional council played roles in the Qaddafi government. Indeed, his words spoke of a recognition that to some extent nearly everyone in some way played a role in facilitating the old order and that catharsis, not punishment, is the point.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not the punishment, it&rsquo;s not the revenge,&rdquo; the justice minister said. &ldquo;Who is responsible for that rape? People should know. After that, trials.&rdquo;        

And then, Mr. Alagi said, &ldquo;we will maybe ask for a law to forgive them.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
An aide sitting at the long conference table offered a quick demurral, however. &ldquo;Except for killing and raping people,&rdquo; said the aide, Nureddin M. Ejledi, director of the legal and treaties department at the Foreign Affairs Ministry, meaning those with blood on their hands should be punished, a standard of culpability that has been used by other nations struggling to reconcile past and present, like Germany.        

Mr. Alagi said that a central focus of prosecutors would have to be, in his calculation, the several dozen Qaddafi-era officials responsible for the worst violations, some of whom &mdash; he would not say how many &mdash; were already in custody.        

&ldquo;What is most important to us are the people who are leading these crimes,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not more than 20 to 25 people.&rdquo;        

With less than two weeks having elapsed since the death of Colonel Qaddafi at the hand of the fighters who found him in his hometown, Surt, the interim government has had many pressing problems to focus on. But officials recognize the need to &ldquo;put in place a justice system&rdquo; to head off the thirst for revenge.        

&ldquo;For months we have been telling people to have mercy, not to take revenge,&rdquo; Mr. Alagi said.        

There is some impatience with this approach. The transitional council has not had &ldquo;nearly enough&rdquo; discussion about the crimes of the past, said Jalal el-Gallal, a council spokesman.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not reflective of the mood of the people,&rdquo; Mr. Gallal said. &ldquo;People have been suffering long enough. Most of the people who were with the previous regime are still walking around, which is a good sign of tolerance.&rdquo; But he suggested that in the streets there was a more pressing desire for retribution.        

Still, Libya&rsquo;s transitional council has given signals in recent days that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s decades of misdeeds have not been forgotten.        

It defensively issued a list of those crimes after international organizations expressed concern over what appeared to be Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s summary execution by fighters who captured him. The transitional council called the colonel a &ldquo;tyrant&rdquo; and said he was responsible for a massacre of officers in 1977, public hangings of university students, more hangings during Ramadan in 1984 and the killing of more than 1,200 prisoners, many of them political detainees, on a single day at the Abu Salim prison in 1996. The council&rsquo;s message to the world seemed clear: any mistreatment of Colonel Qaddafi paled in comparison to his crimes.        

At the same time, in perhaps a harbinger of how the transitional authorities will deal with the past, there has been a fumbling attempt at a new kind of governmental openness. On Sunday, the interim ministers sat on a stage at a Islamic university at the edge of town to answer questions from reporters, in Arabic, and give an account of how they planned to manage their ministries, how much had been spent so far and what their plans were.        

It seemed a rare moment of transparency and official accountability. Mr. Alagi was there, too, blinking from behind thick glasses, and promising a &ldquo;humanitarian court, to protect human rights,&rdquo; as well as the pursuit of members of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s entourage who had taken refuge abroad.        

&ldquo;I want the world, the international community, to see these trials,&rdquo; Mr. Alagi said.        
