
MANAGUA, Nicaragua &mdash; Iv&aacute;n Romero, 37, has many colorful ways of describing President Daniel Ortega: mosquito, crook, tyrant, propagandist.        

Yet on Sunday, when Nicaragua holds national elections, Mr. Romero will mark his ballot not for the opposition, but for five more years of Mr. Ortega.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m voting for his ideas, not for him,&rdquo; said Mr. Romero, a waiter. &ldquo;I will cover my nose and do it.&rdquo;        

In this country of 5.7 million people, Mr. Ortega, 65, has flourished as a paradox, a heavy-handed commander who is widely criticized for skirting the democratic process but is known on the streets as the people&rsquo;s president. He has found support from powerful players on all sides, lionized by the left for his focus on the poor and revered by some on the right &mdash; including those who once condemned him &mdash; for his hands-off approach to business.        

He has had less success wooing foreigners. The election is expected to be a major test of Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s relations with Western powers, namely the United States, which is still fuming about his efforts to reinterpret the Constitution to permit his re-election. Tens of millions of dollars in aid to Nicaragua from the United States and the European Union could be in jeopardy if the elections are not free from fraud, analysts contend.        

Mr. Ortega, a hero of Nicaragua&rsquo;s revolutionary war more than three decades ago, has sought to dispel the many depictions of him as power-hungry.        

In Managua, the capital, his smile beams from billboards that declare &ldquo;love, peace and life!&rdquo; Christmas tree displays stay lighted in public plazas throughout the year, a reminder that while the world reels from recession, Mr. Ortega has kept Nicaragua&rsquo;s economy humming.        

&ldquo;This democratic process is going in a good direction,&rdquo; Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s wife and chief spokeswoman, Rosario Murillo, told local reporters recently. &ldquo;That is a reality you feel everywhere. There is a mood of celebration.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Without a doubt,&rdquo; Ms. Murillo added, &ldquo;he will continue being president.&rdquo;        

It is a sign of his sturdy grip that so many seem poised to stand by the president and his party, the Sandinista National Liberation Front. Mr. Ortega was supported by 48 percent of those surveyed in a recent CID Gallup poll, 18 points ahead of his closest rival, Fabio Gadea, a 79-year-old radio personality.        

Mr. Ortega has broadened his base of supporters through his success in rejuvenating Nicaragua&rsquo;s economy, most visibly through a partnership with Hugo Ch&aacute;vez, the president of Venezuela. The alliance has brought about $400 million each year in long-term loans to the $6 billion Nicaraguan economy.        

While it is unclear exactly how the money is spent, Mr. Ortega regularly announces new policies aimed at the working class, including fuel subsidies for taxi drivers and land titles for lower-income families.        

&ldquo;He&rsquo;s like a pi&ntilde;ata,&rdquo; said Carlos Reyes, 53, a farmer in northern Nicaragua who said he had received two cows and a truckload of fertilizer from the government. &ldquo;The money keeps coming.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ortega has also won allies in the private sector, a constituency that has long been suspicious of Sandinista candidates and of Mr. Ortega in particular. During his previous stint as president, from 1985 to 1990, Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s policies helped usher in a period of rampant inflation and economic anxiety.        

Two decades later, to the surprise of even some in his own party, he has abandoned socialist economic doctrine for a moderate, free-market approach. Under his leadership, tourism and exports have boomed, and labor relations are tranquil.        

In a sign of Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s close relationship with business, the Superior Council of Private Enterprise, a national coalition of business chambers, did not endorse a presidential contender this year. In previous elections, it often sided with non-Sandinista candidates.        

Though the economy will be front and center on Sunday, Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s history of ignoring complaints about the electoral process, particularly after national and international watchdogs alleged widespread fraud by the Sandinistas in the 2008 municipal elections, has left his critics on a hair trigger.        

Already, the Independent Liberal Party has accused Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s party of scheming to pick up votes by denying identification cards to critics of the government, while granting them to Honduran citizens working along the border. (The government disputes the allegations.)        

And many still resent Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s political maneuvering to permit his re-election. The Nicaraguan Constitution bars leaders from serving consecutive terms and limits their total service to two terms. But Nicaragua&rsquo;s Supreme Court, which Mr. Ortega controls, ruled in 2009 that the limits violated human rights.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;If the candidate is in the people&rsquo;s interest, they will elect him, and if the candidate does not represent their wishes, they will not elect him,&rdquo; Mr. Ortega said in a rare television interview that year. &ldquo;Obstacles should not be set up to deny them that right.&rdquo;        

The United States cut about $62 million in aid over concerns about the 2008 elections but has otherwise largely let Mr. Ortega be, wary of provoking anti-American sentiment.        

&ldquo;He goes to the precipice, but he doesn&rsquo;t jump off,&rdquo; explained Robert J. Callahan, who stepped down as the American ambassador to Nicaragua in July. &ldquo;He does just enough to allow the community of democracies to justify staying and attempting to work with him.&rdquo;        

Mr. Callahan said that if there was evidence of widespread fraud in the elections, the United States should cut off future economic aid to the country, refuse to name a new ambassador and forcefully condemn Mr. Ortega. In a statement, the State Department said it remained concerned about the potential for voting irregularities.        

Some Nicaraguans, even those who support Mr. Ortega, said his barbed language had isolated the country. &ldquo;He has worsened the relationship unnecessarily,&rdquo; said &Aacute;lvaro Maradiaga, 20, an architecture student from Managua who hopes to spend time in the United States. Nevertheless, Mr. Maradiaga said he would vote along party lines for Mr. Ortega.        

Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s rivals in the presidential race have seized on his unilateralist approach, warning that he may move to an extreme if he is re-elected and gains a majority in the National Assembly.        

But in a crowded field, his opponents have struggled to win a significant block of voters, and many lack steady financing. They have focused their energy on recruiting young people, given that more than half of Nicaragua&rsquo;s population is under 30.        

Mr. Gadea, the radio personality, who used his platform to back the contra rebellion against the Sandinistas in the 1980s, has built the most fervent following. During a recent campaign stop in Matagalpa, a hilly agricultural community in the north, thousands of his supporters marched through the streets downtown, some stopping to tear down Sandinista flags. On a sidewalk, schoolchildren of opposing parties spit at each other and flashed party signs &mdash; two fingers for Mr. Ortega, three for those supporting Mr. Gadea.        

&ldquo;We are going to elect an honorable president, an honorable government, so that this country gets rid of the scar of corruption,&rdquo; Mr. Gadea told the crowd. &ldquo;We aren&rsquo;t going to ask you if you are liberal or conservative. We will build a government for all.&rdquo;        

For many Nicaraguans, the problems remain the same. Poverty is rampant &mdash; much of the population lives on just a few dollars each day, according to recent estimates &mdash; and unemployment remains high. Education levels are anemic, and violence from the regionwide drug war is beginning to tear at the country&rsquo;s edges.        

But many say that in Mr. Ortega, they have found some stability, even if he is not perfect.        

&ldquo;My family can sleep peacefully at night,&rdquo; said Mr. Romero, the waiter. &ldquo;What else is there to worry about?&rdquo;        
