
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Syrian forces killed at least 15 people on Friday, opposition groups reported, in a spate of bloodshed that activists and some Western officials said called into question the Syrian government&rsquo;s commitment to a plan brokered this week to halt months of violence.        

Opposition groups had urged protesters to take to the streets on Friday to test the government&rsquo;s sincerity in what has become a calibrated contest of wills. Neither the government nor the opposition wants to be blamed for the failure of the initiative, mediated by the Arab League and meant to lead to negotiations, even as the effort itself seems overwhelmed by violence.        

The latest deaths come just two days after the plan was announced by the league and a day after opposition groups said 25 people were killed.        

&ldquo;The regime is doing cosmetic surgery, but cannot make real changes,&rdquo; said Omar al-Hamwi, a 40-year-old Syrian activist, speaking by telephone.        

As in past days, the bloodletting was most pronounced in Homs, a city in central Syria that has emerged as a theater apart in the eight-month uprising against President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s government. Residents say the military and security forces have sent reinforcements to Homs this week, armed defectors have carried out attacks and apparently sectarian vendettas have underlined a dangerous turn in the violence there.        

&ldquo;Some residents are not leaving their homes because they know they might not make it back,&rdquo; said a Homs resident who gave his name as Selim.        

The Arab League plan called for the Syrian government to withdraw tanks and armored vehicles from the streets of restive cities and towns, to halt violence aimed at protesters, and to release political prisoners, estimated to number about 70,000 by the league. Once those steps were taken, the league said, it would initiate dialogue between the government and opposition.        

The plan was met with pronounced skepticism, which appeared to increase during the continued crackdown. Many of those who died Thursday and Friday were killed in Homs, according to activists. On Friday, they said, six people were killed in that city; four in Hama, another large city, north of Homs; four in a town southwest of the capital, Damascus; and one in the suburbs of the capital. The activists&rsquo; numbers are impossible to verify.        

In addition, activists said, two people who were not protesting were killed Friday as they tried to flee across the border to Jordan.        

The government also deployed security forces and plainclothes agents at Damascus&rsquo; entrances and around the city&rsquo;s largest mosques, residents said.        

&ldquo;The continuing repression can only strengthen the international community&rsquo;s doubts about the Syrian regime&rsquo;s sincerity to implement the Arab League peace plan,&rdquo; Romain Nadal, deputy spokesman of the French Foreign Ministry, said Friday.        

The Syrian government, which has cast the protests as an armed insurgency led by militant Islamists taking their cue from abroad, hewed to an altogether different narrative. The official Syrian news agency, SANA, said that no one had been killed Friday.        

At least rhetorically, the government has embraced the Arab League&rsquo;s initiative, apparently viewing it as a way to stanch its growing international isolation. It has lately struck a more triumphant tone as well, organizing mass rallies across Syria that underline its still substantial support and, on Friday, offering an amnesty to insurgents who turned themselves in to the nearest police station and surrendered their weapons by Nov. 12.        

The opposition has sought to bolster its position, too.        

The Local Coordination Committees, an opposition group that helps organize and document protests, welcomed the initiative, even as it cast doubt on the government&rsquo;s willingness to carry it out.        

It was difficult to gauge the size of crowds on Friday, though activists said protests were widespread. In Dara&rsquo;a, the southern town where the uprising began, residents said that crowds held a banner that read, &ldquo;The dialogue will start by trying Bashar.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The regime cannot fulfill the Arab initiative for a simple reason,&rdquo; said a 25-year-old protester in Barzah, near Damascus, who gave his name as Yusuf. &ldquo;If the regime stops the killing, the next day hundreds of thousands will protest across the country.&rdquo;        

Previous mediation with the Syrian government has failed, most notably with the collapse of a dialogue with Turkish officials this summer.        

Turkey&rsquo;s foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, left Damascus in August, believing he had a deal to end the Syrian crackdown, only to accuse Mr. Assad later of lying to him. On Thursday, the International Crisis Group, an independent body that seeks to resolve conflicts, said the Arab League effort &ldquo;could well be a last chance.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;If peaceful protests face continued repression in coming days, a more violent and dangerous confrontation is almost certain to develop,&rdquo; the group said in a statement. &ldquo;Syria&rsquo;s eight-month-old uprising is fast approaching a dangerous tipping point.&rdquo;&nbsp;        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, and an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria.
