
The leader of Colombia&rsquo;s largest guerrilla group was killed Friday in a military raid, Colombian government officials said.        

Alfonso Cano, the leader of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, a Marxist-Socialist group that grew into a rebel force financed with income from drug trafficking and kidnapping, was killed in an air raid, the officials said. There were conflicting reports about whether other guerrillas were killed.        

&ldquo;The military has thus achieved one of its most important goals,&rdquo; Alberto Gonzalez Mosquera, governor of Cauca Department in the country&rsquo;s southwestern region, told a local radio station, according to The Associated Press. The area is near the location where the raid took place.        

Mr. Cano, whose real name was Guillermo Saenz, was an intellectual who joined the party as a hard-liner after dabbling in radical university politics in Bogot&aacute;, the capital. In March 2006, the State Department indicted Mr. Cano and 49 other top FARC leaders on drug trafficking charges. It offered a $5 million reward for his capture.        

He assumed the leadership when Manuel Marulanda Velez, the longtime leader of the group died of natural causes in 2008.        

The latest death deals a serious blow against the FARC, which has been waging a guerrilla war against Colombia&rsquo;s government for the past four decades.        

A drive backed by the United States has in recent years thinned the ranks to around 8,000, according to Reuters. The members were driven into remote hideaways.        

The FARC has suffered many recent blows to its top leadership. In September 2010, Colombian security forces killed its second in command, a field marshal known as Mono Jojoy, in an elaborate raid in the remote Macarena mountain range.        

Two years earlier, the previous No. 2, Raul Reyes, was killed by the Colombian military in a bombing raid in Ecuador. The international episode nearly touched off a war between the countries.        

At one point, the FARC was a 17,000-strong force, not long after its 1964 founding as an ideological army seeking to narrow the gap between rich and poor.        

At its height, it controlled parts of the government, and took hostages.        

The group gained wide notoriety after it captured several United States citizens and held them for about five years.        

Three American hostages and Ingrid Betancourt,&nbsp;a politician with Colombian and French citizenship,&nbsp;who was a contender for the&nbsp;Colombian presidency, were held from 2002 to 2008.        
