
MEXICO CITY &mdash; Some bloggers and Twitter users claiming to be part of the hacker movement Anonymous now say they have abandoned plans to expose collaborators working with the Zetas crime syndicate because the friend they say the gang kidnapped has been released.        

Other self-identified Anonymous hackers say they will eventually undermine the country&rsquo;s drug cartels by exposing corrupt officials, but that threats from the Zetas, along with the friend&rsquo;s release, have pushed them to declare that the current project &mdash; OpCartel &mdash; is dead.        

Some outside critics, meanwhile, wonder if the whole story was a sham. Was anyone kidnapped, they ask. Where is the evidence? Did Anonymous really have the goods on corrupt officials that it claimed to have?        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t have enough facts to draw any conclusion at this point,&rdquo; said Fred Burton, an analyst for Stratfor, a private intelligence firm that was one of the first to scrutinize OpCartel. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s amazing to me, this whole set of circumstances.&rdquo;        

Amazing, confusing, disturbing &mdash; there are many adjectives to describe the ostensible war between Anonymous and the Zetas. But surprising should not be one of them.        

Security experts and Anonymous veterans say the moment that members of an opaque, leaderless hacker movement decided to threaten a shadowy element of organized crime &mdash; with a video featuring a man in a Guy Fawkes mask, no less &mdash; certainty became as scarce as a Mexican murder conviction. With more media attention and time, it has essentially disappeared.        

Take the alleged kidnapping. The video from Anonymous posted Oct. 6 said that a friend was kidnapped a few weeks earlier in Veracruz, a coastal city. No name, age or identifying information was provided.        

When asked for verification earlier this week via e-mail and Twitter, Anonymous hackers initially ignored the requests, except for one person who said that other members had identified the victim as a young man who had taken part in a street protest called a &ldquo;paperstorm&rdquo; with the people who started OpCartel. They knew him in person, not just electronically, that person said, adding, &ldquo;That connection seems to be why they decided to do something.&rdquo;        

Others claiming a connection to Anonymous also said they saw online messages from Anonymous members saying a young man was taken. That was perhaps why skepticism flooded the Twitter stream late Thursday when @IberoAnon, a user who portrayed himself as an OpCartel leader, said the victim had been freed and &ldquo;we have established contact with her.&rdquo;        

@IberoAnon and others promised to provide proof. But it has yet to materialize.        

Another person known online as Itzela, described by others as a direct participant in OpCartel, said in an e-mail on Friday that the victim was a Mexican man, about 20 years old, who had been kidnapped about a month ago and was released Thursdayafternoon. Itzela said Anonymous had compiled the list of corrupt officials by hacking e-mail accounts.        

He said that after the victim was released, he joined the chat room and proved his identity there and in a later conversation on Skype.        

Could that online conversation be provided? How about a replay of the conversation on Skype?        

No answer.        

The current and future status of the group is just as hard to divine. A blog that appears to be linked to @IberoAnon now includes a post saying that OpCartel has been canceled partly because the Zetas threatened to kill 10 people for every collaborator the hackers identified.        

It is yet another claim impossible to verify. Anonymous members, or people who say they are, have given spurious information before. But could a death threat &mdash; from a gang with a proven record of extreme violence &mdash; have led @IberoAnon to change the gender of the released victim, or manufacture a timely release?        

Some hackers say yes. In Internet Relay Chat rooms frequented by Anonymous members on Thursday night, fear and the desire to find protection, mainly through software to mask one&rsquo;s identity, dominated the conversation. The discussion also included comments saying that no information would be given about the kidnapping because the Zetas had demanded silence.        

Still, there are those who insist that the hackers are not finished, even if OpCartel and Anonymous are labels increasingly likely to be avoided. There are conflicting accounts regarding what these hackers, who may or may not be the same hackers involved in the original video, plan to do. Itzela said discussions were under way about the release of information on the corrupt government officials: &ldquo;It&rsquo;s what we will do soon.&rdquo;        

Meanwhile a self-appointed Anonymous spokesman in Texas, Barrett Brown, has told reporters that the group may yet publish what he described as 25,000 Mexican government e-mails containing the names of Zetas members and their collaborators. Why, some might wonder, would Mr. Brown, presumably a real person using his a real name, go public with this information, given the risk?        

On Twitter, two reasons were offered: he has a book contract to write about Anonymous, and he does not live in Mexico. Unlike nearly everything else involving OpCartel, both claims appear to be verifiable facts.        
Damien Cave reported from Mexico City, and Ravi Somaiya from London.
