
MOSCOW        

FOR a moment this fall, as Russia&rsquo;s president and finance minister glared at each other like gladiators over a conference table, the most interesting face in the room belonged to a third man.        

Vladislav Y. Surkov, the first deputy head of the presidential administration, was seated between them. As President Dmitri A. Medvedev prepared to fire the finance minister, Aleksei L. Kudrin, a man widely seen as indispensable, a smile flickered across Mr. Surkov&rsquo;s face &mdash; whether it indicated surprise, approval or pure aesthetic appreciation was not clear. It was replaced by a neutral expression, as if a curtain had fallen, and Mr. Surkov once again blended into a row of dark-suited apparatchiks.        

But anyone paying attention had glimpsed the smile of a true survivor.        

Mr. Surkov, 47, is often ranked as Russia&rsquo;s third-most-powerful political figure, after Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin and Mr. Medvedev. He occupies the time-honored role of the &ldquo;gray cardinal,&rdquo; a behind-the-scenes manipulator who inspires fascination and fear. For more than a decade, he has helped shape the ideological message of Russia&rsquo;s leaders, its governing party, United Russia, of parties in opposition to United Russia, its youth movements, and virtually anything widely published or broadcast in the country.        

That position has been fortified, if anything, by a season of bruising political infighting. In September, the billionaire Mikhail D. Prokhorov called for Mr. Surkov&rsquo;s ouster, condemning him as a &ldquo;puppet master&rdquo; who prevented the growth of real democracy. Mr. Prokhorov&rsquo;s attack was edited out of the evening news and seemed to vanish, like a spark that had been swallowed by a swamp. Now, with two electoral campaigns under way, Mr. Surkov is as essential to the Kremlin as he has ever been.        

&ldquo;He certainly seems indispensable now,&rdquo; said Maria Lipman, a political analyst at the Carnegie Moscow Center. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s one guy at his level,&rdquo; she said, referring to Mr. Surkov, &ldquo;and one guy at the top.&rdquo;        

Mr. Surkov is a funny candidate for guard dog of the system. Half-Chechen, he trained as a theater director and rose to prominence in his 20s as an advertising prodigy, telling one interviewer that he had aspired to be a power broker like Richard Gere&rsquo;s character in the film &ldquo;Pretty Woman.&rdquo;        

After 12 years in government, Mr. Surkov still displays bohemian tendencies. When a blogger photographed his office early this year, it featured framed photographs of John Lennon, Che Guevara, President Obama and the rapper Tupac Shakur. He has written songs for the rock group Agata Kristi and is widely believed to be author of the novel &ldquo;Almost Zero,&rdquo; published under a pseudonym, which was described in a recent essay in The London Review of Books.        

The novel&rsquo;s hero, a &ldquo;bookish hipster&rdquo; whose background is similar to Mr. Surkov&rsquo;s, &ldquo;can see through the superficiality of his age, but is unable to have any real feelings for anyone or anything,&rdquo; wrote Peter Pomerantsev in the essay, which summed up Mr. Surkov&rsquo;s work as a &ldquo;fusion of despotism and postmodernism.&rdquo;        

Mr. Surkov&rsquo;s job is to oversee the relationship of the executive branch with Russia&rsquo;s Parliament, its regional leaders, its political parties and mass media, though that is a little like saying Lady Gaga&rsquo;s job is to sing. His style is hands-on, according to United States diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks.        

In one cable, a diplomat described a rally of Russian nationalist groups in 2004. One nationalist leader, standing on the podium, was not allowed to approach the microphone, and then grabbed a megaphone to denounce Mr. Surkov, who he said had placed a cellphone call to another leader on the podium to prevent it, the cable reported. Later, when turmoil in the nationalist Rodina Party led to the resignation of its leader, Dmitri O. Rogozin, Mr. Surkov was reported to be the reason.        

The diplomat&rsquo;s source &ldquo;observed that Surkov had wanted not only to get rid of Rogozin, but to humiliate him to the maximum extent so that he would not be able to become a political force in the future.&rdquo;        

THE cables reported that Mr. Surkov routinely contacted editors about coverage, sometimes engaging in &ldquo;close textual analysis.&rdquo; He called the newspaper Nezavisimaya Gazeta to take issue with using &ldquo;liberal thaw&rdquo; to refer to Mr. Medvedev&rsquo;s presidency. Mr. Surkov said the phrase &ldquo;implied that change was needed, rather than the continuation of Putin&rsquo;s course.&rdquo;        

Mr. Surkov gives interviews so rarely that each one qualifies as a news event, and he did not respond to a list of reporter&rsquo;s questions. But last year he told Vedomosti, a respected daily newspaper, that centralizing power in the Kremlin had been a matter of survival.        

&ldquo;This system is not separated from the people, as some people think,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It is deeply rooted in the social fabric. Those who want to destroy it are socially dangerous. Maintaining political stability is of critical importance. Stability does not mean stagnation, it does not mean stopping. It is a tool for development. Modernization cannot be achieved out of chaos.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
He also said that &ldquo;centralization was at the limits of its capacity,&rdquo; and that competition needed to be introduced. There has been little sign of this happening, though, in part because political projects are shut down as soon as they threaten to go out of control.        

ALEKSEI A. VENEDIKTOV, editor in chief of the radio station Ekho Moskvy, said Mr. Surkov viewed himself as cultivating a multiparty system in a punishing climate, just as &ldquo;one has to build a greenhouse for vegetables to grow here, since they don&rsquo;t grow in the yard, it&rsquo;s too cold.&rdquo; Asked how long the greenhouse would last, Mr. Venediktov thought for a moment and said, &ldquo;until the end of his and my lives.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;He has been applying all the forces, including law enforcement bodies, in order to freeze the currently existing system,&rdquo; Mr. Venediktov said.        

The television and radio host Sergei Dorenko, who got to know Mr. Surkov in the mid-1990s, said it was &ldquo;absolutely paradoxical&rdquo; to see him &mdash; a creative, ironic type &mdash; in the role of enforcer. But, in the end, limited zones of freedom have been essential to the state he has helped to build.        

&ldquo;Surkov has strict criteria,&rdquo; Mr. Dorenko said. &ldquo;He protects the borders. Within the borders, let there be chaos and plasma. He is the architect and protector of the borders of the system. But do not cross the borders.&rdquo;        

He said a violation of such borders had resulted in the showdown with Mr. Prokhorov, the billionaire: Mr. Prokhorov had been anointed by the Kremlin to build a pro-business party, but when he broke the rules by using nationalist language, it was Mr. Surkov&rsquo;s job to stop him. The scandal strengthened Mr. Surkov, because it allowed him to suffer silently on behalf of his bosses, Mr. Dorenko said.        

&ldquo;This is good for any Confucian official,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Surkov impeccably swallows the insult, smiling, because he always agrees with the decision of the president and premier.&rdquo;        

Indeed, less than two weeks later, Mr. Putin honored Mr. Surkov with a medal for service to Russia. And with that, Mr. Surkov once again dropped off the front page, which is perhaps the best gauge of his well-being. In late September, his name appeared hundreds of times in every news cycle, peaking at nearly 600 citations on the day Mr. Prokhorov called for his firing, according to the media consulting firm Medialogia.        

Within a few days, the flood of attention had been stanched. Then, for most of October, his name simply disappeared from the news media. It was almost as if he didn&rsquo;t exist, which, for a Confucian official, amounts to a state of grace.        
