
BEIJING &mdash; Big Red Belly, his thick limbs nourished by a strict liver-tofu-ginger diet, should have been a contender. Instead, as his trainer watched in dismay, the young fighter nervously circled his more menacing adversary and then skittered to a corner of the ring, prompting jeers from a half-dozen spectators.        

&ldquo;Worthless,&rdquo; his patron, Chang Hongwei, a retired mechanical engineer, growled as he yanked Big Red Belly from the arena and unceremoniously ended his brief fighting career. &ldquo;Next!&rdquo;        

Countless members of the Gryllus bimaculatus clan, also known as field crickets, have faced off in the capital&rsquo;s narrow alleys this fall in a uniquely Chinese blood sport whose provenance extends back more than 1,000 years. Nurtured by Tang Dynasty emperors and later popularized by commoners outside the palace gates, cricket fighting was banned as a bourgeois predilection during the decade-long Cultural Revolution, which ended in 1976.        

But like many once-suppressed traditions, among them Confucianism, mah-jongg and pigeon raising, cricket fighting is undergoing a revival here, spurred on by a younger generation &mdash; well, mostly young men &mdash; eager to embrace genuinely Chinese pastimes.        

Cricket-fighting associations have sprung up across the country, as have more than 20 Web sites devoted to the minutiae of raising critters whose daily needs can rival those of an Arabian steed. Last year, more than 400 million renminbi, or about $63 million, were spent on cricket sales and upkeep, according to the Ningyang Cricket Research Institute in Shandong Province. Shanghai now has more than a dozen cricket markets, and several cities, including Beijing, stage public bouts where the Lilliputian action is blown up and projected on to giant screens. (A related activity, competitive cricket singing, draws the affections of those inclined to more pacific pursuits.)        

&ldquo;As living standards go up and people have more time and money to spend, they want hobbies rich in history and meaning,&rdquo; said Wang Suping, the owner of Autumn Delights, a shop packed with all manner of cricket accouterment &mdash; from elaborately carved cricket houses that sell for hundreds of dollars to hand-painted ceramic bowls fit for a tiny king.        

One Beijing taxi driver compared his passion for cricket duels to a Spaniard&rsquo;s love of bullfighting. &ldquo;The main difference is that cricket fighting is much less dangerous,&rdquo; he said. (Insect-rights advocates take note: Combat seldom causes injuries, save for the occasional severed antennae, and losers are generally tossed onto the sidewalk and allowed to roam free until a November frost, or a pedestrian&rsquo;s foot, puts an end to their chirping.)        

There is, though, a nefarious side to the cricket craze: illegal back-room matches that draw legions of gamblers. In late September, the police in Jiangsu Province raided one such parlor, arresting 79 people and seizing 100 prized fighters. According to the police, cricket owners would bet 10,000 renminbi, or nearly $1,600, on each bout. Wagers by spectators exceeded 100,000 renminbi.        

Liu Yunjiang, 60, a self-described cricket connoisseur who stages exhibition matches for tourists in Beijing, said the spread of gambling on cricket fights has raised the stakes for the casual cricket buyer. &ldquo;A really formidable fighter can be worth more than a horse,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And they eat better than you and I do.&rdquo;        

Most aficionados, however, insist that the sport is a wholesome diversion that fosters camaraderie and friendly competition among devotees.        

Even as interest grows among the computer-game generation, cricket fighting remains the domain of older men who grew up without toys or television.        

&ldquo;It reminds us of our childhoods, when everyone was poor and you could fetch crickets in the fields just outside the city walls,&rdquo; said Chen Huihua, 72, a retired schoolteacher. &ldquo;The fields are now covered with tall buildings, but crickets still bring us great joy.&rdquo;        

Men like Mr. Chen also take pride in China&rsquo;s long affair with the insects, which legend suggests were first domesticated by imperial concubines who kept trilling crickets at their bedside to stave off loneliness.        
Li Bibo and Mia Li contributed research.
