
LAHORE, Pakistan &mdash; A Pakistani antiterrorism court indicted five militants and two police officers Saturday in the assassination of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, prosecutors said.        

Ms. Bhutto was killed after an election rally in 2007 in an attack by at least one gunman and a suicide bomber, both of whom were believed to have been killed in the assault.        

The seven people indicted on Saturday, who include the former police chief of Rawalpindi, where the assassination took place, were charged with being part of a conspiracy.        

In a closed-door hearing at a high-security prison in Rawalpindi, Justice Shahid Rafique charged all seven men with criminal conspiracy and murder, according to Chaudhry Azhar, a special public prosecutor in the case.        

The five militants, who are believed to be members of the Pakistani Taliban, were arrested four years ago and remain in jail, Mr. Azhar said. Two of them have admitted to helping in the suicide bombing, he said.        

The five men were identified as Sher Zaman, Hasnain Gul, Rafaqat Hussain, Abdul Rasheed and Aitzaz Shah. All are from the troubled northwestern region of the country.        

The two police officers charged were Saud Aziz, who was the Rawalpindi police chief at the time of the killing, and Khurram Shahzad, another senior officer.        

Mr. Azhar said they had been charged with failure to perform their duties by ordering the crime scene hosed down two hours after the attack, by removing evidence and by reducing Ms. Bhutto&rsquo;s security detail several days before the attack. The two officers were free on bail.        

All seven suspects denied the charges on Saturday.        

The killing of Ms. Bhutto on Dec. 27, 2007, as she stood in the sunroof of a car waving to crowds two weeks before parliamentary elections, threw Pakistani politics into turmoil. Twice elected prime minister, she was the leader of Pakistan&rsquo;s largest political party and vying for a third term after having returned from eight years in exile.        

Her husband, Asif Ali Zardari, was later elected president, and her party, the Pakistan Peoples Party, leads the coalition government.        

The circumstances of her death &mdash; including the cleansing of the crime scene, the police refusal of an autopsy request, and conflicting reports of the number of attackers and cause of death &mdash; have generated confusion about the case and raised questions about the possible involvement of the military government, then led by Gen. Pervez Musharraf, Ms. Bhutto&rsquo;s rival.        

A United Nations investigation reported last year that the failure of Pakistani authorities to effectively investigate the killing was &ldquo;deliberate&rdquo; and that the investigation had been &ldquo;severely hampered&rdquo; by the country&rsquo;s powerful intelligence agencies.        

The report singled out Mr. Aziz, the police chief, for ordering the washing of the scene and impeding the investigation. But it also said that Mr. Aziz gave the order after receiving a call from army headquarters, possibly involving Maj. Gen. Nadeem Ijaz Ahmad, then director general of military intelligence.        

The government had blamed Baitullah Mehsud, the leader of the Pakistani Taliban, for masterminding the attack. Mr. Mehsud was killed by a C.I.A. drone strike in 2009.        

Mr. Musharraf, who fled the country in 2008 under threat of impeachment, has also been charged in the case. A Pakistani court issued an arrest warrant for him in February, accusing him of failing to provide Ms. Bhutto with adequate security.        

Mr. Musharraf has been living in exile in London and has failed to respond to subpoenas.        

Meanwhile, the legal case against the suspects in custody has been delayed by procedural moves on both sides, although four years is not a particularly long time for an indictment in a murder case in Pakistan.        

&ldquo;Whether the case is high profile or low profile, the court has to adopt the legal procedure to ensure justice and fairness,&rdquo; said Syed Zahid Hussain Bukhari, a former judge and prosecutor in Punjab Province.        

The indictment starts the trial phase of the prosecution. The court instructed the accused to present witnesses at the next hearing, on Nov. 19.        
