
OSH, Kyrgyzstan &mdash; Nearly a year and a half after ethnic clashes ripped through this former Silk Road trading hub, ethnic Uzbeks, who suffered the brunt of the violence, face arbitrary arrest and often horrific abuse at the hands of predominantly ethnic Kyrgyz authorities, victims and local and international rights groups say.        

&ldquo;Persecution against Uzbeks has become systemic,&rdquo; said Khusanbai Saliyev, a lawyer with the rights group Citizens Against Corruption in Osh, which has represented about 80 Uzbeks in cases of wrongful arrest and abuse. &ldquo;To imprison someone for a long prison term, it is only sufficient to have his confession. And you know how they get those confessions: torture is the main instrument for solving a case. This is the main tool they use today.&rdquo;        

Government officials mostly deny reports that Uzbeks suffer unfair treatment. But human rights groups watching the situation have documented a pattern of reprisals and abuses against Kyrgyzstan&rsquo;s Uzbek population. And in interviews, Uzbek prisoners speak of severe beatings, electric shocks and of needles being driven under their fingernails. Several Uzbeks have died in custody or shortly after being released; Mr. Saliyev said three of his clients had died in the past three months after suffering abuse in prison, and Human Rights Watch has documented at least three others.        

The case of Mirzahid Vakhabdzhanov, an ethnic Uzbek serving a 16-year sentence for attempted murder, is an extreme example. Speaking from an Osh prison on a cellphone smuggled to him by his mother, he said he was tortured into confessing to the charge, though he denies he did anything wrong.        

&ldquo;They ripped out my fingernails and put a plastic bag over my head to get me to confess to trying to kill a guy,&rdquo; Mr. Vakhabdzhanov, 35, said. &ldquo;For three days they tortured me.&rdquo;        

The persecution has hardened the longstanding divisions that proved so explosive last year, threatening to further destabilize this already volatile, though strategically important, Central Asian nation, which hosts an American military base crucial to the war in Afghanistan.        

Uzbeks make up about 15 percent of the population in Kyrgyzstan, but they are heavily concentrated in Osh and elsewhere in the south, part of the fertile Fergana Valley that Stalin divided among Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan.        

Complaints of torture in police custody are not uncommon in Kyrgyzstan, regardless of ethnicity. But rights groups have noted what appears to be a bias against Uzbeks in cases relating to the June 2010 riots, which left nearly 500 people dead and destroyed large sections of Osh. According to accounts from witnesses and several independent investigations, Uzbeks suffered disproportionately in the violence as gangs of Kyrgyz men, at times armed and enabled by the police and military, stormed through Uzbek neighborhoods to pillage, burn and murder.        

Ever since, the persecution of Uzbeks has continued, rights groups said. Out of nearly 300 people arrested in connection with the riots, about 85 percent were Uzbek, Human Rights Watch said in a June report. More have been detained in raids on Uzbek neighborhoods, beaten and threatened with long prison sentences in an effort to extort money and property, human rights groups said. Ethnic Kyrgyz who are punished often receive light or suspended sentences.        

&ldquo;We walk down the street in fear,&rdquo; said a former Uzbek detainee, who would not give his name, fearing reprisals. &ldquo;They can arrest us for no reason.&rdquo;        

The central government, still recovering from a violent coup in April 2010, has been largely unable or unwilling to confront the problem. Kyrgyz officials have either played down the Uzbek complaints or denied them completely.        

&ldquo;I do not know anything about such cases,&rdquo; said Taalaibek M. Zikirov, the deputy governor of the Osh region. &ldquo;If there are such cases, these people must appeal to the local prosecutors&rsquo; offices. But there is no evidence that such cases occur, and I do not believe they do.&rdquo;        

Victims and their lawyers said that a vast majority of appeals to the police and prosecutors had led nowhere. Since the start of the year, three criminal cases stemming from mistreatment by the authorities have been opened in Osh, two of which have gone to trial, the prosecutor general&rsquo;s office said in a statement published this month. Almost no one has been punished, and in many cases, appeals to the authorities have provoked reprisals by local law enforcement, victims said.        

The continued tensions in the south will present a major challenge for Kyrgyzstan&rsquo;s new president, Almazbek Atambayev, who has vowed to address the country&rsquo;s history of debilitating schisms.        

Many Uzbeks in Osh said they voted for Mr. Atambayev in the recent election because they hoped that he would help protect them from the Kyrgyz nationalists from Osh and elsewhere in the south, who were his main opponents.        
(Page 2 of 2)
But it is unclear how much he will be able to exercise his authority here. Local leaders have resisted attempts by the nation&rsquo;s ruling authorities, in particular northerners like Mr. Atambayev, to extend their influence to the south.        

In Mr. Vakhabdzhanov&rsquo;s case, for instance, Kyrgyzstan&rsquo;s Supreme Court this year ordered a retrial, citing errors in the prosecution that led an Osh court to sentence him to 15 years in prison. The retrial was held, and last month the Osh court, with a different judge, convicted him again and added a year to his initial sentence.        

His mother, Aisha Vakhabdzhanova, said that before the second sentence was announced, the judge told her to &ldquo;gather as much money as possible&rdquo; and then he would consider lowering the sentence to 10 years.        

She said she would have paid if she had the means. The family lost everything in the riots last year. Their 16-room house where she, her four sons and their families lived was burned along with most of their belongings. Her sons, who had built a lucrative business as auto mechanics, lost their workshop in the blaze.        

Those who do have the ability to purchase their freedom say they remain at the mercy of Kyrgyz authorities.        

An Uzbek carpenter, who along with three neighbors met with a reporter to describe their prison experiences on the condition of anonymity, said that he had probably paid more than $22,000 to judges, prosecutors and police officers to secure his freedom, taking loans from family and friends. He spent four months in prison and was regularly beaten, he said, and he confessed to taking part in last year&rsquo;s riots, though he denies he did. He was sentenced to two years of unpaid labor at a work camp and is allowed to live at home. But he said he must still bribe officials to get a positive monthly evaluation or risk being sent to jail.        

&ldquo;They&rsquo;ve made Uzbeks a business,&rdquo; he said.        

Ms. Vakhabdzhanova says she hopes that by selling the family&rsquo;s old car, one of her last possessions, she will make enough to pay the judge during an appeal of her son&rsquo;s conviction. These days, her other sons are unable to find work, and members of the extended family, including 11 children ages 6 months to 13 years, live in two frigid rooms built by foreign aid groups. A forlorn garden in the courtyard supplements the little food the family can afford.        

&ldquo;They will let my son go for money,&rdquo; she said, suppressing tears. &ldquo;Let me go hungry, but let my son walk free.&rdquo;        
