
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; A suicide bomber killed eight people during religious celebrations in northern Afghanistan on Sunday, defying an admonition by the Taliban&rsquo;s leader not to attack civilians.        



Afghan officials said the attack in the Baghlani Jadid district of Baghlan Province, which occurred as worshipers left a mosque after prayers on the first day of the three-day Id al-Adha holiday, was carried out by the Taliban.        

Two days earlier, the Taliban&rsquo;s reclusive leader, Mullah Omar, delivered his annual message for Id al-Adha, the holiest day of the Islamic year, including a strongly worded statement calling on his followers to refrain from causing civilian casualties.        

The victims in the attack on Sunday included three commanders of the militias known as arbakai who appear to have been the targets, according to the provincial governor, Munshi Abdul Majid. The other people who were killed, as well as the 18 people wounded, were civilians, he said.        

The local mullah was among the dead, the governor said, and three children were wounded, one of whom was in critical condition, said Dr. Khalil Narmgoi at the district hospital.        

The worshipers were streaming out of the mosque toward an outdoor funeral, officials said, when two bombers approached. One detonated his explosive vest, but people in the crowd jumped on the second man and immobilized him, Mr. Majid said.        

Mullah Omar has called on his fighters to avoid civilian casualties in previous years, but his statement on Friday called for the Taliban to investigate attacks that kill civilians and to punish the insurgents who carry them out.        

&ldquo;If it is irrefutably proven that the blood of innocent Muslims is spilled by the negligence of mujahedeen then a penalty should be implemented in accordance with Shariah,&rdquo; he said, referring to the religious law.        

&ldquo;The mujahedeen have to take every step to protect the lives and wealth of ordinary people in accordance with their religious responsibility,&rdquo; said his statement, which was unusually long, about 2,000 words, and issued in five languages.        

The Taliban&rsquo;s normally garrulous spokesmen could not be reached for comment on Sunday after the attack, and no one claimed responsibility.        

&ldquo;We are tired of condemning such attacks,&rdquo; Governor Majid said. &ldquo;We should find a fundamental solution for this. Condemnation is not enough.&rdquo;        

Although the Taliban have carried out numerous attacks in which civilians have been the only victims, attacking on the Id holiday so soon after a major pronouncement by Mullah Omar would be unusual. While the Taliban have been active in the region, other armed groups who have varying degrees of alliance with the Taliban are also operating in northern Afghanistan.        

The attack may also be an indication of the weakening control of Mullah Omar and other traditional Taliban leaders as the movement fragments under a sustained campaign by American Special Forces to kill and capture midlevel commanders.        

According to the United Nations, 75 percent of all civilian casualties in the past year were caused by insurgents, compared with 16 percent attributed to NATO and government forces.        

Id al-Adha, which is three days long, is Islam&rsquo;s most sacred holiday, and celebrates Abraham&rsquo;s willingness to sacrifice his son Ishmael on God&rsquo;s command. God instead provided him with a sheep, and Muslims who can afford to do so slaughter a sheep or other animal for a feast, giving a third of the meat to the poor. The holiday coincides with the end of the hajj, the pilgrimage to Mecca.        

&ldquo;People who carry out attacks on Id al-Adha are great sinners,&rdquo; said a prominent mullah in Kabul, Anayatollah Baleegh. &ldquo;This is a day of love, peace and joy, and sharing with the poor; this is not a day to attack and kill someone.&rdquo;        
