
PARIS &mdash; He has lost much of his hair and, after a 10-day prison hunger strike last month, a bit of his signature paunch. But as he prepares to stand trial on Monday for a series of bombings he is accused of orchestrating in the early 1980s, Ilich Ram&iacute;rez S&aacute;nchez, better known as Carlos the Jackal, seems to have lost little of his bravado.        

Although forbidden from communicating with anyone other than his family and his lawyers, Mr. Ram&iacute;rez managed to organize interviews last month with a French newspaper and a radio station that were conducted using a smuggled mobile phone. In those conversations, the 62-year-old Venezuelan came across as combative and rambling, attacking unspecified &ldquo;falsifications&rdquo; in the case against him, though refusing to either admit to or deny the allegations.        

&ldquo;I am not in the habit of making egocentric declarations,&rdquo; Mr. Ram&iacute;rez told the newspaper, Lib&eacute;ration, when asked whether he was responsible for the bombings. &ldquo;Nor will I play the prosecution&rsquo;s pitiful games.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ram&iacute;rez was placed in solitary confinement after granting the interviews on Oct. 18, prompting him to start a hunger strike in protest of the isolation that prevented him from preparing his defense with his lawyers. That strike ended in late October after he was returned to his regular prison ward in La Sant&eacute; prison here in Paris, where he regularly crosses paths with another notorious inmate, Manuel Antonio Noriega, the former dictator of Panama, who was convicted last year of money laundering and sentenced to seven years.        

Mr. Ram&iacute;rez is already serving a life sentence here for the killings of two French police agents and a Lebanese informer in 1975 &mdash; the same year in which he and a group of followers took several oil ministers hostage at an OPEC meeting in Vienna, killing a Libyan delegate, an Austrian police officer and an Iraqi bodyguard.        

In 1992, France convicted Mr. Ram&iacute;rez in absentia for the 1975 Paris killings. He spent a decade on the run across Eastern Europe and the Middle East, but in 1994, French secret service agents, acting on a tip from the C.I.A., seized him from a hospital bed in Sudan. He was wrapped in a burlap bag and spirited away to France, where he was re-tried in 1997 and given a life sentence.        

In 2007, a French investigating judge ordered Mr. Ram&iacute;rez and three others to stand trial for complicity in four bombings in 1982 and 1983 that left 11 people dead and wounded 195 others, but it was not until this year that a trial date was set.        

The charges against Mr. Ram&iacute;rez stem from a bombing in March 1982 of a Paris-Toulouse train in southwestern France; an attack in April 1982 on the Paris offices of an Arabic-language newspaper, Al Watan; and the bombing in December 1983 of a high-speed train and the main rail station in Marseille.        

Prosecutors allege that those attacks were part of a personal war that Mr. Ram&iacute;rez waged against the French authorities in an effort to secure the liberation of his girlfriend at the time, Magdalena Kopp, a German former revolutionary who had been imprisoned for an attempted bombing in 1982.        

As evidence, prosecutors have cited an anonymous 1982 letter bearing Mr. Ram&iacute;rez&rsquo;s fingerprints that was addressed to France&rsquo;s interior minister at the time, Gaston Defferre, demanding the release of Ms. Kopp and a Swiss accomplice. But Mr. Ram&iacute;rez&rsquo;s lawyers claim the letter does not exist.        

Ms. Kopp, who was married to Mr. Ram&iacute;rez in Syria in 1985 and has a daughter with him, has since become a witness for the prosecution. In a 2007 memoir, she said of Mr. Ram&iacute;rez: &ldquo;He still lives in his own world. Someone needs to tell him the truth.&rdquo;        

A lawyer for Mr. Ram&iacute;rez, Isabelle Coutant-Peyre, who is also his wife, said she expected the court would convict Mr. Ram&iacute;rez to block Venezuelan efforts to have him repatriated there. The president of Venezuela, Hugo Ch&aacute;vez, has publicly praised Mr. Ram&iacute;rez as a &ldquo;revolutionary fighter,&rdquo; and until recently the Venezuelan Embassy here has delivered care packages containing his favorite Cuban cigars.        

&ldquo;Everything is already sewn up,&rdquo; Ms. Coutant-Peyre said in an interview on Saturday. &ldquo;He cannot escape the &lsquo;terrorist&rsquo; label. There is no presumption of innocence.&rdquo;        

None of Mr. Ram&iacute;rez&rsquo;s three co-defendants is expected to appear at the trial, which is scheduled to run until Dec. 16. Johannes Weinrich, a 64-year-old German who once headed European operations for Mr. Ram&iacute;rez, is already serving a life sentence in Germany for another bombing. Christa-Margot Fr&ouml;hlich, 69, is a fugitive from a 2001 French arrest warrant, though she is believed to be living in Germany. The whereabouts of the third defendant, Ali Kamal al-Issawi, 70, are unknown.        

Mr. Ram&iacute;rez was born in Caracas in 1949 to Altagracia Ram&iacute;rez, a wealthy Marxist lawyer who named his other two sons Vladimir and Lenin.        

The Soviet Union expelled Mr. Ram&iacute;rez as a troublemaker in 1970 while he was a student at Patrice Lumumba University in Moscow. He soon moved to Lebanon, where he fell in with pro-Palestinian radicals who were plotting terrorist attacks in Europe. He later allied himself with the Baader-Meinhof Gang, a German terrorist group also known as the Red Army Faction.        

Mr. Ram&iacute;rez converted to Islam under the guidance of an Iranian mullah while in prison in France and married Ms. Coutant-Peyre in an Islamic ceremony in 2001.        

In the interview with Lib&eacute;ration last month, Mr. Ram&iacute;rez praised Osama bin Laden, whom he said he had never met, as a &ldquo;symbol of modern jihad.&rdquo; He also described the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks as a &ldquo;sacrificial operation&rdquo; that &ldquo;proved to the imperialist Yankees that their territory was not out of reach.&rdquo;        
