
WASHINGTON &mdash; Late on a moonless night last March, a plane smuggling nearly half a ton of cocaine touched down at a remote airstrip in Honduras. A heavily armed ground crew was waiting for it &mdash; as were Honduran security forces. After a 20-minute firefight, a Honduran officer was wounded and two drug traffickers lay dead.        

Several news outlets briefly reported the episode, mentioning that a Honduran official said the United States Drug Enforcement Administration had provided support. But none of the reports included a striking detail: that support consisted of an elite detachment of military-trained D.E.A. special agents who joined in the shootout, according to a person familiar with the episode.        

The D.E.A. now has five commando-style squads it has been quietly deploying for the past several years to Western Hemisphere nations &mdash; including Haiti, Honduras, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala and Belize &mdash; that are battling drug cartels, according to documents and interviews with law enforcement officials.        

The program &mdash; called FAST, for Foreign-deployed Advisory Support Team &mdash; was created during the George W. Bush administration to investigate Taliban-linked drug traffickers in Afghanistan. Beginning in 2008 and continuing under President Obama, it has expanded far beyond the war zone.        

&ldquo;You have got to have special skills and equipment to be able to operate effectively and safely in environments like this,&rdquo; said Michael A. Braun, a former head of operations for the drug agency who helped design the program. &ldquo;The D.E.A. is working shoulder-to-shoulder in harm&rsquo;s way with host-nation counterparts.&rdquo;        

The evolution of the program into a global enforcement arm reflects the United States&rsquo; growing reach in combating drug cartels and how policy makers increasingly are blurring the line between law enforcement and military activities, fusing elements of the &ldquo;war on drugs&rdquo; with the &ldquo;war on terrorism.&rdquo;        

Bruce Bagley, a University of Miami professor who specializes in Latin America and counternarcotics, said the commando program carries potential benefits: the American teams could help arrest kingpins, seize stockpiles, disrupt smuggling routes and professionalize security forces in small countries through which traffickers pass drugs headed to the United States.        

But there are also potential dangers.        

&ldquo;It could lead to a nationalist backlash in the countries involved,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;If an American is killed, the administration and the D.E.A. could get mired in Congressional oversight hearings. Taking out kingpins could fragment the organization and lead to more violence. And it won&rsquo;t permanently stop trafficking unless a country also has capable institutions, which often don&rsquo;t exist in Central America.&rdquo;        

Because the presence of armed Americans on their soil raises sensitivities about sovereignty, some countries that have sought the assistance of the United States will not acknowledge it, and the D.E.A. is reluctant to disclose the details of the commando teams&rsquo; deployments. Others &mdash; like Mexico, which has accepted American help, including surveillance drones &mdash; have not wanted the commando squads.        

Federal law prohibits the drug agency from directly carrying out arrests overseas, but agents are permitted to accompany their foreign counterparts on operations. The Americans work with specially vetted units of local security forces that they train and mentor. In &ldquo;exigent circumstances,&rdquo; they may open fire to protect themselves or partners.        

The firefight in Honduras last March, described by officials of both countries, illustrates the flexibility of such rules. The Honduran minister of public security at the time, Oscar &Aacute;lvarez, said that under the agreement with the D.E.A., the Americans normally did not go on missions.        

But in that case, he said, a training exercise went live: an American squad was working with a Honduran police unit in La Mosquitia rainforest when they received word that a suspicious plane from Venezuela was being tracked to a clandestine landing strip nearby.        

After the plane landed, the Honduran police identified themselves and the traffickers opened fire, officials of both countries said. After a 20-minute gunfight, the Hondurans and Americans seized the cocaine and withdrew to evacuate the wounded officer.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to say it was Vietnam-style, but it was typical of war action,&rdquo; said Mr. &Aacute;lvarez; he declined to say whether the Americans took part in the shooting, but another person familiar with the episode said they did.        

The FAST program is similar to a D.E.A. operation in the late 1980s and early 1990s in which drug enforcement agents received military training and entered into partnerships with local forces in places like Peru and Bolivia, targeting smuggling airstrips and jungle labs.        
Randal C. Archibold contributed reporting from Honduras and Haiti, and Ginger Thompson from Washington.
