
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; A satirical song that takes a tongue-in-cheek swipe at religious extremism, militancy and contradictions in Pakistani society has become an instant hit here, drawing widespread attention as a rare voice of the country&rsquo;s embattled liberals.        

The song, &ldquo;Aalu Anday,&rdquo; which means &ldquo;Potatoes and Eggs,&rdquo; comes from a group of three young men who call themselves Beygairat Brigade, or A Brigade Without Honor, openly mocking the military, religious conservatives, nationalist politicians and conspiracy theorists.        

Their YouTube video has been viewed more than 350,000 times since it was uploaded in mid-October. The song is getting glowing reviews in the news media here and is widely talked about &mdash; and shared &mdash; on social networking sites like Twitter and Facebook.        

The name of the band is itself a satire of Pakistan&rsquo;s nationalists and conservatives, who are often described in the local news media as the Ghairat Brigade, or Honor Brigade.        

Local musicians have produced work in the past vilifying the West, especially the United States, but rarely do they ridicule the military or religious extremists, and none have had Beygairat Brigade&rsquo;s kind of success.        

Sung in Punjabi, the language of the most populous and prosperous province, the song delivers biting commentary on the current socio-political milieu of the country, in which religious radicalism and militancy have steadily risen over the years and tolerance for religious minorities is waning.        

Just this year, a governor who opposed Pakistan&rsquo;s contentious blasphemy law was killed by one of his guards. The assassin was then celebrated by many in the country, including lawyers who greeted him with rose petals and garlands.        

The song rues the fact that killers and religious extremists are hailed as heroes in Pakistan, while someone like Abdus Salam, the nation&rsquo;s only Nobel Prize-winning scientist, is often ignored because he belonged to the minority Ahmadi sect.        

&ldquo;Qadri is treated like a royal,&rdquo; wonders the goofy-looking lead vocalist in the song, referring to Malik Mumtaz Qadri, the elite police guard who killed the governor of Punjab, Salman Taseer, in January after he challenged the blasphemy law.        

Another line in the song, &ldquo;where Ajmal Kasab is a hero,&rdquo; makes a reference to the only surviving Pakistani gunman involved in the 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai, India. Still another line, &ldquo;cleric tried to escape in a veil,&rdquo; alludes to the head cleric of Islamabad&rsquo;s Red Mosque &mdash; which was the target of a siege in 2007 by the Pakistani government against Islamic militants &mdash; who tried unsuccessfully to break the security cordon by wearing a veil.        

The song even makes fun of the powerful army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, for extending his role for another three years.        

Potatoes and eggs &ldquo;never tasted so good,&rdquo; wrote Fahd Husain in a commentary on Tuesday in The Daily Times, a newspaper based in Lahore. &ldquo;They will always be credited for being politically incorrect when most needed, and giving voice to all those Pakistanis who live in fear.&rdquo;        

The popularity of the song on the Internet has made it a sensation across the border in India as well, surprising the band members, who have been incessantly asked whether they feel they have put their lives in danger by ridiculing the mighty.        

There are certainly enough provocations to rile nationalists and conservatives. At one point in the music video, the lead singer holds a placard that reads, in English: &ldquo;This video is sponsored by Zionists.&rdquo;        

The band members chose to upload the song on YouTube instead of handing it to television networks because they said the work was too offbeat and might be censored. Not surprisingly, some have criticized the song and its taunts as pedestrian and in bad taste.        

&ldquo;We were not expecting such a huge response,&rdquo; said Ali Aftab Saeed, 27, the lead vocalist, who lives in Lahore, a city that is often considered the country&rsquo;s cultural capital.        

He said the assassination of Mr. Taseer was the inspiration for the song and its lyrics.        

Resistance poetry and literature are not new to Pakistan, and they raised spirits during the somber years of military dictatorships.        

During the protest rallies of the seminal lawyers movement in 2007, when they led the campaign to oust the president, Pervez Musharraf, the lawyers would sing and dance to a poem written by Faiz Ahmad Faiz, considered a giant of Urdu literature. Habib Jalib, another famous Pakistani poet, wrote several poems against Gen. Mohammad Zia ul-Haq, the military dictator in the 1980s.        

But &ldquo;Jalib is irrelevant to the generation of urban, young, middle-class kids that Beygairat Brigade is addressing,&rdquo; said Nadeem Farooq Paracha, a culture critic based in Karachi.        

&ldquo;This band is offering an alternative narrative to the one this generation has grown up on, and provides a counternarrative to establishmentarian and conservative notions of politics, history and society advocated by televangelists, conspiracy theorists and, of course, the right-wing electronic media,&rdquo; Mr. Paracha added. &ldquo;And what better and more effective way to do this than by using satire and pop music.&rdquo;        

The band members, on the other hand, have no pretensions of being revolutionaries, activists or intellectuals, though they do feel that the song represents those who do not believe in extremism and want to live peacefully.        

&ldquo;At the end of the day,&rdquo; said Mr. Saeed, the lead vocalist, &ldquo;we are just musicians who raised some questions.&rdquo;        
