
TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras &mdash; President Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua was leading the polls for an election to a third term on Sunday, buttressing his status as one of Latin America&rsquo;s most resilient voices at a time when Western powers, civic groups and the country&rsquo;s news media are challenging his domineering ways.        

With 18 percent of polling stations reporting, results showed Mr. Ortega holding 63.7 percent of the vote late Sunday, Reuters reported.        

Two major civic groups, and &Eacute;tica y Transparencia, both said the electoral process had serious problems. Hagamos Democracia, or Let&rsquo;s Make Democracy, reported 600 complaints of voting irregularitities, and opponents of Mr. Ortega, 65, were quick to point out what they said were voting irregularities across the country. At one polling place in southern Nicaragua, election officials were accused by supporters of Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s chief rival, Fabio Gadea, a conservative owner of a radio station, of providing two ballots to each supporter of Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s party, the Sandinista National Liberation Front. In Managua, officials were said to have ejected voting supervisors of opposing parties.But international election observers, including the European Union, said the process they had witnessed had been free of any major problems, and activity at the polls was calmer than many people had anticipated, with no extensive violence.        

In Matagalpa, however, protesters burned voting materials at one polling station, and 17 people were injured in a fight between supporters of Mr. Ortega and Mr. Gadea on Saturday night.        

&ldquo;We have seen an environment of normalcy, of tranquillity, of free expression,&rdquo; Luis Y&aacute;&ntilde;ez, leader of a team of European Union election observers, said in an interview. Mr. Y&aacute;&ntilde;ez, however, criticized election officials for not allowing Nicaraguan civic groups to monitor the vote.        

The head of the Organization of American States observer mission, Dante Caputo, told The Associated Press that its observers were denied access to 10 polling stations, which would account for 20 percent of the statistical material they had planned to collect for their analysis. &ldquo;They have prevented our people from being there at the precise moment they should have been there and that is not remediable and will affect our ability to do our jobs,&rdquo; Mr. Caputo said. &ldquo;We are left without radar.&rdquo;        

Claims of widespread fraud in Nicaragua&rsquo;s 2008 municipal elections led the United States to cancel $62 million in development aid. The United States Embassy in Managua had no comment on Sunday&rsquo;s vote.        

At every turn of the campaign, Mr. Ortega proved to be a shrewd political strategist. He adopted policies aimed at pleasing his base of poor and working-class Nicaraguans, including supplying them with government-donated food. At the same time, he actively reached out to independents and conservative business leaders with his free-market approach to the economy.        

Much of his support was due to an alliance with President Hugo Ch&aacute;vez of Venezuela, which brought about $2 billion to the Nicaraguan economy over the past several years.        

&ldquo;He has helped the poor; other presidents didn&rsquo;t do that,&rdquo; a law student, Wendy Gonzalez, 19, told The Associated Press after casting her vote in a poor area of the capital, Managua.        

A victory for Mr. Ortega, a fixture of Nicaraguan politics since he led the Sandinista movement that overthrew the dictator Anastasio Somoza in 1979, would make him the first president in Nicaragua&rsquo;s modern history to serve three terms. His supporters filled the streets in Managua on Sunday chanting, &ldquo;Daniel, Daniel, Daniel!&rdquo;        

For Mr. Ortega, who served as president from 1985 to 1990 and was elected again in 2006, a victory would be something of a vindication of his much maligned decision to run for re-election. The Nicaraguan Constitution bars leaders from serving consecutive terms and limits their total service to two terms. But the country&rsquo;s Supreme Court, which is controlled by Mr. Ortega, ruled in 2009 that the limits violated individual rights, clearing the way for Mr. Ortega to run.        

Some analysts said they were wary of the prospect of another victory for Mr. Ortega because they worry that he might continue to sidestep democratic conventions to maintain his power.        

Robert Pastor, a professor of international relations at American University, called Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s decision to seek re-election a &ldquo;setback for democracy in Central America.&rdquo; But he said it would be a mistake for the United States to return to the battles of the cold war, when the United States backed a war against the Sandinistas and Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s government. &ldquo;Daniel Ortega is not the revolutionary of the 1970s,&rdquo; Mr. Pastor said, noting his pragmatic ideology. &ldquo;It would be a serious mistake for the United States to return to a new era of hostility.&rdquo;        
