
BEIJING &mdash; When the novelist Murong Xuecun showed up at a ceremony here late last year to collect his first literary prize, he clutched a sheet of paper with some of the most incendiary words he had ever written.        
A Writer's Choices

It was a meditation on the malaise brought on by censorship. &ldquo;Chinese writing exhibits symptoms of a mental disorder,&rdquo; he planned to say. &ldquo;This is castrated writing. I am a proactive eunuch, I castrate myself even before the surgeon raises his scalpel.&rdquo;        

The ceremony&rsquo;s organizers forbade him to deliver the speech. On stage, Mr. Murong made a zipping motion across his mouth and left without a word. He then did with the speech what he had done with three of his best-selling novels, all of which had gone through a harsh censorship process: He posted the unexpurgated text on the Internet. Fans flocked to it.        

Murong Xuecun (moo-rong shweh-tswen) is the pen name of Hao Qun. At 37, he is among the most famous of a wave of Chinese writers who have become publishing sensations in the past decade because of their canny use of the Internet.        

Mr. Murong&rsquo;s books are racy and violent and nihilistic, with tales of businessmen and officials engaging in bribe-taking, brawling, drinking, gambling and cavorting with prostitutes in China&rsquo;s booming cities. He is a laureate of corruption, and his friends have introduced him at dinner parties as a writer of pornography.        

That his books are published at all in China shows how the industry, once carefully controlled by the state, has become more market-driven.        

But Mr. Murong&rsquo;s prose inevitably runs up against censorship, which the Chinese Communist Party is intent on maintaining despite the publishing industry&rsquo;s gradual changes. Mr. Murong says he is a &ldquo;word criminal&rdquo; in the eyes of the state, and a &ldquo;coward&rdquo; in his own eyes for engaging in self-censorship. His growing frustrations have pushed him to become one of the most vocal critics of censorship in China. After zipping his mouth in Beijing last November, he delivered his banned speech three months later in Hong Kong. He also discussed the issue last weekend in New York at the Asia Society.        

Mr. Murong owes his commercial success to the fact that he has found ways to practice his art and build a fan base on the Internet, outside the more heavily policed print industry.        

He addresses political issues on both a blog and a microblog account that resembles Twitter, which has nearly 1.1 million followers. He posts his novels chapter by chapter or in sections online under different pseudonyms as he writes. This Dickens-style serialization generates buzz, and the writing evolves with reader feedback. Once the book is finished or nearly so, Mr. Murong signs with a publisher. The censored print editions make money, but the Internet versions are more complete.        

In 2004, the state-run China Radio International called Mr. Murong&rsquo;s popular first novel a &ldquo;cyber trendsetter&rdquo; in a report that was reposted on the Web site of the newspaper People&rsquo;s Daily, the Communist Party&rsquo;s mouthpiece. Local officials in the city of Chengdu, where the story is set, denounced it. The uncensored version of the novel, &ldquo;Chengdu, Please Forget Me Tonight,&rdquo; was translated into English (&ldquo;Leave Me Alone: A Novel of Chengdu&rdquo;) by Harvey Thomlinson and nominated in 2008 for the prestigious Man Asian Literary Prize.        

&ldquo;I simply found it extremely fun to do,&rdquo; Mr. Murong said of writing online, as he chain-smoked one afternoon in his 26th-floor Beijing apartment overlooking the Western Hills, a jester&rsquo;s grin on his boyish face. &ldquo;Later, I realized that the writers and readers on the Internet changed the course of Chinese literature and started a new phenomenon.&rdquo;        

The Internet has ignited a revolution in China&rsquo;s publishing industry by allowing a diversity of voices to bloom. Publishing houses can spot new talents and buy the rights for print editions. All this has contributed to the market reforms of the past decade and debate within the party about how to both nurture and control the industry.        

Although its systemic censorship crushes creativity, the party craves domestic and international respect for China&rsquo;s cultural output. After a four-day policy meeting on culture and ideology in October, the party&rsquo;s Central Committee said China needed to bolster its soft power and &ldquo;cultural security&rdquo; with more &ldquo;outstanding cultural products.&rdquo; Last week, People&rsquo;s Daily ran a commentary that called for the state to build up publishing houses into companies with international brands so their books can help spread &ldquo;socialist core values.&rdquo; And some officials ache for a mainland Chinese writer to win the Nobel Prize for Literature.        

Chinese rulers have long had a complicated relationship with books, promoting ones that enshrine official thought and history while banning or destroying others. Qin Shihuang, ancient China&rsquo;s unifier, burned books and buried scholars alive. In the 18th century, the Qianlong Emperor purged thousands of texts and their authors for treasonous ideas while assembling a vast imperial collection to be printed. Mao Zedong and his comrades were no different.        

As intellectual discourse began to flower again in the 1980s, writers like Yu Hua, Mo Yan and Su Tong cast a critical eye on Chinese history and rural society. Wang Shuo wrote urban &ldquo;hooligan&rdquo; literature. But it was the spread of the Internet in the late 1990s that really opened the floodgates.        

Younger writers went online to tell tales of boom-era China. One Web site, Rongshuxia, was particularly influential, carrying novels by Annie Baobei, Ning Caishen and Li Xunhuan (the pen name of Lu Jinbo, now a prominent publisher who supports Mr. Murong). In recent years, the Internet has popularized genre fiction, and bookstores here now stock the whole gamut: science fiction and fantasy, horror, detective, teenage romance and, most lucrative of all, children&rsquo;s stories.        

&ldquo;The Internet created all, and I say all, the literary trends that took off in 2005 and afterward,&rdquo; said Jo Lusby, managing director of Penguin China.        

 Power Over Publishing        

More books are being printed now than at any time since the Communist Party took power in 1949. In 2010, about 328,000 titles were published, more than double the number in 2001, according to official statistics.        

But the government still wields important instruments of control. The agency overseeing the industry, the General Administration of Press and Publication, has not allowed real growth in the houses officially allowed to publish books. Last year, there were 581 such houses, just 19 more than in 2001. All are state-owned, and the government is moving to consolidate them.        
Mia Li contributed research.
