
BEIJING &mdash; Last month, the cream of the Communist Party leadership gathered here to proclaim a national effort to make China a cultural tastemaker, one whose global creative influence matches its economic clout. &ldquo;A nation cannot stand among great powers,&rdquo; the official party newspaper People&rsquo;s Daily said on its front page, &ldquo;without its people&rsquo;s spiritual affluence and the nation&rsquo;s full expression of its creativity.&rdquo;        

The question is how to square that goal with what just happened to Yue Luping.        

Mr. Yue, a professional artist for more than 10 years, was preparing his works for an exhibition in the Shunyi District of north Beijing last month when government officials and police officers abruptly canceled the show.        

The next day, he said, agents of the local Public Security Bureau interrogated him about one work, a collection of peppercorns arranged to form numbers. Security officers had already photographed the piece, studied it for an entire night and consulted cryptography experts to divine its message.        

As they eventually discovered, the numbers were in a computer language, Unicode, spelling out five phrases that Chinese censors have banned from the results of Internet search engines. And the pungent peppercorns were a metaphor for what Mr. Yue called people&rsquo;s undue sensitivity to ordinary words.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s very ironic,&rdquo; Mr. Yue, 36, said in an interview last week. &ldquo;On the one hand, they want to boost cultural development. And on the other, they call off our exhibition.&rdquo;        

Ironic is one way to describe it. But viewed against the language of the party&rsquo;s declaration on culture &mdash; the Oct. 25 report on the annual Central Committee plenum, held last month &mdash; there is not much inconsistency at all, some analysts say.        

Rather, they suggest, the leaders&rsquo; approach to building a world-class culture is not all that different from the one that powered China&rsquo;s economic miracle: set a long-term goal, adopt rigid specifications, pour in copious amounts of public money, monitor closely to ensure the desired result.        

In this case, as the report repeatedly stated, the specifications are to adhere to &ldquo;core socialist values&rdquo; in cultural activities. The desired result is &ldquo;to build our country into a socialist culture superpower.&rdquo;        

The monitoring affects artists like Mr. Yue and Yu Jianrong, a painter and photographer whose works &mdash; on the petitions prepared annually by thousands of ordinary Chinese whose grievances have been ignored by the government &mdash; were banned two weeks ago from being exhibited in Songzhuang, a suburban Beijing artists&rsquo; colony.        

Mr. Yu declined to be interviewed. But The South China Morning Post in Hong Kong quoted a microblog post, since deleted, in which Mr. Yu wrote that exhibition officials in Songzhuang had told him that &ldquo;the situation this year is tense, and no sensitive topics are allowed.&rdquo;        

Such tales show that there is nothing ironic about the current censorship, said Zhang Ming, a political science professor at Renmin University of China.        

&ldquo;The government is overconfident about controlling art,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They think as long as they provide money and they provide a value orientation, there can be good art produced. This is not surprising at all, because they have never experienced the process of free expression.&rdquo;        

In that view, the notion is lost on Chinese leaders that a great culture &mdash; whether in painting, science or journalism &mdash; rests on people&rsquo;s abilities to push the boundaries of creativity, no matter whom it offends.        

There is much to support that view, including the arrest in April of the internationally famous artist and dissident Ai Weiwei and the banning of literature like &ldquo;The Fat Years,&rdquo; Chan Koonchung&rsquo;s bleak depiction of a China-dominated future.        

Not a few officially approved commentaries cast Chinese culture as a sort of zero-sum contest with its rivals. Xinhua, the government news agency, described the challenge last month as an &ldquo;international cultural competition,&rdquo; in which controlling the world stage is one more hurdle to surmount in a triathlon toward global greatness.        

&ldquo;Chinese cultural companies have yet to produce a world-famous brand,&rdquo; that commentary groused, offering a litany of shortcomings: China&rsquo;s television programs have an &ldquo;embarrassing&rdquo; export record; its total published literature does not approach the output of a single German firm, Bertelsmann.        

Most embarrassing, the 1998 animated film &ldquo;Mulan,&rdquo; based on a Chinese heroine, was produced by the Walt Disney Studios in California. &ldquo;China has yet to produce an animated film as internationally successful,&rdquo; the commentary said.        
Shi Da and Edy Yin contributed research.
