
BAGHDAD &mdash; The governor of Anbar Province survived an assassination attempt on Monday, the latest of several, when a homemade bomb blew up beside his convoy near the town of Abu Ghraib. The Sunni governor, Qasim al-Fahadi, was unharmed in the attack, but his spokesman said three guards were wounded.        

Because the bomb was planted and detonated within sight of an Iraqi Army checkpoint, Sunni leaders said the attack showed the Shiite-dominated central government&rsquo;s disregard for their safety, or worse.        

It elicited a sharp rebuke of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki from the leader of the Sunni Awakening movement, Sheik Ahmed Abu Risha, who is so close an ally of the United States that President George W. Bush visited his brother in Anbar in 2007.        

Mr. Abu Risha noted in an interview that Mr. Fahadi was on his way to a meeting with Mr. Maliki when the bomb went off, and he said that Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s allies must have had a hand in the attack.        

&ldquo;I accuse the Dawa Party, in collusion with the Muthanna Brigade, for trying to assassinate the governor of Anbar,&rdquo; the tribal leader said, referring to Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s political party and the predominantly Shiite unit of the Iraqi Army that is stationed in Anbar.        

The Iraqi government did not respond to Mr. Abu Risha&rsquo;s accusations on its Web site or to the Iraqi news media on Monday.        

Accusations and counteraccusations have been escalating between Iraq&rsquo;s Sunnis and the central government as American troops are withdrawing from the country, an ominous development four years after the worst of the sectarian violence here subsided.        

The provincial council in Anbar, dominated by Awakening movement loyalists, has been growing impatient with Baghdad. It issued a statement on Monday saying the Muthanna Brigade &ldquo;bears full responsibility&rdquo; for the attack, and asking Mr. Maliki to open an investigation. The Anbar council is already debating whether to form a semi-autonomous region with other Sunni provinces in the west and northwest of Iraq.        

After American forces and the Awakening militias cooperated to tamp down insurgent violence in Sunni areas, the United States tried to nudge Awakening leaders into politics. But only one candidate backed by the movement became a governor &mdash; in Anbar, which the Americans are hoping will not turn back into a tinderbox after they are gone.        

Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, the terrorist group&rsquo;s Iraq affiliate, was once active in Anbar, and Iraq and American experts have said that it seems to be planning a resurgence after the American pullout. Its cells seem to be striving to unite with nationalist Sunnis, including former Baath Party members, officials said.        

The Iraqi government has responded with sweeping arrests of suspected Baathist sympathizers, though the party was disbanded nearly nine years ago.        

In part, the government has said it was acting on an intelligence tip from the new leaders in Libya, who discovered documents in the rubble of the former intelligence headquarters in Tripoli, that former Baathists intended to stage a coup after the American pullout.        

Sunni leaders have responded, as they did on Monday, with accusations of their own against Mr. Maliki.        
An Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Ramadi.
