
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Toothpaste and moisturizing cream, aftershave, shoes, sheep and dogs, pigeons, toilet plungers and bicycle pumps now populate the once-forbidden grounds that were the Brother Leader&rsquo;s private domain, a sudden reversal of fortune that must rank with the Sack of Rome in its completeness. Up to five months ago anyone lingering near the Bab al-Aziziya complex, much less trying to buy a mattress there, could expect arrest.        

Once Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s sprawling and secretive walled compound inside the capital, it has been pillaged and turned over to the people in a big way. He was killed over two weeks ago, but his defeat is re-enacted daily in thousands of people&rsquo;s victories at what was the center of his power. It is now a testament to the humbling of power: messy fields of smashed concrete, iron rods and mud.        

The community has filled the vacuum of the colonel&rsquo;s demise, transforming this once spectacularly symbolic place into the most ordinary of locations. It is no longer an element in the alchemy of Colonel Qaddafi, but merely the backdrop to a Friday market, with vendors and shoppers outwardly nonchalant about their haunted surroundings. Every day, families tour the still-smoky remains with quiet glee. Where Colonel Qaddafi received foreign leaders, made bellicose televised speeches or simply enjoyed his nicely landscaped swimming pool, small children armed with plastic rifles now romp.        

Mothers and fathers from the provinces look on with quiet satisfaction; even those who did not take up arms against the colonel can now redress 40 years of humiliation. The compound was bombed repeatedly by NATO this year before being taken by the rebels on Aug. 23.        

&ldquo;All his 42 years, he said, &lsquo;Just do this, just do that,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said Khaled al-Fittouri, 28, a security guard who came in from Zlitan with his two small daughters on a recent Saturday. His daughters giggled at shreds of a wig hanging from a vine-covered wall. &ldquo;We want to see how Qaddafi lived,&rdquo; Mr. Fittouri said.        

A visiting taxi driver recalled how five years earlier he had been detained and questioned for an hour after his cab broke down outside the high thick walls. &ldquo;Tomorrow, you won&rsquo;t see the sun,&rdquo; he said his interrogators told him.        

&ldquo;Praise God,&rdquo; said the cabdriver, Saad Amar el-Arabi, as he recalled the moment. &ldquo;Now we are free.&rdquo;        

The Libyan capital&rsquo;s newly famous tourist attractions exist in a world turned upside down.        

The evocative whitewashed Medina, the Old City of the Ottoman Turks, is empty of visitors, as are the grandiose nearby Roman ruins of Leptis Magna, a more imposing monument to the temporal limitations of authoritarian overreach than Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s already tattered remnants.        

But Bab al-Aziziya, nerve center of the colonel&rsquo;s feared Revolutionary Committees and Intelligence Bureau, private residence and military barracks, and even the sprawling and now-vandalized Abu Salim prison complex, where political prisoners were tortured and killed, have troops of avid visitors.        

&ldquo;My friends died here,&rdquo; said Mohammed Khalifa Swisse, a sad-eyed man who had come with his video camera to record the wide-open cell doors, hastily discarded sandals, piles of wiring, broken glass and torn foam mattresses of the now-empty prison.        

In the twilight he recalled the day 15 years ago when the prison echoed to shouts of &ldquo;Allahu akbar&rdquo; as automatic fire and grenades rained down on prisoners penned in an enclosed courtyard. About 1,200 died in two and a half hours; bullet holes still pockmark the walls of the silent space. Mr. Swisse spent 12 years at Abu Salim for having scrawled anti-Qaddafi graffiti on a downtown wall, he said.        

Off the sunlit seaside Martyr&rsquo;s Square where Colonel Qaddafi (and before him, Mussolini) addressed the masses, crowds of men pore over tables stacked high with outlandish oversized postcards. They are not buying, simply staring in amazement: Qaddafi as a prostitute, Qaddafi wearing shimmering dresses, Qaddafi sporting the Star of David, Qaddafi having his wig shaved by a mean-looking barber, Qaddafi as an aging diva, Qaddafi emerging from a sewer.        

A similar over-the-top liberation from the colonel&rsquo;s psychic stranglehold is playing out elsewhere, too. In Misurata, people lined up for several days to see his corpse, proof that Brother Leader was, indeed, a mortal. And in Benghazi, walls are decorated with mocking graffiti that surpasses even what can be found in Tripoli: One drawing shows Qaddafi enthroned on a toilet.        

And the Friday market at Bab al-Aziziya is proof that the commercial opportunities offered by his downfall are limitless, with an ingenious fusion of theme park &mdash; Come see how the Brother Leader lived! &mdash; and outdoor shopping mall. The visitor is hooked by a peek into the ruined boudoir, then sold on a great deal for an extension cord.        

The vendors who have set up shop there in recent weeks take their unusual surroundings in stride. A mountain of rubble that for 25 years was the colonel&rsquo;s own carefully preserved ruin &mdash; the building bombed by the United States in 1986 &mdash; is now the backdrop for Abdu Salam al-Harashi&rsquo;s electrical goods stand. &ldquo;Wherever you can go and get money is a good place,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t really mind it, as long as I can sell.&rdquo;        

A shopper clutching plastic bags of newly bought toiletries, Omar Ramadan, said: &ldquo;The mind can&rsquo;t believe this. As a Libyan, it is impossible for me to express how I feel.&rdquo; His small grin told a different story.        

Inside the walled grove where the colonel&rsquo;s residence was located, Nasser al-Ghati&rsquo;s two boys were scampering around. &ldquo;We got rockets aimed at our kids, and he was happy in here,&rdquo; Mr. Al-Ghati said.        

Fathi Mabrouk Khalifa, who had just bought some emblems of the new government &mdash; some revolutionary posters &mdash; said: &ldquo;A dictator used to live here. Now it&rsquo;s a Friday market. We&rsquo;re still living in a dream.&rdquo;        
