
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; More than 3,500 Syrians have been killed in a crackdown by the government of President Bashar al-Assad on an uprising that has persisted for eight months, the United Nations said Tuesday, as the government pressed its assault on Homs, the city where the uprising has demonstrated its greatest strength.        

Activists said that after six days of near-continuous bombing, the army and security forces sought Tuesday to tighten their grip on parts of Homs, in central Syria near the Lebanese border, to crush army defectors who are holed up in Baba Amr and other neighborhoods.        

At least 111 people were killed in the first five days of the Homs campaign, according to the Local Coordination Committees, a group of activists who are involved in organizing and documenting the uprising.        

The crackdown in Homs has continued despite the government&rsquo;s consent to a plan brokered by the Arab League that was supposed to end the bloodshed and to start talks between the government and the opposition. Syria announced its agreement with the league&rsquo;s plan on Nov. 2.        

At least 60 people have been killed since then, the United Nations estimates, including 19 on Sunday, the start of Id al-Adha, one of the most important holidays in the Muslim calendar.        

&ldquo;Syrian troops continue to use tanks and heavy weaponry to attack residential areas in the city of Homs,&rdquo; said Ravina Shamdasani, spokeswoman for the United Nations high commissioner for human rights. &ldquo;Since the peace plan was signed, there have been further killings, further sieges of towns and really shocking reports coming out from the ground.&rdquo;        

Ms. Shamdasani, speaking to reporters in Geneva, described the situation in Baba Amr as &ldquo;appalling,&rdquo; and said that residents had been short of food, water and medical supplies for a week.        

Activists and residents in Homs said that the army took firm control of Baba Amr on Tuesday and that army defectors had withdrawn from the neighborhood and gone into hiding. Residents also said that looting had been rampant in the neighborhood.        

Opponents of the government were still seeking to keep the security forces from exerting control in other parts of the city, in a contest that has become one of the bloodiest episodes of the Syrian uprising.        

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, an opposition group operating in exile, said that 13 people were killed across the country on Tuesday, including a girl in Homs. The group also added in a statement that eight armed men loyal to the Assad government were killed in an ambush by army defectors in Maarat al-Noaman, a town in the northwestern province of Idlib.        

The Syrian government regularly dismisses reports of civilian casualties compiled by activists or by the United Nations and other outside groups, saying instead that its security forces are being attacked by armed gangs financed and directed from abroad.        

On Tuesday, the country&rsquo;s most prominent opposition group, the Syrian National Council, urged the Arab League to take a harder stance, calling on it to suspend Syria&rsquo;s membership and impose economic sanctions.        

The Arab League has called an emergency meeting in Cairo for Saturday to discuss Syria&rsquo;s failure to comply with the Nov. 2 agreement.        
