
BANGKOK &mdash; At the flood-ravaged Don Muang airport, children play with luggage carts while their parents hang laundry above check-in counters. The signs read &ldquo;Departures,&rdquo; but the families camped out at the airport will not be leaving anytime soon.        

Three weeks after floodwaters first arrived in Thailand&rsquo;s capital, dirty, chest-deep water stubbornly lingers across vast areas of northern Bangkok, a slow-moving catastrophe with no sign of resolution. Flooded residents of Bangkok and its surroundings say they are resigned to spending weeks in temporary shelter before they can return home.        

&ldquo;I have lost the ability to be angry,&rdquo; said Orn Perdpring, a 49-year-old owner of a coin-operated laundry shop, who has spent nearly a month sleeping in a tent near rows of airline check-in counters at Don Muang &mdash; which literally means &ldquo;city on higher ground&rdquo; &mdash; the smaller of two airports in the Thai capital. &ldquo;Anger will just stress me out more.&rdquo;        

Bangkok&rsquo;s central business districts remain dry, and the main international airport, Suvarnabhumi, which is protected by a dike about 12 feet high, is functioning normally.        

Anond Snidvongs, a flood expert advising the Thai government, said that pumps, sandbags and dikes were preventing water from entering inner Bangkok. But the barriers have had the perverse effect of prolonging the crisis.        

&ldquo;The water doesn&rsquo;t know where to go,&rdquo; Mr. Anond said.        

In addition to Bangkok, one quarter of Thailand&rsquo;s 76 provinces are still affected by flooding. The death toll from more than three months of flooding rose to 527 on Tuesday.        

The allotment of sandbags and dikes continues to stir tensions across Bangkok, with people in flooded areas complaining that they have been sacrificed to keep wealthier parts of the capital dry. But the water itself has not discriminated between the powerful and the plebian.        

On Tuesday, the Thai news media reported that water was bubbling up from the sewers in front of the private residence of Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra. Her temporary office is surrounded by floodwaters. (Her first temporary office was here at Don Muang, but was abandoned on Oct. 29 when floodwaters surrounded it.)        

The flooding appears to have taken a toll on Ms. Yingluck, whose government came to power in August, just as the flooding was becoming severe in northern Thailand. She has come close to tears during recent public appearances. On Tuesday, she announced that she was canceling plans to attend a summit meeting of Asia-Pacific leaders in Hawaii this weekend.        

By many measures, Thailand is working at half speed. Flooding has shut more than 1,000 factories, and the government announced Tuesday that the reopening of public schools would be delayed by a week, to Nov. 21. Stores across Bangkok are still short of supplies, including drinking water.        

Floods have knocked out production at the country&rsquo;s major providers of bottled water, including Singha, Chang and Nestl&eacute;. &ldquo;We are trying to recover our factory,&rdquo; said Bongkod Paebunyong, a spokeswoman for Nestl&eacute;, which produces two popular drinking-water brands, including the country&rsquo;s best-selling mineral water, Miner&eacute;. In the meantime, the company has ordered bottled water from its factories abroad.        

For the tens of thousands of Bangkok residents who have sought to tough it out in flooded homes, getting supplies has involved traveling by boat or military trucks.        

One woman in a Bangkok suburb called in to a television program to appeal for baby formula for her infant. A news crew traveled nine hours down flooded roads to deliver the powder to the woman, who wept with gratitude.        

The government says 2.9 million people have been affected by the floods in a country of 65 million.        

Flood refugees at Don Muang, which is surrounded by neck-deep water, say they have adequate supplies, thanks largely to private donations. Food is delivered several times a day, and a doctor visits the facilities twice a week and dispenses medication to the sick. But the air-conditioning does not function, there is no running water and mosquitoes are legion.        

Two weeks ago, when the airport&rsquo;s electrical system was inundated and power was cut, the authorities sought to force flood refugees out of the facility. Thousands were taken to other shelters, but hundreds refused to leave.        

Among those camped out on Tuesday at the departures level was a retired American, Willis Webster, and his Thai wife, Amornrat.        

&ldquo;We decided to tough it out,&rdquo; said Mr. Webster, 65, who sleeps under a pink mosquito net next to the escalator. The couple arrived on Oct. 31 and are waiting for the floodwaters to subside so they can return to their nearby apartment. Mr. Webster said he gauged the water level by looking out at a road where a yellow taxi sat in the floodwaters. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s still fully submerged,&rdquo; he said.        

A frequent traveler to Thailand before he retired here, Mr. Webster said he was very familiar with the airport. &ldquo;But I never thought I would spend a week here,&rdquo; he said.        
Poypiti Amatatham contributed reporting. 
Poypiti Amatatham contributed reporting.
