
The Palestinian bid to become a full member of the United Nations headed toward certain failure on Tuesday after the Security Council&rsquo;s membership committee deadlocked on the issue, according to a draft report by the committee.        

The outcome, which had been anticipated, was laid out in typically detached diplomatic language. &ldquo;The committee was unable to make a unanimous recommendation to the Security Council,&rdquo; the report concluded.        

There was little likelihood from the beginning that the attempt would be successful, because the United States had vowed to veto it.        

But in submitting the bid in September, the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, appeared ready to try to claim at least a moral victory by having yet another Palestinian initiative felled by an American veto.        

The membership committee&rsquo;s report will go to the Council, where, in theory, 9 of the 15 members could still vote in favor of accepting the Palestinians. But it has become increasingly apparent that there are not sufficient votes to get a resolution passed, and it is possible that it may not even come to a vote.        

The four-page report, drafted by Portugal, said the Council members held three broad views on the issue, without going into details. (Each Council member gets a seat on the membership committee, and Portugal, as the current Council president, is the chair.)        

Some members thought the Palestinians should be admitted, some thought they should not and some questioned whether the Palestinians had met the requirements of membership at this time. Some members focused on whether Hamas, the extremist group that controls Gaza, had accepted the terms of membership, including the peaceful settlement of disputes.        

But the main impediment is that only eight states are prepared to support the bid. Russia, China, Lebanon, India, Brazil and South Africa have voiced outright support. Nigeria and Gabon, though hedging publicly, were expected to vote in favor.        

The United States has been firmly opposed, and Germany may also vote against membership. Britain, France and Colombia said in a closed membership meeting last week that they would abstain, diplomats said. That left Portugal and Bosnia. Portugal was expected to go along with its European partners, while the tripartite presidency of Bosnia was in disagreement.        

Although changes could still be made in the draft report, the Security Council is expected to accept the report by consensus on Friday, a kind of &ldquo;we agree to disagree&rdquo; outcome. If no nation submits a resolution demanding a formal vote on the issue, none will be taken.        

France has been pressing the Palestinians to request that the General Assembly upgrade their current status, as an organization, to an observer state, but it was unclear that the Palestinians would go that route.        

&ldquo;It is not over yet,&rdquo; said Saeb Erekat, a close aide to Mr. Abbas in Ramallah, noting that the Palestinian Authority was weighing its options. &ldquo;We may put the motion to a vote in the Security Council, and if we fail we can try again and again and again.&rdquo;        
Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from Jerusalem.
