
MONROVIA, Liberia &mdash; President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, who won the Nobel Peace Prize this year for helping to stabilize her country after years of conflict, was poised to win a second term in an uncontested presidential runoff on Tuesday.        

But the election was dampened by low voter turnout, the refusal of her only remaining competitor to stay in the race and lingering bitterness from clashes between the police and opposition supporters a day earlier that left at least one person dead.        

The election &mdash; only the second since Liberia emerged from 14 years of civil war &mdash; was intended to solidify the country&rsquo;s fledgling democracy but instead could exacerbate divisions.        

&ldquo;After Monday&rsquo;s events, she might have some difficulty pulling the country together,&rdquo; said Dan Saryee, executive director of the Liberia Democratic Institute, referring to the president.        

Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf, the first woman to be elected a head of state in Africa, is an icon abroad but less popular at home. She persuaded international donors to forgive $4.6 billion of Liberia&rsquo;s debt and has drawn $19 billion in foreign direct investment.        

But 8 out of 10 people here still live on $1.25 or less per day, according to the World Bank. About half the population has no access to safe drinking water, and far fewer people have access to electricity.        

The president has recently been criticized for clamping down on political freedoms. The government refused to allow the chief opposition party to use the main stadium in Monrovia, the capital, for a campaign event, and on Monday night it shut down a pro-opposition television network and two radio stations.        

The opposition&rsquo;s vice presidential candidate, George Weah, an international soccer legend, is his party&rsquo;s main draw. Liberians view his rise from a Monrovia slum to the ranks of the world&rsquo;s top athletes as inspiration for their own struggle against Liberia&rsquo;s deeply rooted elite.        

&ldquo;The Sirleaf administration has to do a much better job of reaching out to the disenfranchised youth of Liberia, who will always be an army of ready-made shock troops for any opposition,&rdquo; said Michael Keating, a Liberia expert at the University of Massachusetts, Boston. &ldquo;They need to do a much better job of creating jobs rather than simply signing natural resource deals that rarely serve the interests of the majority.&rdquo;        

The opposition&rsquo;s presidential candidate, Winston Tubman, a Harvard-educated former justice minister and diplomat, withdrew from the race on Nov. 5 after claiming fraud in the first round. International observers had declared the election free and fair, but Mr. Tubman urged voters to stay away from the polls during the runoff and warned of violence if it was not postponed.        

Hundreds of demonstrators supporting Mr. Tubman&rsquo;s boycott took to the streets on Monday, throwing rocks and setting tires ablaze. The Liberian national police responded with tear gas and gunfire, chasing demonstrators off the main road. About 50 people were taken into police custody, said a police spokesman, George Bardue.        

At the opposition&rsquo;s headquarters on Tuesday, the party&rsquo;s secretary general, Acarous Gray, addressed dozens of people who had gathered in the yard amid broken glass and spent bullet casings.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;ve come to offer solace, to tell you that all is not lost,&rdquo; he told the crowd, adding that the opposition would announce its position after overseeing the medical care of those injured in Monday&rsquo;s melee.        

Mrs. Johnson Sirleaf expressed remorse over Monday&rsquo;s events as she cast her vote Tuesday in a small village 50 miles outside the capital. &ldquo;I think Liberians want peace, they want their basic needs met, and that will be our obligation and commitment,&rdquo; she said.        

Though an elections commission spokesman, Emmanuel Bowier, said Tuesday&rsquo;s vote went off without a hitch, the earlier violence seemed to have had a chilling effect.        

In the swamp behind the opposition headquarters, Victoria Wesseh, 28, said she saw a young man shot just a few feet from her zinc shack. &ldquo;If the president wanted peace, why would she bring police to kill innocent people?&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t need to give her my vote.&rdquo;        

More people &mdash; mostly young men &mdash; stood defiantly outside a polling place in West Point, a Monrovia slum and opposition stronghold that in the first round was filled with voters.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m not voting because what happened in my country yesterday made me feel discouraged from participating,&rdquo; said Kibie George, 32, a trader. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid and I&rsquo;m bereaved. My brothers and sisters died yesterday.&rdquo;        

Daddy Boy Padmore, 27, was more to the point. &ldquo;We will not legitimize their killing,&rdquo; he said.        

Fewer than a third of registered voters in one election district cast ballots on Tuesday at a high school in downtown Monrovia that was empty minutes before polling places closed.        

&ldquo;The first round, people were lined up out the door,&rdquo; said Lionel Richards, a poll worker. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what happened.&rdquo;        
Josh Kron contributed reporting from Nairobi, Kenya.
