
A Tunisian appeals court on Tuesday approved the extradition of Libya&rsquo;s former prime minister, making him the first escaped member of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s felled government to be ordered returned home into Libyan custody since the revolution that officially ended last month.        

The former prime minister, Al-Baghdadi Ali al-Mahmoudi, was arrested by the Tunisian border police on Sept. 22 and sentenced to six months in a Tunisian prison for entering the country illegally. The sentence was overturned, but the Tunisian authorities held him pending the outcome of an extradition request by Libya&rsquo;s post-Qaddafi government.        

Despite a plea for a postponement by Mr. Mahmoudi&rsquo;s defense lawyers, the appeals court ordered the extradition, according to TAP, the official Tunisia news agency.        

It did not specify precisely when Mr. Mahmoudi would be returned to Libya.        

The extradition order came despite concerns by rights groups and foreign governments, including those that aided the former rebels who toppled Colonel Qaddafi, about extrajudicial killings and mistreatment of Qaddafi loyalists by vindictive militia members who had battled them in the eight-month revolution.        

Those concerns intensified when Colonel Qaddafi, one of his sons and a former intelligence minister were killed while in the custody of militias that besieged the former leader&rsquo;s last redoubt of resistance, in his hometown, Surt, on Oct. 20.        

Amnesty International had sent a letter to the Tunisian government urging it not to extradite Mr. Mahmoudi. James Lynch, the group&rsquo;s spokesman for North Africa, was quoted by Agence France-Presse as saying it feared that Mr. Mahmoudi would &ldquo;face real risks, serious human rights violations, including torture, extrajudicial execution and unfair trial.&rdquo;        

The Transitional National Council, the interim government in Libya, has promised that any former members of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government accused of wrongdoing would be tried fairly. The council has also pledged to prosecute the killers of Colonel Qaddafi, although few Libyans expect that they will be arrested or punished.        

There has been no word for more than a week on the whereabouts of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s remaining son-at-large, Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi, who is believed to be hiding with sympathetic Tuareg tribesmen in Mali or Niger.        

Luis Moreno-Ocampo, chief prosecutor at the International Criminal Court, which has issued a warrant for Mr. Qaddafi over suspected abuses of civilians committed during the Libyan revolution, said on Oct. 28 that he had been in indirect contact with Mr. Qaddafi about a possible surrender.&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;        
