
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; South Korea on Tuesday authorized the World Health Organization to resume the distribution of medical aid to North Korea, financed by the South Korean government, amid growing international calls for assistance for malnourished North Korean children.        

The decision &ldquo;was based upon our belief that purely humanitarian support for the young and vulnerable in North Korea should continue,&rdquo; a senior South Korean Unification Ministry official told reporters on Tuesday during a briefing given on the condition of anonymity.        

In 2009, South Korea donated $13 million for a W.H.O. program to send medicine and medical supplies to the North. But it asked the United Nations agency to suspend the distribution of the money after the March 2010 sinking of a South Korean warship, the Cheonan. South Korea says the North torpedoed the ship, killing 46 sailors, an accusation North Korea rejects.        

On Tuesday, the Unification Ministry accepted the W.H.O.&rsquo;s request to distribute the remaining South Korean money, totaling about $7 million, the official said.        

In New York on Saturday, Unification Minister Yu Woo-ik told the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, that his government would consider sending aid to the North through the United Nations. South Korean officials say that in the event of another nationwide food crisis in the North, they are ready to step in with significant aid shipments but that with harvest season having just begun, the chronic food shortages in North Korea have not reached a crisis level.        

In recent months, tensions have eased on the divided Korean Peninsula, with the North Korean government signaling a possible willingness to resume talks on ending its nuclear weapons program and the South Korean government relaxing restrictions on nongovernmental aid shipments to the North.        

While South Korea remains frustrated with the North&rsquo;s persistence in its nuclear program, it has faced growing appeals from international relief agencies who say that the North&rsquo;s most vulnerable should not be punished for their government&rsquo;s deeds. The United Nations humanitarian chief, Valerie Amos, said last month that six million North Koreans were in urgent need of food aid.        

Aid organizations have warned South Korea that the malnutrition that has plagued two generations in the North will have broad consequences should the two Koreas reunify one day. North Korean children on average are considerably shorter than their South Korean counterparts, and doctors have reported signs that malnutrition is hindering North Korean children&rsquo;s cognitive development.        
