
LONDON &mdash; In one corner sits Oligarch No. 1, Boris A. Berezovsky, beefy, pugnacious, litigious, voluble, intent on revenge. In the other sits his erstwhile associate and current archenemy, Oligarch No. 2, Roman A. Abramovich, trim, reserved, terse, angry, extremely rich and extremely unhappy about being here.        

The two men, who banded together to help plunder the spoils of post-Soviet Russia in the 1990s before spectacularly falling out, have been fighting an epic legal battle here in the High Court of Justice for the past month. Mr. Berezovsky, 65, claims that Mr. Abramovich owes him about $5.8 billion; Mr. Abramovich, 45, says he owes Mr. Berezovsky nothing at all.        

One of the lawyers recently described the case as the largest private lawsuit in the world. But beyond its sheer scale, it is also proving to be a riveting window into the inner workings of a singular period in Russian history, when men of untold wealth and connections capitalized on rampant lawlessness and corruption to commandeer industries, neutralize enemies and fix elections.        

In their testimony, and in hundreds of pages of court papers, the two men are exposing the secrets of that time &mdash; the sub rosa meetings, the millions of dollars thrown around like petty change, the extortion, the bribery, the sweetheart deals with corrupt governments. And although much has been written about the oligarchs&rsquo; seamy rise to riches, this is the first time so much has been revealed by the men themselves so matter-of-factly.        

Even in a cynical and virtually unshockable Russia, some people are shocked. Novaya Gazeta, an opposition newspaper, recently called the trial the &ldquo;Russian Assange,&rdquo; in a reference to the founder of WikiLeaks, Julian Assange, and his document disclosures. &ldquo;The underside of the modern history of Russia is being brought to life,&rdquo; Vera Chelishcheza wrote in the newspaper. &ldquo;Only here, at this mad trial in a foreign court, have I got answers.&rdquo;        

By 1994, when the two men met while cruising the Caribbean in a private yacht, Mr. Berezovsky had felicitously moved on from his earlier job as an academic to become the owner of Russia&rsquo;s largest car dealership and an intimate of Boris N. Yeltsin, then the Russian president. He and Mr. Abramovich, a former soldier and toy-duck importer who branched out into the oil business, decided to pool their resources in an audacious deal.        

With Mr. Abramovich contributing business acumen and cash, Mr. Berezovsky agreed to use his influence to persuade the government to privatize two Siberian oil holdings and then sell a stake in the new business, Sibneft, to him, Mr. Abramovich and the richest man in Georgia, Arkady Patarkatsishvili. The deal would also help Mr. Berezovsky raise money (from Mr. Abramovich) to prop up his media company, ORT, which would in turn prop up Mr. Yeltsin&rsquo;s political career.        

Mr. Berezovsky says the deal meant that he owned part of Sibneft and that Mr. Abramovich later bullied and blackmailed him into selling his stake in 2001 for a mere $1.3 billion &mdash; only for Mr. Abramovich to turn around and sell his own stake in the company for $11.9 billion in 2005.        

Mr. Abramovich says that is not at all true. Mr. Berezovsky never owned a stake in Sibneft, he asserts; instead, his role in that and other deals was to provide &ldquo;krysha,&rdquo; literally &ldquo;roof,&rdquo; or protection. &ldquo;His political clout was necessary, and it was that clout I was paying for,&rdquo; Mr. Abramovich said in court papers.        

Their various maneuverings, including ventures in airplanes and aluminum, apparently required that they and their associates meet in exotic and exclusive places, including Mr. Berezovsky&rsquo;s club in Moscow; on the Riviera; in the French Alps; at the Dorchester Hotel in London; in private planes and super-yachts; and at various heliports and airports. Mr. Berezovsky&rsquo;s case rests in part on a secret recording made in 2000 in the V.I.P. lounge at Le Bourget Airport in Paris; he said that in exchange for a tape of the recording, he agreed to pay $80 million (or 5 percent of his potential winnings from the case) to a person whose name, he said in court papers, he cannot divulge.        

Throughout this period, Mr. Abramovich said, he was continually handing over huge sums of money to help finance what he called Mr. Berezovsky&rsquo;s &ldquo;exuberant lifestyle&rdquo; &mdash; an arrangement that apparently included paying Mr. Berezovsky&rsquo;s girlfriend&rsquo;s credit card bills; chartering planes for Mr. Berezovsky; and buying him a house in Cap d&rsquo;Antibes, France. In 2000, Mr. Abramovich said, he gave Mr. Berezovsky $305 million because &ldquo;I wanted him to be able to establish himself properly abroad.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
Both men are now dismissive, even contemptuous, of each other&rsquo;s competence. &ldquo;To get leverage you need to be smart,&rdquo; Mr. Berezovsky said in court, &ldquo;and he wasn&rsquo;t.&rdquo; Meanwhile, Mr. Abramovich described his antagonist in court papers as &ldquo;very boastful and prone sometimes to wild exaggeration,&rdquo; said he had no head for business and no attention span for details, and was so disorganized he often failed to appear at meetings.        

The two men are also prone sometimes to self-deception. Mr. Abramovich asserted in court papers that he did not have an &ldquo;extravagant lifestyle,&rdquo; only to be reminded in court that his holdings included several enormous properties in London and a chateau in France, as well as the Chelsea Football Club and the world&rsquo;s largest yacht. Mr. Berezovsky, who gave testimony last month in colorfully ungrammatical English (Mr. Abramovich is speaking Russian, through an interpreter), continually contradicted himself about whether he thought it was corrupt to use one&rsquo;s media company to support a politician in exchange for political favors.        

The two men sparred for at least four years over whether the case could even go forward, starting with a bizarre incident in 2007 in which Mr. Berezovsky, exiting the Dolce & Gabbana boutique in Knightsbridge, suddenly spotted Mr. Abramovich entering the nearby Herm&egrave;s store.        

Directing a bodyguard to return to his car to retrieve court papers outlining his lawsuit against Mr. Abramovich &mdash; he apparently had been carrying them around, just in case &mdash; Mr. Berezovsky muscled his way into Herm&egrave;s, while the two men&rsquo;s sets of bodyguards reportedly sparred outside. He then served Mr. Abramovich with the court papers, saying, &ldquo;I have a present for you.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;It was like a scene from &lsquo;The Godfather,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Berezovsky said at the time.        

Indeed, at a time of austerity and grim news wafting from Europe, the trial has proved to be a welcome cinematic diversion. The two oligarchs travel with large entourages that include burly bounceresque bodyguards sporting Secret Service-style earpieces, and comely girlfriends wielding designer handbags.        

Their fortunes have diverged drastically in the past decade.        

Mr. Berezovsky fled Russia in 2001 after running afoul of the new president, Vladimir V. Putin, and obtained political asylum in Britain. Russia then tried and convicted him in absentia for corruption, fraud and embezzlement. Last spring, The Sunday Times estimated his fortune to be around $800 million.        

Mr. Abramovich, on the other hand, is still a Russian citizen and enjoys a good relationship with Mr. Putin, which is a plus in doing business in Russia. The Sunday Times estimated his fortune at $17 billion.        
