
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Australian troops on a training mission in southern Afghanistan were attacked Tuesday by one of the Afghan soldiers they were training, officials said Wednesday.        

Though no one was killed in the attack, in a remote area of Oruzgan Province, it was strikingly similar to one last month in Kandahar Province that killed three Australian soldiers. Together, the two attacks have deepened public criticism in Australia of the Afghan war and Australia&rsquo;s role in it.        

After the Oruzgan attack, the gunman fled the scene of the shooting in a stolen Humvee, which was later found abandoned and on fire, according to the provincial governor, Mohammed Omar Sherzad. Three Australian soldiers and two Afghan soldiers were wounded.        

Speaking to reporters in Perth, Australia, on Wednesday, Stephen Smith, the Australian defense minister, said the attacks were &ldquo;a very serious blow to confidence and trust; there&rsquo;s no point walking away from that.&rdquo;        

Australia has about 1,550 troops deployed in Afghanistan. Since the start of the conflict, the force has suffered 32 deaths and 212 injuries, the government said; seven were wounded in the Kandahar attack on Oct. 29. Another Australian soldier was killed in May by the Afghan soldier he was training.        

Although 49 countries belong to the American-led coalition fighting in Afghanistan, only a handful of them have sent substantial forces, and only five now have more than 1,000 troops in the country: Britain, France, Germany, Australia and the United States.        

Public pressure to pull out of Afghanistan ahead of the 2014 deadline set by President Obama for withdrawing all combat troops has been particularly strong in Australia, France and Germany.        

Prime Minister Julia Gillard of Australia visited her nation&rsquo;s troops in Afghanistan on Sunday, stopping at a base in Tirin Kot, the capital of Oruzgan Province, to try to improve morale after the Oct. 29 attack. The attack on Tuesday took place near that base.        

Ms. Gillard also met with President Hamid Karzai on her trip. &ldquo;We came to Afghanistan and we have found some tremendous days of sorrow, but we have also found a great friendship,&rdquo; she said then, in comments broadcast on Australian television. &ldquo;We do intend to stay engaged here with you, in a spirit of friendship, for the long term.&rdquo;        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting.
