
CAIRO &mdash; At the rally kicking off his campaign for Parliament, Basem Kamel, a core member of the youthful council that helped spur the end of the Mubarak government, wrestled with his stump speech calling for civilian rule.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want to return to the Islam of the Middle Ages,&rdquo; said Mr. Kamel, his shaved head and white suit setting him apart in Sharabiyya, an impoverished northern Cairo neighborhood in his campaign district. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want the Islam that preaches I am right and everyone else is an infidel.&rdquo;        

The official campaign for Egypt&rsquo;s first parliamentary elections since President Hosni Mubarak was toppled in February has started slowly, coinciding with a weeklong break marking the year&rsquo;s main Muslim holiday.        

But the campaign&rsquo;s contours have been known for months, namely how a group of upstart, mostly liberal parties will challenge the well-organized juggernaut of the Muslim Brotherhood, as well as remnants of the old government&rsquo;s political machine. The question shadowing the election is whether a robust enough Parliament will emerge to fulfill an elusive goal of the revolution: challenging the military&rsquo;s 60-year grip on power.        

Given that the young organizers who first summoned protesters to Tahrir Square pulled off a miraculous feat &mdash; chasing a president of nearly 30 years from office in 18 days &mdash; they were expected to play a leading role in what came next.        

Reality proved different. Initially, the ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces appeared interested in consulting with the youth coalition. But the youths broke off the meetings after a violent April crackdown on demonstrators.        

&ldquo;We decided it was better to try to establish ourselves on the street than to talk to the military council,&rdquo; said Shady el-Ghazaly Harb, a 32-year-old surgeon who is now building his own liberal party, The Awareness Party, and is sitting out these elections.        

&ldquo;The military wanted us for decoration,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They used us as a source of information, an indicator of the mood on the street, of how the youth will react &mdash; but it was not an interactive experience.&rdquo;        

Although they still meet, the 17 or so core members of the Revolution Youth Coalition splintered among factions much like the entire Egyptian political spectrum. Some, including the young members of the Muslim Brotherhood, started parties of their own. Some were absorbed into older groups as mummified political parties struggled to their feet. Some thrived as media stars.        

&ldquo;They were all beggars before the revolution,&rdquo; said Mohamed Salah, an acerbic columnist for the pan-Arab Al-Hayat newspaper, summarizing a common perception. &ldquo;Now half of them are TV talk-show hosts while the other half appear on their shows as paid guests, while the rest of the population cannot find money to buy food.&rdquo;        

About six of the original members hope to translate their role into a parliamentary seat in the three-stage elections that run through Jan. 10. But they face pronounced skepticism.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t care about them, they are just like Mubarak, all they want is money,&rdquo; groused one heavily veiled woman dismissively just before Mr. Kamel rose to speak. Her main concern was the pervading sense of instability: &ldquo;We just want things to go back the way they were.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kamel is running for the Egyptian Social Democratic Party, among the strongest liberal groups with its mix of Muslims and Coptic Christians, which argues seriously that Egypt might emulate Sweden. The rally played on nostalgia for better days by not starting with the current martial national anthem, but a more romantic version from the 1920s with lines like &ldquo;I am an Egyptian built by those who built the everlasting pyramids.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kamel noted in an interview that he could not run as a revolutionary. (The 42-year-old architect was pushing the youth envelope, but because Mr. Mubarak was 82, people half his age were deemed youthful.)        

&ldquo;They know that we were somehow pioneers in this, but now is not the time to say that,&rdquo; he explained. &ldquo;I have to speak about the new constitution, about education, health care and the environment.&rdquo;        

Still, his speech referred to those halcyon days.        
Dina Saleh Amer and Heba Afify contributed reporting.
