
WASHINGTON &mdash; Angered by the release of an incriminating United Nations report on their nuclear ambitions, Iran&rsquo;s leaders sought on Wednesday to cast it as an American fabrication.        

They denounced its chief author as a Washington stooge and vowed that their country would not be bullied into abandoning its nuclear program.        

The tone of their reaction suggested that Iran&rsquo;s leaders were worried that the report, released Tuesday by the International Atomic Energy Agency, could sway world opinion and deepen Iran&rsquo;s isolation, complicating its repeated claims that the goal of the nuclear program is energy for civilian use, not weapons.        

France, Britain and Germany quickly signaled that they would join the United States in seeking new ways to pressure Iran, although Russia said it was opposed to any new sanctions and China said it was noncommittal.        

The report, buttressed by evidence not previously disclosed, concluded that Iran had been secretly engaged in behaviors that suggested that it was seeking to construct a nuclear weapon. The report also asserted that Iran might be researching ways to deliver a nuclear weapon by means of a missile warhead. It was the first time that the agency, an arm of the United Nations, had made such assertions.        

President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran led the verbal assault on the report, saying it had been orchestrated by Iran&rsquo;s enemies, principally the United States, which he said had dictated the report&rsquo;s findings.        

&ldquo;Why do you exploit the I.A.E.A. dignity in favor of the U.S. administration?&rdquo; Mr. Ahmadinejad asked rhetorically in a question directed at Yukiya Amano, the director general of the agency, who oversaw the production and content of the report.        

&ldquo;Some bullying powers are armed with atomic bombs and they claim Iran is seeking such bombs,&rdquo; Mr. Ahmadinejad said, in remarks reported by Iranian news agencies. &ldquo;The Iranian nation does not fear you if it wants to make a bomb, but it does not need a bomb.&rdquo;        

Ali Asghar Soltanieh, Iran&rsquo;s chief delegate to the United Nations nuclear agency, was quoted by Iranian news agencies as saying that Mr. Amano had violated the agency&rsquo;s charter by asserting false claims in the report and that he would &ldquo;see consequences of his historical mistake.&rdquo;        

Foreign Minister Alain Jupp&eacute; of France, an advocate of harsher sanctions against Iran but opposed to a military response, said France and its allies were prepared to impose &ldquo;unprecedented sanctions&rdquo; on Iran. Mr. Jupp&eacute; also said that France wanted to convene the United Nations Security Council, which has already imposed four rounds of sanctions on Iran. &ldquo;We cannot accept this situation, which is a threat,&rdquo; he told RFI radio.        

Britain&rsquo;s foreign secretary, William Hague, told the House of Commons that &ldquo;no option is off the table&rdquo; concerning Iran penalties and that he would work on persuading Russia and China to view Iran more critically.        

Catherine Ashton, the European Union&rsquo;s foreign policy chief, said that the United Nations report&rsquo;s findings &ldquo;strongly indicate the existence of a full-fledged nuclear weapons development program in Iran.&rdquo;        

&nbsp;The European Union, like the United States, has already imposed sanctions on Iran that exceed those specified by the Security Council. They include travel bans and asset freezes on 35 people and 215 entities.        

The German foreign minister, Guido Westerwelle, called the new report &ldquo;alarming&rdquo; and said more severe sanctions would be inevitable if Iran &ldquo;continues to refuse to conduct serious negotiations on its nuclear program.&rdquo; But he ruled out military action.        

Whether the weight of evidence in the report could alter the calculus of Russia and China, who have been Iran&rsquo;s chief defenders against European and American claims about Iran&rsquo;s nuclear intentions, remained unclear, but Russia quickly signaled that it would not support new or stricter sanctions regardless of what the report suggested.        

Before the release of the report, Iranian officials had said it was intended to bolster the case for a pre-emptive military strike on Iran by Israel, which considers Iran its most lethal enemy and has dropped hints of planning such an attack.        

Reacting to the report on Wednesday, Prime Minister Benjahim Netanyahu of Israel said nothing about a military response. But in a statement, he said the report &ldquo;corroborates the position of the international community, and of Israel, that Iran is developing nuclear weapons.&rdquo;        

The reaction among Iran&rsquo;s Arab neighbors, historically suspicious of Iran&rsquo;s motivations, clearly reflected worries about a possible military confrontation and economic upheaval. A columnist for the conservative Lebanese daily An-Nahar, Rajeh al-Khoury, wrote that it was not in President Obama&rsquo;s interests &ldquo;to slide into a new war that could set the Gulf and Middle East region on fire and push the price of oil to astronomical levels.&rdquo;        

Others expressed skepticism that the report provided enough justification to attack Iran in order to thwart its nuclear ambitions. &ldquo;There is insufficient evidence to decide whether to go to war,&rdquo; said Ma&rsquo;moun al-Husseini, a columnist for Al-Khaleej, a United Arab Emirates newspaper.        

Walid Choucair, a columnist for the newspaper Al-Hayat of Saudi Arabia, which has no love for Iran, said the report could even help Iran by validating widespread suspicions that Israel was looking for an excuse to attack. He wrote that such a threat strengthened &ldquo;the argument by the Iranian regime and its allies in the region that they constitute the formidable &lsquo;resistance&rsquo; to the &lsquo;Zionist entity.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        
Robert F. Worth reported from Washington, and Rick Gladstone from New York. Reporting was contributed by Steven Erlanger from Paris; Michael Schwirtz from Moscow; Ethan Bronner from Jerusalem; Nada Bakri from Beirut, Lebanon; and Artin Afkhami from Boston.
