
MANILA &mdash; President Benigno S. Aquino III offered Wednesday to bring in foreign doctors to examine his predecessor, Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, but he insisted that a travel ban for Mrs. Arroyo stay in place until corruption allegations against her were resolved.        

Mrs. Arroyo, who has been seen in photos looking haggard and wearing an elaborate neck brace, is seeking to travel overseas in order to get medical treatment for a bone disorder that she says cannot be obtained in the Philippines.        

She has said that she has undergone multiple surgeries on her spine.        

On Tuesday, Mr. Aquino&rsquo;s justice secretary declined Mrs. Arroyo&rsquo;s request to travel, saying there was &ldquo;no urgent and immediate medical emergency situation.&rdquo; The justice secretary also said there were discrepancies in the medical documents Mrs. Arroyo provided in her effort to justify the overseas travel.        

On Wednesday, Mr. Aquino, 64, upped the ante by offering to fly in medical experts and pay for her care.        

&ldquo;If we allow an accused with a pending, nonbailable case to travel to countries without extradition treaties with the Philippines to seek medical care for an ailment that can be addressed sufficiently in our own hospitals, is justice prevailing?&rdquo; Mr. Aquino asked at a news conference. &ldquo;In case she chooses not to return, how can we compel her to answer the charges?&rdquo;        

A spokeswoman for Mrs. Arroyo, Elena Bautista-Horn, said that the former president was thankful for Mr. Aquino&rsquo;s offer but would still pursue the petition to travel through the Supreme Court, The Associated Press reported.        

Mrs. Arroyo&rsquo;s husband, Jose Miguel Arroyo, who has also been implicated in the corruption allegations, called the current administration &ldquo;a bunch of schoolyard bullies.&rdquo;        

Later Wednesday, several members of the country&rsquo;s powerful Roman Catholic hierarchy appealed on a church-run radio station for the current administration to show mercy toward Mrs. Arroyo.        

&ldquo;Even if she hides abroad, her ailment will serve as justice,&rdquo; said Oscar Cruz, a former president of the influential Catholic Bishops&rsquo; Conference of the Philippines. &ldquo;I have never been an admirer, but it doesn&rsquo;t mean that you have to step on her when she is on her knees.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Arroyo is facing allegations of corruption and electoral fraud. Her opponents say she tampered with results of congressional elections in 2007 and illegally used government funds for her 2004 election campaign. She left office as president last year and was subsequently elected to Congress.        

She has denied any wrongdoing and has noted that although she faces allegations, she has not been formally charged with a crime.        

Prosecuting former presidents on corruption charges is something of a tradition in the Philippines. Former President Joseph Estrada &mdash; Mrs. Arroyo&rsquo;s predecessor &mdash; was jailed after he left office. Even the popular Corazon Aquino was hounded by corruption allegations, as was her successor, Fidel Ramos.        
