
BEIJING &mdash; Environmental officials who have resisted releasing comprehensive data about air pollution here in the capital announced that they would take action to address increasing complaints that the government&rsquo;s monitoring system fails to report on the most dangerous airborne particles emitted by the growing ranks of cars and trucks.        

The action: allowing 40 people to tour the source of the frustration, Beijing&rsquo;s monitoring center, once a week.        

&ldquo;With their rising quality of life, Beijing residents are increasingly concerned about the environment,&rdquo; Hua Lei, vice director of the city&rsquo;s monitoring center, told Xinhua, the state news agency, in a report published Tuesday. &ldquo;We hope the new move can allay the public&rsquo;s fears.&rdquo;        

The move is significant as an instance of Chinese officials responding to popular discontent. However, the tours, which must be arranged in advance through an online application, do not appear to raise the likelihood that the center&rsquo;s pollution reports will be any more comprehensive.        

The city&rsquo;s environmental bureau currently releases data on pollutants, but many environmentalists and scientists say the more dangerous particles, those smaller than 2.5 micrometers, or PM 2.5, are left out of the daily assessments.        

The discrepancy has been driven home by the United States Embassy, which maintains its own rooftop monitoring device and releases the results through Twitter and an iPhone app. Because it measures PM 2.5, the embassy&rsquo;s readings have painted a far less sanguine picture of Beijing&rsquo;s air quality, frequently deeming it &ldquo;hazardous&rdquo; on days when the government&rsquo;s monitors describe pollution as &ldquo;moderate&rdquo; or &ldquo;slight.&rdquo;        

Chinese officials have publicly played down the significance of the embassy&rsquo;s readings while privately asking American officials to stop making the data public, according to a diplomatic cable released by WikiLeaks this year.        

The matter came to a head last week, fueled by a bad spell of smog and a firestorm of microblog postings that highlighted the government&rsquo;s air monitoring.        

A number of celebrities weighed in on their microblogs, and a real estate developer, Pan Shiyi, asked his seven million followers to vote on whether the government should adopt stricter standards. &ldquo;If they know how serious the problem is, then people can consciously prevent air pollution and change their unhealthy lifestyles and habits,&rdquo; he wrote.        

Though not anything like a randomized poll, the results were still indicative of deep concerns among Chinese. By Wednesday evening, nearly 40,000 people had voted, with more than 30,000 calling for the immediate introduction of the new standards. (Most of the rest said it was reasonable to wait a year; a small fraction said the status quo should remain in place.)        

The government has said it will eventually adopt the stricter standards, although it has yet to commit to a timetable.        

In the meantime, the authorities have taken every opportunity to point out the gains made since 2008, when they made herculean efforts to clean up the air for the Summer Olympics. To wit, the Beijing Bureau of Environmental Protection says the capital has experienced 63 days of outstanding air quality this year, about 12 more than during the same period in 2008.        

Such figures seem to carry little weight among those who pay attention to the American measurements. In a commentary last Thursday, the state-owned Guangzhou Daily said the government&rsquo;s approach essentially sweeps the problem under the rug while reinforcing public cynicism.        

&ldquo;Even if PM 2.5 data is ugly and people come to realize they live in heavily polluted cities, it may give them the courage to bring about change,&rdquo; said the writer, Li Long. &ldquo;But if we remain fixated on impressive-looking data, we will sap the public&rsquo;s desire to take on the problem.&rdquo;        
Shi Da contributed research.
