
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Two leading international human rights organizations are calling on the Arab League to back the referral of Syria to the International Criminal Court for committing crimes against humanity in its ferocious campaign to crush an eight-month uprising.        

Amnesty International, in a statement on Thursday, and Human Rights Watch, in a report to be released Friday, called on the League to support a move by the United Nations Security Council to refer Syria to the court and to impose an arms embargo on Syria.        

The calls for action by Arab nations came as Syrian forces killed at least 30 people on Thursday, mostly in the city of Homs, in apparent defiance of an agreement brokered by the Arab League last week to end the violence. The deaths included a newborn and five other children.        

Activists in Syria also said that four soldiers were killed in an attack on their checkpoint by armed men in the northwestern province of Idlib.        

The New York-based Human Rights Watch is to release a 63-page report on Friday focused on Homs, the country&rsquo;s third largest city, which has been under siege for more than a week as troops loyal to the government battle army defectors.        

The report, based on interviews with more than 110 victims and witnesses from mid-April, a month after the uprising against the government of President Bashar al-Assad started, until August, found grave abuses committed against unarmed civilians, including women, the elderly and children. The crimes included unlawful killings, torture and forced disappearances.        

At least 587 people were killed in Homs Province during that period, the report found, the highest death toll for a single province in the government&rsquo;s crackdown on the uprising. A total of 3,500 people have been killed nationwide, according to a United Nations report released Tuesday.        

Since last Wednesday, when Syria agreed to the Arab League-sponsored peace initiative, at least 104 people have been killed in the Homs area, Human Rights Watch said. It said that 17 of them had died in custody, and 12 from torture.        

&ldquo;Homs is a microcosm of the Syrian government&rsquo;s brutality,&rdquo; Sarah Leah Whitson, Middle East director at Human Rights Watch, said in the report. &ldquo;The Arab League needs to tell President Assad that violating their agreement has consequences, and that it now supports Security Council action to end the carnage.&rdquo;        

The Arab League is set to meet in an emergency session on Saturday to discuss Syria&rsquo;s failure to comply with the initiative, in which it agreed to remove its tanks and armored vehicles from the streets, halt violence against protesters and begin dialogue with the opposition.        

Arab diplomats said that they would consider imposing economic sanctions on Syria and suspending its membership in the League, a demand of many Syrian opposition groups. Such a move would be humiliating to a government that has cast itself as the pre-eminent force behind Arab unity.        

In addition to its call for the League to back prosecution of Syria at the international court and endorse an arms embargo, Human Rights Watch also urged the League to suspend Syria&rsquo;s membership and to back sanctions against those responsible for rights abuses.        

Amnesty International, based in London, also called for freezing the assets of Mr. Assad and his top aides.        

The Human Rights Watch report also found widespread torture in detention centers, including the burning of detainees with heated metal rods, the use of electric shock, forcing detainees to maintain stress positions for long periods, and forcing them into tires in a way that makes it easier to beat them on sensitive body parts.        

The group also noted that Syrian security forces fired heavy machine guns, including antiaircraft guns mounted on vehicles, on the civilian neighborhoods of Homs and nearby towns. The tactic was meant to terrify people before deploying troops in armored personal carriers. The security forces also restricted people&rsquo;s movement by setting up checkpoints, and they controlled delivery of food and medicine.        
