
RIO DE JANEIRO &mdash; One of Brazil&rsquo;s most-wanted drug lords has been captured, the authorities here announced Thursday, taken around midnight from the trunk of a car while he was attempting to flee Rocinha, one of this city&rsquo;s largest slums, ahead of a bid by security forces to seize control of the sprawling hillside territory.        

The suspect, Ant&ocirc;nio Bonfim Lopes, 35, is known as Nem and is renowned here for extravagant tastes that include Armani suits and renting a helicopter for his wife to tour Rio from the sky.        

Mr. Lopes is accused of heading a cocaine-trafficking organization with more than $5 million in monthly revenue, and he has been hunted for years. But he is believed to have only rarely left his bastions in the slum, including a luxurious lair he created in a three-story villa equipped with a gym and swimming pool.        

Rocinha &mdash; the slum controlled by Mr. Lopes &mdash; is situated above some of Rio&rsquo;s most exclusive residential districts. Police squads had begun stationing themselves in recent days around its entrances in anticipation of a broader push into the community as part of the authorities&rsquo; &ldquo;pacification&rdquo; project, aimed at asserting control over Rio&rsquo;s slums in preparation for the 2014 World Cup and the 2016 Summer Olympics.        

The authorities are hoping a campaign of arrests will avert in Rocinha the type of bloody incursion that occurred last year when 2,600 personnel from the security forces took control of Complexo do Alem&atilde;o, another sprawling patchwork of slums. The operation left dozens dead.        

Referring to Mr. Lopes and his collaborators, Rio&rsquo;s security chief, Jos&eacute; Mariano Beltrame, said in televised comments, &ldquo;They showed fragility, simply after what was coming had been announced.&rdquo;        

A police official involved in the capture said that Mr. Lopes and his men had offered a bribe of 1 million reais, nearly $600,000, to escape arrest. Police officials said that Mr. Lopes and three of his associates were arrested after their Toyota was stopped around midnight at a checkpoint near the Catholic University, an elite institution in the upscale G&aacute;vea district, close to a route exiting Rocinha. One of the men identified himself as Congo&rsquo;s honorary consul, the local news media reported, in an attempt to plead diplomatic immunity.        

On Wednesday, the federal police in G&aacute;vea arrested five other people suspected of being traffickers as they fled Rocinha. Those suspects were accompanied by three police officials and two former police officials, who were taken into custody and accused of providing security to cartel members.        
