
JERUSALEM &mdash; Moshe Katsav, the former president of Israel, is expected to enter prison on Dec. 7 to begin a seven-year term for rape after the country&rsquo;s Supreme Court on Thursday rejected an appeal of his conviction and sentence. &nbsp;        

The court&rsquo;s decision sealed a long and sordid episode that began while Mr. Katsav was still president, a distinguished, if mostly ceremonial, position that he held from 2000 to 2007.        

Mr. Katsav, 65, was convicted in a district court in December of raping an employee &mdash; who has been identified only by her first initial, A. &mdash; on two occasions while he was minister of tourism in 1998. The court also convicted him of sexually abusing and harassing another woman and of harassing a third while he was head of state. In March, he was sentenced to seven years in prison.        

After the Supreme Court issued its verdict, lawyers for the prosecution said it had sent a clear message that Israel upholds the principle of equality before the law. One of the prosecutors, Nisim Marom, said that it would also encourage victims of rape &ldquo;to come forward and press charges.&rdquo;        

Mr. Katsav has always maintained his innocence, and his defense team insisted that his accuser had lied. They argued that Mr. Katsav had been demonized by the news media and by leaks and statements from public figures, preventing a fair trial.        

But the three-judge panel, after long deliberations, found unanimously on Thursday that it saw no reason to intervene in the conviction or the sentence passed down by the district court since both were well considered and appropriate.        

While the Katsav case bolstered public pride in the country&rsquo;s legal system, it also brought the prestige of the post of president to a low.        

&ldquo;A deep sadness descends on the State of Israel when it is determined that a person who served as a government minister, a deputy prime minister and president perpetrated acts such as those,&rdquo; the judges wrote in their ruling. &ldquo;It is a most difficult spectacle to see a man who was once the country&rsquo;s symbol of state going to jail.&rdquo;        

Mr. Katsav resigned from the presidency in disgrace two weeks before his term was to end, amid a public uproar over a deal he had reached with state prosecutors. Under the agreement, the rape charges were to have been dropped in exchange for an admission of guilt to lesser offenses, and Mr. Katsav was not to serve any time in jail. But during a court hearing in April 2008, Mr. Katsav unexpectedly backed out of the plea agreement, saying that he preferred to fight to prove his innocence.        

After the ruling on Thursday, a lawyer for Mr. Katsav, Avigdor Feldman, said that the Supreme Court had taken the concept of credibility to the maximum, meaning that once an Israeli court had deemed the testimony of a rape complainant as credible there was little hope of another court ruling otherwise.        

&ldquo;The concept of credibility hinges on the court&rsquo;s intuition, and I have little faith in it,&rdquo; he added.        

Mr. Feldman said that the defense team would study Thursday&rsquo;s ruling and then consider whether to seek another hearing before a different Supreme Court panel. Another lawyer for the defense, Zion Amir, told Israel Radio that the chances were remote that the Supreme Court would agree to another hearing.        
