
MEXICO CITY &mdash; A helicopter crash killed Mexico&rsquo;s second-most-powerful official and seven others on Friday, dealing yet another blow to the country&rsquo;s battle against a drug-and-crime scourge and leaving a battered nation in shock.        

The official, Francisco Blake Mora, 45, was the secretary of the interior and often the public face of the antidrug campaign. He was the second interior secretary to die in an air crash in three years.        

There was no immediate word on the cause of the crash. President Felipe Calder&oacute;n said it was probably an accident caused by bad weather, but his words did little to assuage the anxiety of a nation that has been pummeled by violence and pushed to trusting rumors by an opaque justice system that rarely provides evidence of innocence or guilt.        

Stupefied and worried, many Mexicans could only imagine the worst. Offices came to a standstill as people tried to digest the news. Twitter and Facebook exploded with commentary, much of it presuming that some criminal group had brought the helicopter down.        

&ldquo;It sounds to me like a hit from narcos to scare Calder&oacute;n,&rdquo; said Engel Fonseca, 31, who was debating the issue with friends over sushi at a Mexico City restaurant. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s too much coincidence.&rdquo;        

At a brief news conference, Mr. Calder&oacute;n said that the helicopter had been flying in fog and had probably crashed accidentally, but that &ldquo;all possible hypotheses&rdquo; would be thoroughly investigated. He said that there was no evidence of foul play, and that the helicopter had been well maintained and protected.        

Sipping water between emotional points, he described Mr. Blake Mora as a brilliant young lawyer, a man of &ldquo;absolute integrity&rdquo; and a friend. &ldquo;Mexico,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;has lost a patriot.&rdquo;        

President Obama called Mr. Calder&oacute;n from Air Force One in the afternoon to offer his condolences. &ldquo;The United States worked closely with those who were lost in this crash and considered them to be close partners,&rdquo; said Ben Rhodes, a White House spokesman.        

Mexican officials said the helicopter crashed in an area of low clouds and poor visibility on its way from Mexico City to Cuernavaca, where Mr. Blake Mora had a meeting scheduled with prosecutors. It was last seen in the air just before 9 a.m. and found, damaged, at 11:12 a.m. Mexican television showed the crash site, just south of the capital, where small pieces of debris covered a woodsy, mountainous field.        

The bodies of the victims &mdash; Mr. Blake Mora, a ministry spokesman, three other ministry employees and three members of the Mexican Air Force &mdash; were not visible.        

Mexican officials mainly ignored the questions of cause and lamented the loss of a longtime public figure. In Congress, representatives observed a moment of silence before the floor opened for comments, delivered in voices hushed by grief.        

&ldquo;Today we lost a great Mexican,&rdquo; said Sergio Tolento Hern&aacute;ndez, a representative from Baja California, Mr. Blake Mora&rsquo;s home state.        

Mr. Blake Mora served in Congress and the Baja California State government before President Calder&oacute;n appointed him to the cabinet post in July 2010.        

Prof. Mario G. Herrera Z&aacute;rate, director of the law school Mr. Blake Mora attended in Tijuana, said he stood out as a student because of his calm demeanor and his ability to search for consensus and agreement.        

To most Mexicans, he was best known as the loyal point man for the president&rsquo;s campaign against drug traffickers. Dark-haired but graying at the temples, serious and discreet, Mr. Blake Mora was one of the main managers for an approach that focused on tough rhetoric, and a frontal, military-style assault on organized crime.        

Despite a rising death toll of around 45,000 people in drug violence since 2006, Mr. Blake Mora was as quick as his boss, the president, to insist on the need to stay tough and keep fighting the cartels rather than backing down.        

He frequently traveled to the worst areas of Mexico, and died en route to the city that gave birth to a protest movement demanding a new security strategy after the son of a famous poet, Javier Sicilia, was killed in March.        

Mr. Blake Mora was less of a firebrand than Genaro Garc&iacute;a Luna, the secretary of public security, and some experts said that if the drug cartels had their pick, Mr. Garc&iacute;a Luna would have been their top target.        

While the crash was not expected to alter the government&rsquo;s crime strategy, inside and outside the halls of power, fears of nefarious intentions seemed to dominate.        
Karla Zabludovsky and Yadira Solano contributed reporting from Mexico City, and Ginger Thompson from Washington.
