
LONDON &mdash; The day after James Murdoch appeared before a parliamentary panel investigating allegations of phone hacking at The News of the World tabloid, he was firmly locked in a high-stakes battle of wills with the tabloid&rsquo;s last editor, Colin Myler, and a former legal manager, Tom Crone.        

Mr. Murdoch told Parliament that Mr. Crone and Mr. Myler had failed to inform him of the depth of the scandal at the tabloid he supervised in his father&rsquo;s media empire, News Corporation. The two men, with equal vehemence, insist they informed him of more widespread criminal practices at the paper in 2008.        

Mr. Crone and Mr. Myler are known in the industry as tough operators &mdash; &ldquo;not the kind of people you take on lightly,&rdquo; according to Brian Cathcart, a professor of journalism at Kingston University, and the founder of Hacked Off, a campaign seeking full investigation of the scandal.        

&ldquo;This is a man,&rdquo; he said of Mr. Crone, &ldquo;who has been the body-burier at The News of the World, and he&rsquo;s a sharp lawyer. But it&rsquo;s come down to a situation for the company where there&rsquo;s no saving James without taking him on.&rdquo;        

Mr. Myler, one of his former employees said, is a devout Catholic and is more cautious than most tabloid editors. &ldquo;If he decides to do something,&rdquo; said the person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, citing the continuing investigations and the condition of the tabloid&rsquo;s severance package, &ldquo;it is well thought through and calculated.&rdquo;        

The two men had presented a united front with Mr. Murdoch through years of scrutiny since the scandal surfaced in 2006. But that cracked after Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s first round of testimony, in July, as the panel tried to determine how long he had known of potentially rampant hacking at The News of the World, now defunct.        

Any remaining bonds between them shattered after Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s second round, on Thursday. In both appearances before the parliamentary committee, he was asked sharp questions about clear evidence of broader hacking that circulated among his executives in 2008. Mr. Murdoch sought to deflect the panel&rsquo;s focus from himself and toward Mr. Myler and Mr. Crone.        

After the first round, the two men released a statement rejecting Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s testimony that they had not informed him of evidence suggesting more widespread hacking: an e-mail that indicated more than one reporter at The News of the World had used information from hacked voicemail messages for stories. On Thursday, after Mr. Murdoch said their statements were &ldquo;inconsistent and not right&rdquo; and &ldquo;misleading,&rdquo; the rejoinder was swift.        

&ldquo;It is regrettable,&rdquo; Mr. Crone counterpunched in a statement, &ldquo;but I can perfectly understand why James Murdoch felt the need to discredit Colin Myler and myself. The simple truth is that he was told by us in 2008 about the damning e-mail and what it meant in terms of wider News of the World involvement.&rdquo; He concluded: &ldquo;At best, his evidence on this matter was disingenuous.&rdquo; Mr. Myler, too, said he stood by his account.        

Professor Cathcart sees the clash as a turning point in what is now an epic scandal, roping in top politicians, police officials and media moguls. &ldquo;The day that Myler and Crone broke ranks was the day this cracked open,&rdquo; he said. Several former News of the World employees, who also spoke on the condition of anonymity to protect severance packages, expressed bafflement at Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s decision to engage in a public conflict with the two men.        

Mr. Crone, the former staff members said, is a steely man of few, but devastating, words, a manner he forged over years of facing down the angry subjects of News of the World scoops. He was often found in the newsroom, and was the subject of affectionate rumor.        

He has had, one former staff member said, &ldquo;pretty much the most high-pressure job on Fleet Street for the last two decades, handling the biggest stories at the most litigious paper in the world. If there&rsquo;s one man who knows his stuff, knows where all the bodies are buried, and isn&rsquo;t flappable, it&rsquo;s Tom Crone.&rdquo;        
