
DUBLIN (AP) &mdash; Ireland ordered a Russian diplomat expelled Tuesday, after an investigation found that Russia&rsquo;s intelligence service used six stolen Irish identities as cover for spies operating in the United States.        

Ireland opened the investigation after the F.B.I. in June smashed a Russian spy ring involving 10 men and women posing as American suburbanites in Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey and Virginia.        

Last year, Ireland expelled an Israeli diplomat over the suspected use of Irish passports, by agents of the Israeli intelligence agency Mossad, to assassinate a top official of Hamas in Dubai in the United Arab Emirates. Israel has refused to confirm or deny the agents&rsquo; involvement.        

Ireland declined to identify the Russian Embassy official being expelled.        

The episodes highlighted what appeared to be the ease of abusing Irish identification documents when undercover agents want to travel unrecognized. The commander of Ireland&rsquo;s national police force, Commissioner Martin Callinan, said the investigation of the Russians&rsquo; counterfeit passports had determined that Russian diplomatic officials stole the details off passports provided by Irish citizens for tourist visas to Russia from 2001 to 2003.        

Mr. Callinan said the investigation had unearthed evidence that the diplomat facing expulsion was involved in the identity theft. &ldquo;We have produced the facts as we have found them,&rdquo; he said.        

One spy, Anna Chapman, used passport details stolen from the managing director of a Dublin charity for orphans called To Russia With Love.        

The United States in July exchanged the 10 spies for 4 people convicted in Russia of spying for the West.        

Ireland&rsquo;s Department of Foreign Affairs said its secretary general had issued a reprimand to Russia&rsquo;s ambassador to Ireland, Vladimir Rakhmanin.        

The Russian Embassy in Dublin and the Foreign Ministry in Moscow declined to comment.        
