
MOSCOW &mdash; In a move certain to further strain already fractured relations between Ukraine and the West, the opposition leader Yulia V. Tymoshenko has been formally charged with tax evasion and embezzlement in a recently reopened case dating back more than 15 years.        

Ms. Tymoshenko, a former Ukrainian prime minister, is already serving a seven-year prison sentence on other charges condemned by Western nations as politically motivated.        

The announcement on Friday of new charges, by the Ukrainian State Tax Service, was the latest signal that the government of her rival, President Viktor F. Yanukovich, is reluctant to release her, despite pressure from European leaders and the risk that her continued imprisonment seems to pose for Ukraine&rsquo;s diplomatic and economic ties.        

Ms. Tymoshenko was videotaped last week waving to supporters who have been holding rallies outside the detention center where she is being held in central Kiev. Barely visible through the bars of her cell window, Ms. Tymoshenko blew kisses and was heard saying: &ldquo;Hang on, my dear ones! Thank you for your support!&rdquo; and &ldquo;I will get through this.&rdquo;        

The charges announced by the tax service on Friday date to the mid-1990s, when Ms. Tymoshenko was president of a power company and she made a fortune selling natural gas from Russia to Ukraine &mdash; an industry heavily tainted by corruption in the years after the collapse of the Soviet Union.        

In a statement, the tax service said she had been charged with concealing about $165 million in revenues and with failing to pay the equivalent of nearly $6 million in taxes.        

Ms. Tymoshenko previously faced corruption charges in Russia and Ukraine related to her role in the gas company, United Energy Systems of Ukraine. The charges in Ukraine were dismissed about five years ago, apparently for lack of evidence.        

The seven-year prison term was imposed last month after Ms. Tymoshenko was convicted of harming Ukraine by agreeing when she was prime minister to pay an overly high price for Russian natural gas in 2009.        

A spokesman for Ms. Tymoshenko, former Deputy Prime Minister Sergei Vlasenko, issued a statement calling the new charges &ldquo;absolutely false.&rdquo; Mr. Vlasenko said that Ms. Tymoshenko, who has complained of chronic back problems, was in poor health and was unable to sit up on Thursday when the authorities visited her in prison to inform her of the new charges.        

Ukraine&rsquo;s Parliament has delayed plans to consider a law that could lead to Ms. Tymoshenko&rsquo;s release by reducing the severity of the crime for which she was convicted.        
