
SAN DIEGO &mdash; After a decade in which wars in the Middle East have dominated American foreign policy, President Obama began an eight-day trip around the Pacific Rim on Friday to inaugurate what he hopes will be a new era in which engagement with the fast-growing economies of Asia is paramount.        

Mr. Obama will travel from Hawaii, where he will host one trade summit meeting of Pacific nations, including China, to Bali, Indonesia, for a second meeting, promoting both as steps toward his goal of doubling American exports to create more jobs.        

In between, he will make a quick stop in Australia to celebrate the 60th anniversary of the military alliance with the country, which sent troops to Iraq and Afghanistan. He will also announce an agreement for a permanent American military presence in Australia, allowing increased naval operations.        

The diplomatic island-hopping comes at a time of conflicting economic and political pressures for the president. While Mr. Obama is eager to avoid any tensions or trade wars with China, especially with the economy weak, Asian allies are eager for the United States to raise its regional profile as a commercial and security counterweight to a rising China.        

And in his own country, Mr. Obama is under increasing political pressure to get tougher with China on trade, not only from the usual labor groups and liberals in his own party, but from Republican presidential candidates led by Mitt Romney, the candidate considered Mr. Obama&rsquo;s likeliest challenger. In a Republican debate on Wednesday, Mr. Romney called China a trade &ldquo;cheater&rdquo; for keeping its currency undervalued and its products underpriced against American exports.        

While no major agreements are expected from the summit meetings, the White House has defined the coming week&rsquo;s events in sweeping terms.        

&ldquo;This is really an important opportunity for the president to engage in this dynamic region to create American jobs, secure our interests and stand up for democratic values,&rdquo; Benjamin Rhodes, the deputy national security adviser for strategic communications, told reporters this week.        

But Mr. Obama is constrained by worries about the mounting debt of the United States. Indeed, the president will be absent from Washington while a special Congressional committee is struggling to surmount its partisan impasse over spending and taxes to reach a compromise deficit-reduction plan by a Nov. 23 deadline &mdash; just four days after Mr. Obama returns.        

As the Asian allies are well aware, if the committee fails or falls short of its charge to cut deficits by $1.2 trillion over 10 years, in 2013 automatic cuts will take effect, fully half from military programs. So the allies are looking for reassurance that that will not happen and, more broadly, that the focus on deficit reduction will not reduce the military resources &mdash; like carrier battle groups &mdash; that the United States has available to offset China&rsquo;s growing military muscle in Asia.        

During his flight first to San Diego, Mr. Obama made phone calls to the leaders of the Congressional committee &mdash; Senator Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington, and Representative Jeb Hensarling, Republican of Texas &mdash; to receive an update.        

Jay Carney, Mr. Obama&rsquo;s press secretary, said the president reiterated that any plan &ldquo;must be balanced and will require tough choices by both sides, including looking at revenues and entitlements.&rdquo; And he said Mr. Obama would not support efforts by some Republicans to repeal the provision threatening automatic cuts in military spending.        

Mr. Rhodes told reporters aboard Air Force One, &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll be making it very clear over the course of the trip that the United States will continue to play the role it has throughout the last century in being the anchor of security and stability in the region and having the type of force posture in the Asia-Pacific that can protect our interests as well as those of our allies in the region.&rdquo;        

Mr. Rhodes also said Mr. Obama was certain to raise the issue of China&rsquo;s currency valuation when he meets with its president, Hu Jintao, along with &ldquo;other steps to increase demand within China&rsquo;s market.&rdquo;        

But illustrating that the Middle East continues to exert its pull on the nation&rsquo;s attention, Mr. Rhodes said Mr. Obama also was expected to speak with Mr. Hu and with Russia&rsquo;s president, Dmitri A. Medvedev, about the recent report of the International Atomic Energy Agency on evidence pointing to an Iranian nuclear weapons program.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta paved the way for Mr. Obama in trips to Asia last month. Mr. Panetta, there after Mr. Obama announced all troops would be out of Iraq by the year&rsquo;s end, said the United States was at &ldquo;a turning point.&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s recent long essay in Foreign Policy magazine was read as the fullest statement yet of American aspirations in the region and for rebalancing foreign policy after 10 years and 3 wars in the Middle East.        

Michael J. Green, an Asia expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said the president&rsquo;s trip &ldquo;comes at a point when the American elite, at least, and I think the American public is really focused on Asia.&rdquo; Mr. Green cited a recent poll for the Chicago Council on Global Affairs that for the first time showed that Americans, by a wide margin, consider Asia the most important part of the world for the United States.        

On Saturday, Mr. Obama will meet with eight other leaders in what they are calling the Trans-Pacific Partnership for expanded trade. Neither China nor Japan is included. China is watching warily, given the group&rsquo;s talk of rules against government subsidies of state-owned companies.        

On Sunday, Mr. Obama is to host the annual Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, known as APEC, with leaders of 21 economies on both sides of the Pacific, including Canada and Mexico. Mr. Obama chose Honolulu, his birthplace, as the site &ldquo;to highlight America&rsquo;s position as a Pacific nation,&rdquo; the White House said.        
