
GUANGZHOU, China        

AS the powerful Communist Party chief of Guangdong Province waited in an ornate conference room last week for the arrival of the new American ambassador, Gary Locke, the banter with his aides naturally turned to Mr. Locke&rsquo;s Chinese roots. Mr. Locke had stopped in Guangzhou to talk to the party chief, Wang Yang, en route to a visit to his ancestral village.        

Mr. Wang put a quick end to that topic. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s no hometown folk,&rdquo; he told aides as they shifted in a reception line. &ldquo;He should clearly realize he is an American.&rdquo;        

Just a few months ago, some Chinese media outlets were offering Mr. Locke as a role model for China&rsquo;s stuffy political leaders &mdash; an American bigwig who flew economy class and shunned having a retinue of underlings, like those who attend to the needs of politicians here.        

As Mr. Wang&rsquo;s remark suggests, those days are over. Propaganda authorities, apparently worried that Mr. Locke makes Chinese leaders look out of touch, have imposed restrictions on media coverage of Mr. Locke, the former two-term governor of Washington State and commerce secretary, and the first Chinese-American ambassador here.        

Some news organizations have even suggested in commentaries that his man-of-the-people style is an act, an American plot to stir citizens&rsquo; resentment of their own leaders.        

Two Chinese journalists covering Mr. Locke&rsquo;s visit last week to Guangzhou and his ancestral village said propaganda officials had issued a directive not to &ldquo;hype&rdquo; the trip. That meant that they would write straightforward articles of about 1,000 Chinese characters and that their work would be kept off newspaper front pages.        

&ldquo;They don&rsquo;t like him,&rdquo; one reporter, who insisted on anonymity, said of the propaganda authorities. &ldquo;They think he is too high-profile and he is embarrassing Chinese leaders.&rdquo;        

But somehow, the word has not gotten to ordinary Chinese.        

As Mr. Locke traveled on Nov. 4 to his ancestral village, Jilong, a cluster of gray-brick homes two and a half hours from this provincial capital, hundreds of people gathered on the streets of the city of Taishan, to watch as he stopped at a local kindergarten and &mdash; if they were lucky &mdash; to have their picture taken with him.        

Mr. Locke was typically obliging about posing for snapshots. &ldquo;He likes to be with common people,&rdquo; said Wu Qiang, a 35-year-old factory worker, as he waited patiently for the ambassador&rsquo;s motorcade. &ldquo;He has Chinese blood, but American characteristics.&rdquo;        

Taishan, a spawning ground for hundreds of thousands of Chinese immigrants to the United States, seems to be the rule, not the exception. Three months into Mr. Locke&rsquo;s tenure in China, his popularity among the masses separates him from his predecessors.        

His immediate predecessor, Jon M. Huntsman Jr., although steeped in China policy and, unlike Mr. Locke, able to converse in Mandarin, never generated such hoopla. Nor did those before him.        

As Mr. Locke touched down in Beijing in August, Chinese microblogs were buzzing with reports about how he had bought his own coffee, carried his own backpack, hauled his own luggage and traveled in an ordinary vehicle instead of a limousine.        

Ordinary Chinese continue to be fascinated by reports of Mr. Locke and his family waiting in line for an hour to catch a cable car while visiting the Great Wall or flying economy class. Coach plane travel, the ambassador has repeatedly explained, is United States government policy.        

In no small part, Chinese are riveted &mdash; and proud &mdash; that one of their own has joined the ranks of the powerful in a nation they still regard with respect. Mr. Locke makes the most of this anyone-can-succeed-in-America narrative.        

His grandfather left Jilong village for the United States in the 1880s, washing dishes and mopping floors in exchange for English lessons, and brought his children and relatives over to America one by one. Mr. Locke says his father, who immigrated at age 12 or 13, worked every day of the year and taught him respect for family, education and hard work.        
Li Bibo contributed research from Guangzhou and Edy Yin from Beijing.
