
ADEN, Yemen &mdash; Yemeni government forces attacked protesters and residential areas on Friday in the southern city of Taiz, killing at least 15 civilians and wounding dozens of others, residents said.        

The assault was the most aggressive by government forces in nearly two months of almost daily fighting in a city that has emerged as a front line in a battle between demonstrators and the government of President Ali Abdullah Saleh, residents said. Mr. Saleh and his allies have shown little tolerance for the uprising in Taiz, where tribesmen have organized an armed rebellion against government forces.        

&ldquo;Today you can only call it a real war against civilians in Taiz, you cannot call it by any other name,&rdquo; said a local doctor, Abdul-Rahim al-Samie, who said that four women and two children were among those killed Friday by gunfire and mortar attacks.        

Shelling from the government, which began early in the morning and continued for several hours, first targeted al-Rawda, a central neighborhood controlled by armed tribesmen loyal to the opposition, residents said.        

Then, antigovernment protesters said, snipers shot directly into a demonstration area from the edge of their encampment immediately after Friday Prayer as thousands came out to participate. Artillery fire from a tank struck the eastern edge of the camp and killed three women.        

Government forces also fired artillery at al-Rawda hospital, used to treat protesters and civilians in the area wounded from government shelling. A video posted on YouTube showed evidence of the damage to the hospital and staff members guiding the wounded out the hospital&rsquo;s main entrance.        

It is unclear what exactly incited the latest outbreak of violence. In the past, the government has lashed out after the armed tribesmen attacked a government building, vehicle or roadside checkpoint. Typically, government forces would retaliate by shelling a residential neighborhood controlled by opposition groups. Last month, at least 30 civilians were killed in the city.        

A statement on the official Saba news agency Web site said that two soldiers were killed in clashes with armed Islamist groups on Friday, perhaps suggesting the government&rsquo;s motive.        

Taiz, about 160 miles south of the capital, Sana, was once one of Yemen&rsquo;s most peaceful cities. Known for its educated populace, Taiz has emerged as one of the central zones of conflict in Yemen over the past six months. Opposition to President Saleh&rsquo;s government has long been strong in Taiz, and the antigovernment demonstrations have been larger and more organized than those in the capital.        

The government accuses the armed tribesmen, led by the charismatic Sheik Hamoud al-Mikhlafi, of trying to take control of the city. Sheik Mikhlafi maintains that he and his men are protecting Taiz&rsquo;s civilians.        

While the conflict is fierce, it is also at a standoff; as the tribesmen who are well supported by the local people maintain their presence in the city center, the better-armed government forces are in control of high points in and around Taiz.        

The assault on Taiz came as Jamal Benomar, the United Nations special envoy to Yemen, returned to Sana on Thursday as part of the international community&rsquo;s latest attempt to facilitate an accord between Yemen&rsquo;s governing party and opposition leaders. The international community is hoping that the two sides can reach an agreement that will lead to early elections for the country, as Mr. Saleh has refused to leave office early since the start of antigovernment protests here in February.        
