
MOSCOW &mdash; An attacker described by officials as a jihadist went on a shooting rampage in southern Kazakhstan on Saturday, killing at least seven people and blowing himself up, Kazakh authorities said.        

The violence was the deadliest in a recent spate of small-scale attacks in Kazakhstan, a mostly Muslim former Soviet republic in Central Asia where such bloodshed used to be rare.        

Last week, prosecutors blamed what they said was a recently formed militant group called Jund al-Khilafah for an apparently botched attack in the city of Atyrau that killed only the bomber. Two separate bombings in May also left only the attackers dead. Several police officers have been killed this year in shootouts with people suspected of being militants.        

In Saturday&rsquo;s attack, which occurred in Taraz, a man identified by investigators as M. K. Kariyev first killed two members of the Kazakh security service, a statement on the prosecutor general&rsquo;s Web site said. The attacker raided a weapons store around 11:30 a.m., killing a guard and a customer, before making off with two semiautomatic rifles and ammunition, the statement said.        

The suspect then killed two police officers who were pursuing him and took their weapons, including an assault rifle. He commandeered a car, and then went home and picked up a grenade launcher before attacking the regional headquarters of the National Security Committee. He was quickly surrounded by the police and wounded, evidently in a shootout.        

When the police tried to disarm the suspect, &ldquo;He blew himself up, killing a police commander, Captain G. Baitasov,&rdquo; the deputy prosecutor general, Nurmakhanbet Isayev, said in televised remarks.        

Witnesses told Russian television that the suspect appeared to be an ethnic Kazakh, and that he was specifically targeting the police.        

Amateur video from the scene uploaded to YouTube showed columns of police officers marching through the city and at least one uniformed police officer lying in a pool of blood.        

&ldquo;It is complete chaos in the city,&rdquo; one witness told Russia&rsquo;s NTV television. &ldquo;People are scared to leave their houses.&rdquo;        

Officials in Kazakhstan, a regional power rich in oil reserves, have grown increasingly wary about what they consider a rising threat from Islamist militants. Last month, the country&rsquo;s autocratic president, Nursultan Nazarbayev, signed a law toughening restrictions on religious practice in an effort to stamp out extremism.        

The measure was criticized by human rights groups, which have accused the government of playing up the extremist threat as an excuse to stifle opposition.        

No group immediately took responsibility for Saturday&rsquo;s violence.        

Members of Jund al-Khilafah, which the government said was founded this summer, reportedly vowed to launch attacks in response to new religious restrictions.        
