
Robert A. Scalapino, an eminent scholar of Asian politics who achieved prominence during the Vietnam War for his strong defense of American policy as opposition to it was growing, died Nov. 1 in Oakland, Calif. He was 92.        

The cause was complications of a respiratory infection, the University of California, Berkeley, said. Professor Scalapino taught there from 1949 to 1990 and founded its Institute of East Asian Studies in 1978.        

The author of 39 books on Vietnam, China, Korea, Japan and Taiwan, Professor Scalapino was also editor of Asian Survey, a scholarly publication, from 1962 to 1996 and advised the State Department and other government agencies.        

In 1965, he wound up arguing the Johnson administration&rsquo;s case for escalating the war at what was billed as a national teach-in on Vietnam policy. The event was a debate by a panel before an audience of 5,000 in Washington and more than 100,000 people at more than 100 campuses who had gathered to hear the debate by radio hookups.        

McGeorge Bundy, the national security adviser to President Lyndon B. Johnson, had been scheduled to attend, and many participants had hoped to hear his pro-war views and confront him. When he canceled at the last minute, it fell to Professor Scalapino, who had also been invited to join the panel, to take the lead in defending the White House&rsquo;s policy. He argued that the United States was fighting communism, not Asian nationalism, and that China would regard the United States as a &ldquo;paper tiger&rdquo; if it abandoned the war.        

He continued to make that argument the following year in a long article in The New York Times Magazine. He wrote that the war tested &ldquo;the American capacity to respond to a threat that is important but not terminal.&rdquo;        

His pro-war views were disputed by some academics. In 1967, after he helped write a report with 13 other scholars arguing that the war&rsquo;s prosecution was a &ldquo;moderate&rdquo; course, four professors at the University of Pennsylvania wrote a letter to The Times saying that &ldquo;destroying a small country&rdquo; was immoral.        

Robert Anthony Scalapino was born Oct. 19, 1919, in Leavenworth, Kan., and spent his teens in Santa Barbara, Calif., where his father taught school. He studied politics, focusing on relations between the United States and Europe, at what is now the University of California, Santa Barbara, graduating in 1940. He earned a master&rsquo;s degree and a Ph.D. from Harvard. His interest in Asia was sparked when he was trained in the Japanese language as a Navy officer in World War II.        

Professor Scalapino became an influential analyst of the Japanese political system. He called it a &ldquo;one-and-a-half party&rdquo; system in which the dominant Liberal Democrats maneuvered with minority parties to govern. His description of present-day China as an &ldquo;authoritarian-pluralist society,&rdquo; one that allows limited rights but not democracy, was widely quoted.        

In the mid-1970s, John K. Fairbank, the eminent sinologist, called Professor Scalapino &ldquo;a leader in the Asian revolution in American thinking.&rdquo;        

Professor Scalapino advised secretaries of state, advocating closer relations with China years before President Richard M. Nixon&rsquo;s historic 1972 visit, and condemning &ldquo;flagrant&rdquo; human rights abuses in Taiwan in the 1960s. In 2002, he worked behind the scenes to arrange for a group of American experts on Korea to visit North Korea. The trip was canceled after President George W. Bush included North Korea in what he called &ldquo;the axis of evil.&rdquo;        

Last year, the National Bureau of Asian Research and the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars created the Scalapino Prize, to be awarded to an outstanding American scholar on Asia.        

His wife of 64 years, the former Dee Jessen, died in 2005, and their daughter Leslie Scalapino died last year. He is survived by his daughters Diane Jablon and Lynne Scalapino; five grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren.        

Professor Scalapino visited the People&rsquo;s Republic of China 62 times, the last when he was 88. He went to Tibet and, with the aid of an oxygen container, rode a yak up a mountain to a Buddhist monastery.        
