
ZAWIYAH, Libya &mdash; Two rival militias fought a sporadic but deadly gun battle just west of Tripoli over the weekend, blocking traffic on the vital coastal road between the Libyan capital and the Tunisian border. The outburst of violence was among the worst to come to light since the killing of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi last month.        

Participants said that as many as 15 people were killed in the shooting along a short stretch of the highway between Tripoli and Zawiyah, a key coastal town to the west. Health officials put the death toll lower, saying perhaps as few as six were killed.        

Lethal rivalries have emerged within the huge population of Libyan fighters who rose up against Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s rule. The poorly trained and only moderately organized militias are often suspicious of one another and are sometimes openly hostile, posing difficult problems for the transitional council now trying to govern the country.        

The uprising to overthrow the Qaddafi family held many of these disparate groups together. Now that the common enemy is vanquished, though, competition for turf, resources and power threatens to pull some of the groups into persistent conflict, as do allegations that some of the armed groups have suspect pasts.        

The risks appear to be intensified by the weakness of the transitional government, which has yet to appoint important ministers or to wield strong influence, much less control, over the militias.        

The clashes over the weekend were between groups from Zawiyah and Warshefana, an area on the outskirts of Tripoli where some residents are accused by former rebels from other areas of continuing to support the old government. During the uprising, pro-Qaddafi officials took reporters to see crowds in Warshefana chanting in support of the former Libyan leader, as well as for tribal autonomy.        

The fighting first broke out last week and erupted again on Saturday afternoon. It was rooted at least in part in a dispute over control of a former Qaddafi military base on the highway. Also at issue were historical boundaries between the communities, some of the gathered fighters said.        

By Saturday evening, as tracer rounds from machine guns could be seen occasionally arcing into the sky, the militia from Zawiyah had sounded a general alarm and flooded the road with hundreds of nervous gunmen. Most were armed only with automatic rifles, but a few trucks mounted with heavy machine guns or rocket launchers could also be seen. The men searched passing cars for weapons and suspicious passengers, and occasionally fired into the air.        

Knots of fighters rushed eastward toward Warshefana in their cars and trucks, but they came under fire and they turned back toward Zawiyah; several were killed. One fighter in retreat expressed dismay and confusion, saying that their opponents were firing at them from hiding places along the road.        

Some of the Zawiyah fighters said their opponents were Qaddafi loyalists, others said they were a rival militia and some were not sure whom they were fighting.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know if they are rebels or Qaddafi guys,&rdquo; a panicked gunmen said as he pulled back from the military base. &ldquo;But they fired an antiaircraft gun at us, and we could not keep going.&rdquo;        

Ambulances periodically rushed by, lights flashing, carrying more wounded. The Zawiyah fighters held up all other traffic on the coastal highway on Saturday, saying the road was too dangerous. &ldquo;The people shooting at us have machine guns and tanks,&rdquo; one of them said, as rumors swept through the milling crowds.        

Heavy rain at night seemed to disperse the fighters and calm the dispute temporarily, and by dawn Sunday, traffic on the highway had resumed. In the afternoon, the fighting flared up once more, then subsided again. It was not clear whether that lull, too, would prove temporary, though political figures appeared eager to assure the nervous nation that it would hold.        

Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, chairman of the Transitional National Council, said he hoped the two sides would reach an agreement that would end the fighting, which he said pitted one group of former rebels against another.        

&ldquo;I want to assure the Libyan people that everything is under control,&rdquo; he said.        

The violence was the latest in a series of relatively small clashes around the country in recent weeks.        

In addition to sitting astride the strategic highway, Zawiyah is the site of the nation&rsquo;s second-largest refinery and oil port, where production was shut down in August and is just beginning to return to normal. No damage or incidents were reported at the oil facility.        

Tensions between Zawiyah and Warshefana have been rising for the last week, after fighters from Zawiyah entered Warshefana to confiscate weapons. Warshefana fighters retaliated by setting up barricades and firing on the coastal highway, the Zawiyah militia said.        

Many of the claims and counterclaims could not be independently confirmed, including reports heard through several of hours of confusion Saturday night that the fighters shooting at the Zawiyah men might be led by Seif el-Islam, one of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons.        

What could be confirmed was grief. At a cemetery in Tripoli, a grave was being dug for Siraj Erteeb, 24, described by friends as an anti-Qaddafi student of economics who did not fight in the revolution but somehow had been killed during the fighting on Saturday.        

&ldquo;He had no relation to any of the militias,&rdquo; said Muad Erfeeb, a friend helping with the digging. &ldquo;But he was killed, and now we wait for his body.&rdquo;        
C .J. Chivers reported from Zawiyah and Tripoli, Libya, and Clifford Krauss reported from Tripoli.
