
One of the top commanders in Iran&rsquo;s ballistic missile program was among those killed Saturday in an explosion at a base for the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, the group said in a statement on Monday.        

The commander, Brig. Gen. Hassan Moghaddam, was killed along with 16 other Revolutionary Guards members Saturday at a military site outside Bidganeh, about 25 miles from Tehran. The Revolutionary Guards, Iran&rsquo;s elite military force, said the explosion was an accident that occurred while soldiers were transporting munitions at what it characterized as a base mostly used as an ammunition depot.        

Iranian officials went to pains to emphasize that the explosion was not sabotage or an attack by one of the insurgent groups it is fighting within its borders. Such groups have been responsible for attacks on Iranian military bases in the past, and the government has accused the United States and Israel of sponsoring the groups in their attempts to destabilize the country.        

Iranian officials did not explain why General Moghaddam was at the site at the time of the explosion. An exiled Iranian dissident group, the Mujaheddeen Khalq, claimed that the base was mostly used as a center for missile development and storage. But that report could not be confirmed. The group, also known as the National Resistance Council of Iran, is classified as a terrorist group by the State Department and has a history of killings and sabotage aimed at overthrowing Iran&rsquo;s Islamic government.        

Under General Moghaddam, Iran&rsquo;s missile program has tested several longer-range designs, including the Shahab-3 missile. According to intelligence estimates, the Shahab-3 is able to reach to 1,250 miles &mdash; far enough to hit Israel, Iran&rsquo;s archenemy, and the Iranian government has emphasized that that is precisely the reason for its development.        

In military parades, the towering missiles have been draped with banners reading &ldquo;Wipe Israel off the map.&rdquo;        

In a report on Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program by the International Atomic Energy Agency, released Tuesday, inspectors suggested that the government was studying how to change the Shahab-3&rsquo;s warhead design to allow it to be used with a nuclear payload.        

For its part, Iran has long maintained that its nuclear program is not geared toward weapons, but rather toward electricity generation.        
