
HONOLULU &mdash; Is the &ldquo;silly shirts&rdquo; photo of Asia-Pacific leaders now history?        

To the chagrin of White House photographers but the relief of the 21 leaders at the annual Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum that took place over the weekend, President Obama, as the host this year, packed away for good the two-decade tradition of having the group pose for a &ldquo;family photo&rdquo; in some garb representative of the host country.        

&ldquo;I got rid of the Hawaiian shirts because I looked at pictures of some of the previous APEC meetings and some of the garb that appeared previously and I thought this might be a tradition that we might want to break,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said during a news conference Sunday. &ldquo;I suggested to leaders, we gave them a shirt and I promise you if they wanted to wear it that would have been fine, but I didn&rsquo;t hear a lot of complaints about breaking precedent.&rdquo;        

There was speculation in recent weeks that Mr. Obama had provided Hawaiian shirts, grass hula skirts or even surfer-dude wet suits representative of his childhood home. That might seem implausible but for the precedents of past summit meetings &mdash; which have included ponchos and what looked like gowns for pregnant bridesmaids.        

Mr. Obama suggested as much two years ago, when it was announced that Hawaii would be the site of the 2011 forum. More recently, a fake White House Web site stoked the speculation by putting three options &mdash; Aloha Attire, Hula Dancer and Wet Suit, modeled by Photoshopped illustrations of the leaders &mdash; to a vote.        

Late Saturday the faux Web site divulged that the winner was... Hula Dancer.        

It was hard to imagine that Mr. Obama &mdash; he of cool reserve, given to unflashy white shirts and plain ties &mdash; would ever submit to such apparel. And indeed, he and the other leaders were photographed together on Sunday in the usual dark business suits and ties, except of course for the only woman in the group, Prime Minister Julia Gillard of Australia.        

The break could well mean the end of the tradition since it actually marks the second consecutive year that the leaders skipped native costumes.        

The tradition started innocently enough in 1993, when the United States last hosted the gathering, in Seattle, and President Bill Clinton distributed bomber jackets for the group shot. Subsequent sartorial highlights included two ponchos &mdash; colorfully striped in Chile and brown in Peru; pastel &ldquo;hanboks&rdquo; in South Korea with bow-like trim that resembled (female) wedding wear; and silk tunics in Vietnam.        

While the so-called &ldquo;silly shirts&rdquo; photos became the defining highlight of APEC meetings, many leaders came to dread them as lending a comic aspect to the proceedings at their expense. The fake White House feature included past photos, saying, &ldquo;As you can see, the APEC leaders clearly enjoy posing for the traditional &lsquo;silly shirts&rsquo; photo and are good sports despite some dubious choices made over the years.&rdquo;        
