
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; South Korea announced on Tuesday that it would hold military talks with North Korea next week, the first inter-Korean dialogue since a deadly artillery exchange in November, and President Lee Myung-bak said for the first time that a summit meeting with Kim Jong-il, the North Korean leader, was a possibility.        

The military talks, to be held at the border village of Panmunjom, were described as &ldquo;low-level and preliminary&rdquo; by a Defense Ministry official in Seoul. The meeting is scheduled for Feb. 8, after this week&rsquo;s Lunar New Year celebrations.        

The principal aim of the talks, the defense official said, will be to prepare an agenda for more substantive discussions about what the South calls &ldquo;provocations&rdquo; by the North &mdash; the artillery barrage that killed four South Koreans on Yeonpyeong Island in November, the sinking of a South Korean warship that killed 46 sailors last March and North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear programs.        

The shelling of the island brought the peninsula to the brink of war, with South Korea holding large live-fire military exercises and North Korea threatening reprisals.        

Since then tempers have cooled, with the North carrying out something of a diplomatic charm offensive, including repeated calls for talks and exchanges with the South.        

&ldquo;Whenever North Koreans committed provocations, they made proposals for inter-Korean talks after a while,&rdquo; Mr. Lee said Tuesday during an interview on a morning television show. &ldquo;Every time they did so, they demanded rice and fertilizer from us.&rdquo;        

Mr. Lee said this &ldquo;typical tactic, overused in the past,&rdquo; would no longer result in aid or concessions from the South.        

He said further talks or any resumption of economic assistance would hinge on a demonstrable change in behavior by the North, adding that the coming military talks would provide North Korea with &ldquo;a good opportunity to show that it is willing to change.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I will see whether North Korea has really changed,&rdquo; Mr. Lee said, suggesting that a cut of 20 percent to 30 percent in the North&rsquo;s military budget would be a welcome sign.        

Mr. Lee has never categorically ruled out the possibility of a meeting with Mr. Kim, but such a meeting would hardly please his conservative political base. Mr. Lee came to power three years ago on a platform that promised a harder line against North Korea.        

But on Tuesday, he said a summit meeting &ldquo;may be politically possible.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;If necessary,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;we will hold a summit.&rdquo;        

The first North-South summit meeting was held in North Korea in June 2000, between Kim Jong-il and the South Korean president at the time, Kim Dae-jung. The only other summit meeting was in October 2007, also in the North, when Kim Jong-il met with Roh Moo-hyun, then South Korea&rsquo;s president.        

The last inter-Korean military talks were held last September. Those discussions, conducted by colonels from both sides, were brief and fruitless.        

South Korea and the United States have said in recent weeks that substantive inter-Korean talks are a prerequisite for any resumption of the six-nation talks aimed at the denuclearization of the North.        

North Korea and China, the North&rsquo;s main ally, have been pressing to resume the talks.        

North and South Korea, China, the United States, Japan and Russia are the participants in the talks, which were suspended in 2009 when North Korea withdrew from the process, expelled United Nations nuclear inspectors and then tested its second atomic device.        
