
ZWICKAU, Germany &mdash; Neo-Nazi terrorists are responsible for a crime wave reaching back more than a decade that includes the murders of at least 10 people, including immigrant shopkeepers and a police officer, German government officials said Sunday. The group is also suspected in more than a dozen bank robberies and a bombing in Cologne, they said.        



Two main suspects in the crimes are dead, apparently suicides. Another surrendered to the police, and a fourth person was arrested Sunday.        

Much of the evidence on the group came from the wreckage of an apartment here in eastern Germany where several of the suspects had been living. In a scene that seemed torn from a suspense thriller, an explosion and fire on Nov. 4 gutted the apartment, apparently an effort by the suspects to cover their tracks. But the police were able to recover a likely murder weapon, along with a gruesome 15-minute propaganda video and other evidence.        

The newsmagazine Der Spiegel published still images from the video, including of the bloody bodies of several victims of what became known as the d&ouml;ner murders &mdash; a reference to the fact that some of the victims were foreign-born food vendors who worked at d&ouml;ner kebab stands.        

The case sent shudders through German society, which has struggled for decades to put the country&rsquo;s Nazi era behind it. The scope of violence ascribed to the neo-Nazis drew comparisons with the left-wing terrorists of the former Red Army Faction, also known as the Baader-Meinhof Gang.        

The killings are signs of &ldquo;a new form of right-wing-extremist terrorism,&rdquo; the country&rsquo;s interior minister, Hans-Peter Friedrich, said at a news conference in Berlin on Sunday. Speaking to reporters in Leipzig on Sunday, Chancellor Angela Merkel said the crimes revealed &ldquo;structures that we never imagined.&rdquo;        

Allegations surfaced Sunday that one or more members of the group, which called itself the National Socialist Underground, may have worked as confidential informants for Germany&rsquo;s domestic intelligence service. Opposition politicians called for a special meeting of the Parliament&rsquo;s intelligence oversight committee to address the matter.        

Reports in the newspaper Bild and elsewhere said that the police had found identification papers with false names, similar to documents that had been given to informants and undercover agents. Officials in the German state of Thuringia said there would be an official investigation.        

The two principal suspects &mdash; Uwe Mundlos and Uwe B&ouml;hnhardt, identified by the police as militant far-right extremists &mdash; apparently killed themselves on Nov. 4 in a recreational vehicle in Eisenach, about 110 miles west of Zwickau. At the scene, the police said they found Heckler & Koch semiautomatic pistols belonging to two officers who were shot in Heilbronn in 2007; one was killed and the other critically wounded.        

The authorities say the group&rsquo;s crimes went far beyond that attack. The men are suspected of committing at least 14 bank robberies, including one in Eisenach the day they died. The group is also suspected of detonating a bomb outside a hairdresser&rsquo;s shop in an immigrant neighborhood of Cologne in 2004, wounding 22 people. The propaganda video includes a photograph of a bomb packed with nails, similar to the one used in Cologne.        

Investigators said Sunday that they were looking at other crimes that might be the work of the group, including a bombing in Saarbr&uuml;cken in March 1999 during an exhibition about the German military during World War II, and another at a Jewish cemetery in Berlin in March 2002. The police are also looking into whether the group may have been behind the killing earlier this month of a man in D&ouml;beln who was selling kebabs.        

The authorities were scrambling to determine whether the known members of the group had connections to other undiscovered criminals, as officials from across the political spectrum demanded to know how the group could have operated undetected for so long.        
Stefan Pauly contributed reporting from Berlin.
