
JERUSALEM &mdash; Israel hopes that a United Nations report released last week cataloging suspect activities in Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program will finally force major countries to make sanctions painful enough that Iran will stop its uranium enrichment program.        

But officials and experts here say that Israel must not be seen as leading that effort, and they acknowledge that when it comes to imposing sanctions, Israel has little influence anyway.        

Where Israel seems to be playing a larger role is in convincing Iran and the West that if no drastic change occurs in the next few months, Israel might be pushed into military action.        

Israel has quietly mobilized diplomats to press for stricter sanctions in foreign capitals.        

Their efforts have been bolstered by a flurry of speculative news reports and leaks about possible plans for an Israeli attack on Iranian nuclear facilities, along with Israel&rsquo;s testing of a ballistic missile this month.        

Whether those reports were intended, in part, to prod Western powers to act is impossible to know. Officials insist that the missile test, on a weekday morning in full view of Tel Aviv commuters on their way to work, had been long planned and was carried out as scheduled.        

Publicly, Israel is keeping a low profile.        

Israel&rsquo;s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, waited until Sunday, five days after the release of the International Atomic Energy Agency report, to make his first public remarks on it.        

&ldquo;The international community must stop Iran&rsquo;s race to arm itself with nuclear weapons, a race that endangers the peace of the entire world,&rdquo; he said at the start of the weekly cabinet meeting, where ministers received a briefing on the report.        

Israeli officials say that a new round of crippling sanctions against Iran could still be effective, even if Russian and Chinese objections preclude a United Nations Security Council resolution. Other nations could still take action to hobble Iran diplomatically, economically and technologically.        

&ldquo;Iran purports to want a regional and global role, and therefore does not want to be isolated and in a box like North Korea,&rdquo; said Jeremy Issacharoff, deputy director general for strategic affairs at Israel&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry.        

Some Israelis have expressed concern that growing international annoyance with Israel over the Palestinian issue and antipathy toward Mr. Netanyahu could make cooperation over Iran more difficult. But Israeli officials say that where Iran is concerned, there is a convergence of understanding and interests. While Israel regards nuclear-armed Iran as potentially an existential threat, it also threatens moderate Arab states and could set off a destabilizing regional arms race.        

Israeli officials consider the next few months crucial. The atomic agency&rsquo;s report said that Iran had worked on experiments with explosives to start a chain reaction that ends in nuclear explosion, that it was working on &ldquo;at least 14 progressive design iterations&rdquo; for an atomic missile warhead, and that it had nearly five metric tons of low-enriched uranium and at least 70 kilograms of 20 percent enriched uranium, enough, experts said, to potentially produce three or four cores for nuclear devices with further enrichment.        

The report did not speculate on the time it would take Iran to produce a nuclear weapon, but Israelis say it shows Iran is moving ever closer to the nuclear threshold while Western powers have been dragging their feet on action to stop it.        

Some experts see the threat of military action as complementary to sanctions. &ldquo;Only a combination of these two conditions might make Iran reconsider,&rdquo; said Ephraim Kam, deputy director of the Institute for National Security Studies at Tel Aviv University.        

While the news reports about Mr. Netanyahu and his defense minister, Ehud Barak, pressing for an Israeli attack were speculative and unverifiable, the possibility that they are true adds to their persuasive power.        

Iran, at least, seems to be taking them seriously.        

Iran&rsquo;s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, warned last week that a military attack would be met with a &ldquo;strong slap and iron fist,&rdquo; suggesting concern among Iranian leaders that the United Nations report could be used as a justification by Israel to bomb Iran.        

A third leg of the efforts against Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program, covert action by Israel and the United States, while known to exist, has also been difficult to verify.        

Most Israeli newspapers did not speculate openly about any possible Israeli involvement in a deadly blast this weekend at an Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps base near Tehran, which Iran said was an accident and not sabotage. But the newspapers added the explosion to a string of explosions, malfunctions and assassinations of Iranian scientists believed to have been involved in Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program, some of which have been attributed to Israel.        

But some experts, including the former Israeli intelligence chief Meir Dagan, have questioned whether military action would be effective. Iran&rsquo;s stated intention to move some of its nuclear activity to an underground facility, largely out of reach of a military attack, could mean the window for such an attack is closing.        

For now, sanctions to force Iran to decide that the effort is not worth the cost are the way forward, Israeli officials and experts say.        

To be effective, according to Ephraim Asculai, an Israeli nuclear expert who worked at the Israel Atomic Energy Commission for more than 40 years and also at the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, sanctions would have to include restrictions on personal travel for all Iranians and on Iranian civilian air traffic, as well as restrictions on the sale of oil distillates, a complete embargo on Western sales of nonhumanitarian goods and equipment to Iran and on dealings with its central bank.        

All that stands between Iran and a nuclear weapon, said Mr. Asculai, now a senior fellow at the Institute for National Security Studies, is a political decision by Iran to further enrich existing stocks of uranium.        

&ldquo;The Iranians have already passed any deadline you can think of,&rdquo; he said. But such draconian sanctions, he added, &ldquo;could prevent Iran from taking the political decision.&rdquo;        
