
HONOLULU &mdash; With the weak domestic economy and his re-election hopes as the backdrop, President Obama made job creation the theme of an annual trade summit meeting on Sunday as the United States, for the first time in nearly two decades, hosted leaders of Pacific Rim nations.        

&ldquo;I want to emphasize that the Asia-Pacific region is absolutely critical to America&rsquo;s economic growth. We consider it a top priority,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said as he opened the daylong meeting near Hawaii&rsquo;s capital. &ldquo;And we consider it a top priority because we&rsquo;re not going to be able to put our folks back to work and grow our economy and expand opportunity unless the Asia-Pacific region is also successful.&rdquo;        

At a press conference after the session ended, Mr. Obama said, &ldquo;No region will do more to shape our long-term economic future.&rdquo;        

Although Mr. Obama&rsquo;s remarks at the opening of the closed-door gathering were directed to the leaders of 20 other economies on both sides of the Pacific Ocean, they were clearly intended as much for American voters.        

Free trade, especially in his Democratic Party but increasingly among Republicans as well, often carries a negative association, evoking notions of American jobs being shipped overseas to lower-wage nations and of unfair competition from countries like China or Japan.        

But Mr. Obama used the annual Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum to promote what he and many economists believe are the benefits of free trade and competition in terms of creating jobs in export industries &mdash; even as he also challenges trading partners, China in particular, to take down barriers to open trade.        

The president will hammer at that jobs theme this week as he continues on his eight-day trip around the Pacific. He goes next to Australia, with which the United States has a trade surplus, and then to Indonesia for meetings with many of the same leaders &mdash; including those from China &mdash; at the East Asia Summit and the gathering of the Association of South East Asian Nations.        

But the president&rsquo;s trip comes at a time when China-bashing &mdash; and criticism of Mr. Obama for not being tough on Beijing &mdash; has become a staple among some Republicans seeking their party&rsquo;s presidential nomination.        

Mr. Obama did not mention China in his opening remarks at the diplomatic roundtable on Sunday. Smaller Asian nations, fearful of China&rsquo;s rising economic and military strength, have welcomed Mr. Obama&rsquo;s signals of greater engagement in their region as a counterbalance to China.        

At the press conference, Mr. Obama said, &ldquo;We welcome the peaceful rise of China. It is in America&rsquo;s interest to see China succeed.&rdquo;        

But he said he also told President Hu Jintao and other Chinese leaders, &ldquo;There are a range of things that they have done that disadvantage not just the United States but a whole host of their trading partners and countries in the region&rdquo; &mdash; in particular, valuing their currency so low that &ldquo;our exports to China are that much more expensive,&rdquo; and failing to protect the intellectual property rights of American exporters.        

Though the meeting, as expected, did not produce significant policy agreements among the trading partners, Mr. Obama described progress in addressing the three areas he set for the agenda: increasing trade and investment, promoting green jobs, and streamlining and coordinating the nations&rsquo; regulations related to commerce and trade.        

The president seeks lower tariffs for green technology, like wind turbines and solar panels. China&rsquo;s tariffs on American products and state subsidies for its companies are a major dispute between the two nations; China has come to dominate the global green-technology sector while American companies have struggled or gone bankrupt &mdash; including, notably, Solyndra, the subject of an investigation by Congressional Republicans for the loans it received from the Obama administration.        

The 21 members of the group are described as economies rather than nations because they include Taiwan, which China claims as its own, and Hong Kong, which is now part of China.        

Because the forum mainly deals with trade relations rather than regional security issues, Mr. Obama as host was eager to have Congress&rsquo;s approval beforehand for three free-trade pacts with South Korea, Colombia and Panama that had languished since the Bush administration &mdash; largely because of opposition from Democrats, including Mr. Obama.        

But he won changes from the other nations on labor and environmental provisions, and Congress recently approved all three, giving Mr. Obama boasting rights in time for the meeting.        
