
BOYNUYOGUN, Turkey &mdash; The Turkish government describes the refugee camp here as a &ldquo;temporary residence&rdquo; for the country&rsquo;s Syrian guests, but very little about it looks temporary.        

Erected only four months ago on agricultural land, Boynuyogun camp is lined with paved roads and sidewalks of neatly interlocking cobblestones. Young people play on three broad, pebble-strewn sports fields, where on a recent day uniformed Turkish soldiers hit a volleyball back and forth with laughing children.        

A row of free phones stands near the camp entrance, and even the tents, arranged in neat columns, have electric lighting. There is a well-staffed field hospital and a tent schoolhouse adorned with colorful construction-paper projects made by kindergartners and equipped with a computer lab and a faculty conference room.        

More than 19,000 Syrians have fled to Turkey since a brutal crackdown on antigovernment protests hit northern Syria in June. Today more than 7,600 of them live in Turkish government-sponsored camps. As the government of President Bashar al-Assad steps up its violent crackdown in Syria despite international condemnation, the refugees here appear to be settling in for what may be a long stay.        

&ldquo;If there is safety, we will go home, but why should we go back there to die?&rdquo; said Muhammad Haji Hassan, 62, who said he saw dead bodies lying in the street on the June day he fled Jisr al-Shoughour with 18 family members. &ldquo;I cannot go home until Bashar is dead. In Syria we don&rsquo;t have a government; we have a gang. If it was a real government, it would not be killing its own people.&rdquo;        

Turkish officials say they are prepared to continue offering humanitarian assistance as long as it is needed, but say that over half of all refugees have since gone home.        

Turkey has spent at least $15 million setting up and maintaining six camps (five for civilians and one for military defectors) in the last six months, say officials, who bristle at the description of their charges as &ldquo;refugees.&rdquo; They insist that the Syrians are &ldquo;guests&rdquo; who will return home once the uprising in Syria has run its course.        

Turkey&rsquo;s role in taking in refugees, along with its public criticism of Mr. Assad and its allowing Syrian opposition, including both the Syrian National Council, a political group, and the Free Syrian Army, an antigovernment militia, to organize here, have plunged relations between Turkey and Syria to their lowest point in years.        

These tensions boiled over on Saturday, when pro-government mobs attacked the Turkish Embassy and consulates in Syria. That same day, the Arab League voted to suspend Syria&rsquo;s membership, citing continued violence against civilians and the government&rsquo;s failure to follow through on a peace plan it agreed to on Nov. 2.        

But life in Boynuyogun, amid fallow cotton fields in the shadow of blue mountains, feels a world away from the escalating violence in Syria.        

Most of the refugees here came from the northern Syrian town of Jisr al-Shoughour in June, when battles between security forces and a militia of residents and army defectors provoked a crushing government crackdown. In Boynuyogun, even as they are haunted by their memories of the carnage at home and anxious about a future that feels unmoored, they have found a measure of order and safety.&nbsp;        

&ldquo;Here I can zip my tent closed at night and know I can sleep safely,&rdquo; said Muhammad Hejazi, a horticulturist who came here with 26 family members. &ldquo;In Syria you could lock your door, then lock another door, then lock a steel door, and the security forces could still kick it down and take you away.&rdquo;        

No one knows for sure when or if the Syrian refugees will go home, but for many the prospect of returning is at best a long-term ambition.        

&ldquo;We love our country, and we are very scared for it,&rdquo; said Mr. Hejazi, who is now a leader of sorts here, part of a seven-member council elected by the camp&rsquo;s 1,450 residents. &ldquo;We just want our rights, democracy and freedom, like in Egypt and Libya. We cannot go back until we have them. I just do not know when that will be.&rdquo;        

Since March, Syria has been gripped by a widespread protest movement against the government of Mr. Assad, whose family has ruled with an iron fist for four decades.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Some protesters and army defectors have taken up arms against the state, which has responded with brutal assaults, particularly in the central Syrian city of Homs. Few refugees here admit to having organized protests or having led antigovernment activities, but many fear their flight to Turkey has marked them as enemies of the state in the eyes of the Assad government.        

Scarred by the violence they have witnessed and convinced their country will see only more fighting, most say they cannot imagine returning home until the government has fallen. That does not appear likely in the near future.        

The United Nations estimates that more than 3,500 people have died since the uprising began. A total of 24,000 refugees are estimated to have fled to neighboring Lebanon and Turkey.        

This month, a Syrian official and witnesses said that Syria had begun planting land mines along the border with Lebanon to prevent the flow of arms into the country, which the government says are going to antigovernment fighters, The Associated Press reported.        

Most Syrians who remain in Turkey largely take it as an article of faith that a terrible fate awaits anyone who returns. Almost every refugee, it seems, knows someone who went back to Syria only to be arrested or shot soon after crossing the border.        

Walid, 60, who gave only one name for fear of government retribution, told of the death of Alaa Soufan, a 23-year-old relative, shot in the head by a sniper 200 yards after crossing the border on his way home to the coastal town of Latakia. Villagers in the border town of Gorentas, interviewed this month, recounted the same story.        

Walid, a former political prisoner from the border village of Khirbet al-Jouz, said that members of the security forces appeared to be squatting in his home.        

&ldquo;I saw my house through binoculars from a village on the Turkish side of the border, and there were soldiers sitting on my roof,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I couldn&rsquo;t believe it. I can&rsquo;t go home as long as they are in my house.&rdquo;        
