
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Despite criticism from neighboring countries, threats from the Taliban and calls for a boycott from some political opponents, President Hamid Karzai has called a loya jirga, the traditional grand council of Afghan elders and leaders, in an attempt to gain popular support for a long-term partnership with the United States, Afghan officials and analysts say.        

Even before the jirga&rsquo;s opening, set for Wednesday, it is being clouded by doubt and confusion &mdash; much of it sown by Mr. Karzai himself.        

His public statements about the United States have grown more hostile in recent months, including a statement several weeks ago in which he suggested that if Pakistanis were to go to war with the Americans, he would actually ally himself with Islamabad.        

That in particular seemed a contrary message to be sending while intense negotiations were under way to persuade the United States to keep troops and military trainers for 10 years beyond the Obama administration&rsquo;s 2014 withdrawal deadline, and while also asking for help in paying for the Afghan security forces.        

Afghan officials affirmed, however, that Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s overarching goal is to obtain an agreement with the Americans, not least because he knows that his fate is closely tied to their military presence and aid.        

Mr. Karzai must overcome the resistance of Americans facing both budget pressures and public exhaustion with a war that is entering its second decade. He must also counter intensifying opposition from the governments of Pakistan and Iran, which have their own ambitions in Afghanistan and distrust the United States.        

Some Afghan officials say that the four- or five-day jirga, to which 2,030 delegates have been invited, is vital to building domestic political support for keeping the American military here for an extra decade, so that he can tell his opponents that he is in the talks at the behest of the Afghan people.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s so much opposition to this partnership with the United States from our neighbors,&rdquo; said an Afghan government official who is knowledgeable about the negotiations and spoke on the condition of anonymity because of diplomatic concerns. &ldquo;So this jirga is so the president can show that the people of Afghanistan want this.&rdquo;        

The jirga will also discuss how to bring about peace with the Taliban in the wake of the assassination of the head of the government-sponsored High Peace Council, Burhanuddin Rabbani, in September.        

However, the council&rsquo;s planners have been vague about its full agenda, and there may be other goals. Some Afghan analysts suggest that Mr. Karzai wants an endorsement for specific requirements for the strategic partnership with United States.        

These include demands that the agreement be binding, that all detention operations be turned over rapidly to the Afghan government, and that military night raids, which are central to American counterinsurgency tactics but a driving instigator of domestic outrage, be conducted only by Afghan forces.        

An Afghan analyst who asked not to be named because he is close to the government of Mr. Karzai acknowledged the uncertainty of the jirga&rsquo;s purposes. &ldquo;It is not clear the president has decided what he wants to use it for, but he&rsquo;s spent money, he&rsquo;s invited people, they are on their way and he&rsquo;s played it up,&rdquo; the analyst said.        

There is even confusion about what kind of jirga is being held this week and whether its decisions will have any legal weight. There are consultative jirgas, like the 2010 peace jirga that sought to bring the Taliban into negotiations with the government. There are emergency jirgas, like the one in 2002 to seek direction after the Taliban&rsquo;s ouster from power. And there are constitutional councils, required to enact lasting legal changes.        

The jirga to begin Wednesday is being called &ldquo;traditional,&rdquo; bypassing the usual classifications and clouding its legal mandate.        

That imprecision has alarmed both Western diplomats and members of Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s opposition, who fear it may allow the council to veer off course. One specific concern is that it will present an opening for a constitutional change that would allow Mr. Karzai to run for a third term.        

&ldquo;Its goals are entirely confusing,&rdquo; said Abdullah Abdullah, who ran unsuccessfully against Mr. Karzai in the 2009 presidential election and who held a news conference on Sunday about the coming meeting. &ldquo;It has secret goals. Its decisions, whatever decisions it would make, would not be acceptable for the people of Afghanistan.&rdquo;        
Sangar Rahimi contributed reporting.
