
LONDON &mdash;As a government-commissioned inquiry into Britain&rsquo;s journalistic practices opened on Monday, its chief lawyer delivered a series of bombshell revelations about what he called a &ldquo;thriving cottage industry&rdquo; of illegality at the defunct News of the World tabloid.        

In addition, said the chief lawyer, Robert Jay, police evidence showed that hacking was not limited to The News of the World, which was summarily closed by its owner, Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s News Corporation, in July. Instead, he said, two other tabloids &mdash; the Murdoch-owned Sun, and The Daily Mirror, owned by the Trinity Mirror Group &mdash; had also illegally intercepted people&rsquo;s voice-mail messages, employing the same private investigator as The News of the World.        

But those papers&rsquo; potential malfeasance appears to have paled beside that of The News of the World, according to Mr. Jay, chief counsel to the investigation, the Leveson Inquiry, a far-reaching examination into the practices and regulation of the British news media.        

Mr. Jay said that 11,000 pages in notebooks belonging to the private investigator, Glenn Mulcaire, reveal that he conducted 2,266 investigations on behalf of at least 28 different employees of News International, the British newspaper arm of News Corporation, over several years. Four of those employees &mdash; listed in the notebooks under various code letters &mdash; apparently commissioned 2,143 of those investigations. The most prolific of the four commissioned 1,453 alone.        

Until early this year, executives at News International repeatedly told the police, Parliament and other news media outlets that phone hacking was limited to a single &ldquo;rogue reporter&rdquo; at The News of the World. That was Clive Goodman, the paper&rsquo;s royal correspondent, who was jailed in 2007, along with Mr. Mulcaire, for intercepting voice-mail messages of members of the royal household.        

But the information from Mr. Mulcaire&rsquo;s notebooks, seized by the police in 2006, contradicts News International&rsquo;s claim, Mr. Jay said, suggesting instead a pattern of &ldquo;wide-ranging illegal acts within the organization.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;It is clear that Goodman was not a rogue reporter,&rdquo; he said. He added: &ldquo;Aside from the number of individuals potentially inculpated, we also have evidence of a significant quantity of illegal activity over a relatively lengthy time period. There are a number of ways in which this activity might collectively be characterized. I suggest that it would not be unfair to comment that it was, at the very least, a thriving cottage industry.&rdquo;        

Mr. Jay said that a total of 690 audio tapes were seized from Mr. Mulcaire&rsquo;s office, along with records of 586 recordings of voice-mail messages intended for 64 different people. The notebooks listed a total of 5,795 names of people who could be potential victims of phone hacking.        

He also said that the inquiry had seen documents suggesting that phones were being hacked as early as May 2001 &mdash; at least a year earlier than previously disclosed &mdash; and that the practice continued until 2009, two years after Mr. Goodman and Mr. Mulcaire were jailed.        

The inquiry, led by Lord Justice Leveson, is one of three started since The Guardian newspaper disclosed in July that The News of the World had illegally hacked into the phone of a murdered teenager, Milly Dowler, in 2002, while she was missing but before her body had been found. The disclosure caused a wave of revulsion and led, ultimately, to the closing of The News of the World, the resignation of top officials at News International and the Metropolitan Police Service, the withdrawal of News Corporation&rsquo;s $12 billion bid to acquire the satellite company British Sky Broadcasting, and the dissolution of the close ties between News Corporation and the British political establishment.        

Other investigations are being conducted by the police and by a parliamentary panel, which last week interviewed James Murdoch, News Corporation&rsquo;s deputy chief operating officer and a son of Rupert Murdoch, for the second time since July. James Murdoch told the panel that no one had ever told him about the extent of the hacking at The News of the World &mdash; not even in 2008, when he agreed to authorize a payment of more than $1 million to settle a lawsuit brought by a hacking victim, Gordon Taylor, against The News of the World.        

On Monday, Mr. Jay said that one of the questions at hand was how high up in News International &ldquo;the metaphorical buck stops.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Is there a culture of denial &mdash; or even worse, a cover-up &mdash; at News International?&rdquo; he asked.        

The Leveson inquiry will examine the relationship between privacy and freedom of the press, the newspapers&rsquo; code of conduct and whether Britain&rsquo;s self-regulating news media should have governmental oversight.        

In his opening remarks, Justice Leveson said that his team would monitor news coverage in the next months to ensure that no one speaking at the inquiry would be threatened by or punished in the news media. In the past, Britain&rsquo;s tabloids have made it standard practice to print damaging articles about their critics and those who refused to cooperate with them.        

Among the likely witnesses are 46 celebrities, politicians, sports stars and other public figures who have complained about media intrusion. They include J. K. Rowling, author of the Harry Potter books; the actors Hugh Grant and Sienna Miller; and a number of lawmakers, including Lord Prescott, former deputy leader of the Labour Party.        

One of the issues the judge will consider is the ties between politicians and the news media &mdash; particularly the erstwhile coziness between lawmakers and News International.        

The inquiry is scheduled to fall into two parts, the first a general review of media culture and ethics. The second, into illegal activity, is meant to begin only when the police investigations and potential prosecutions are finished.        

So far, 16 people have been arrested in the phone hacking inquiry, including Andy Coulson, the former editor of The News of the World and the former chief spokesman for Prime Minister David Cameron.        

Earlier this month, a journalist at The Sun was arrested on suspicion of making illegal payments to police officers, the first sign that the scandal had spread beyond The News of the World.        
Alan Cowell contributed reporting.
