
MOSCOW &mdash; A Russian Soyuz rocket blasted off through heavy snowfall in Kazakhstan on Monday morning, beginning a two-day trip to ferry three astronauts to the International Space Station. The flight opens a new era of American dependence on Russia, and eventually on commercial enterprises, for manned space travel, after the end of NASA&rsquo;s space shuttle program in July.        

The rocket launch went off smoothly at 10:14 a.m. from the Baikonur Cosmodrome, carrying an American, Daniel C. Burbank, and two Russians, Anton N. Shkaplerov and Anatoly A. Ivanishin, on the first trip into orbit by astronauts since the final shuttle flight in July.        

The Soyuz TMA-22 capsule is scheduled to dock at the space station on Wednesday morning, in time to relieve the crew of three who have been there since June and are due to return to Earth next week.        

Still, what might have been a triumphal year for the Russian space program &mdash; 50 years after Yuri Gagarin became the first human to go into space &mdash; has been scarred by mishaps and mission failures, which had raised the possibility, now averted, that the space station would be left unstaffed for the first time in more than a decade.        

The Soyuz mission was originally scheduled for September, but was delayed after an unmanned Russian cargo rocket similar to the one used for manned flights failed in August. NASA officials said before the launch on Monday that they were confident that their Russian counterparts had identified and corrected the problems.        

In August, a different Russian rocket also failed, putting a communication satellite in an incorrect orbit. And in a separate mishap last week, a Russian spacecraft that was intended to explore Phobos, one of Mars&rsquo;s two moons, got only as far as low-Earth orbit, where its engines failed to fire.        

The stalled probe, Phobos-Grunt, could end up &ldquo;flying inclusively until January,&rdquo; and then re-enter the Earth&rsquo;s atmosphere and explode, Vladimir Popovkin, the director of the Russian space agency, told reporters on Monday. Mr. Popovkin said that officials would continue to try to make contact with the probe, and that there was still a chance that control could be re-established and the mission resumed.        

He said that Russia would not be deterred by the setback, noting that numerous attempts by various countries to send probes toward Mars had met with glitches or failures. &ldquo;Mars doesn&rsquo;t like Earthlings,&rdquo; Mr. Popovkin said, the Interfax News Agency reported.        

Video images from the Baikonur Cosmodrome on Monday showed the Soyuz astronauts in blue parkas on their way to board the rocket as snowflakes swirled in a blustery wind. The white snowscape around the launch pad briefly glowed bright orange as the countdown hit zero, the boosters fired and the gray rocket quickly accelerated to more than 3,000 miles per hour for a smooth launch into space.        

In the capsule&rsquo;s close quarters, the astronauts had hung a stuffed Angry Bird toy &mdash; a character from the video game. For the first two minutes and six seconds of the flight, the red bird could be seen hanging straight down, demonstrating the pull of Earth&rsquo;s gravity. Then, as the manned capsule separated from the rocket booster, the bird started to bob upward. &ldquo;As you can see from the Angry Bird floating up above Shkaplerov,&rdquo; an announcer narrated helpfully on NASA-TV, &ldquo;the crew has reached orbit.&rdquo;        

Mr. Burbank, a space flight veteran, will take charge of the space station, and the current commander, Michael Fossum, an American, and two flight engineers, Satoshi Furukawa of Japan and Sergei Volkov of Russia, are scheduled to return to Earth on Nov. 22. Another crew of three astronauts is scheduled to travel to the space station on Dec. 21.        

In addition to carrying out dozens of scientific experiments, the newly arrived space station team will inaugurate the new era of commercial space expeditions, including the launch of a Falcon 9 rocket, built by Space Exploration Technologies Corporation of Hawthorne, Calif., known as SpaceX, to deliver supplies to the station using a reusable capsule called a Dragon.        

Another commercial resupply ship being built by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Va., is expected to make the trip to the station next year, NASA said.        
