
CAIRO &mdash; President Hosni Mubarak declared Tuesday night that he would step down in September as modern Egypt&rsquo;s longest-serving leader, but that did not go far enough for the hundreds of thousands who poured into Tahrir Square in a sprawling protest that cut across entrenched lines of piety, class and ideology.        

Hours later, President Obama strongly suggested that Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s concession was not enough, declaring that an &ldquo;orderly transition must be meaningful, it must be peaceful, and it must begin now.&rdquo;        

While the meaning of the last phrase was deliberately vague, it appeared to be a signal that Mr. Mubarak might not be able to delay the process or manipulate the results.        

In a 30-minute phone call to Mr. Mubarak just before his public remarks, Mr. Obama was more forceful in insisting on a rapid transition, according to officials familiar with the discussion.        

The announcement in a 10-minute speech by Mr. Mubarak came after his support from the powerful Egyptian military began to crumble and after American officials urged him not to run again for president.        

Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s offer, which fell short of the crowd&rsquo;s demands for him to step down now and even face trial, could well inflame passions in an uprising that has rivaled some of the most epic moments in Egypt&rsquo;s contemporary history. The protests have captivated a broader Arab world that has already seen a leader fall in Tunisia this month and growing protests against other American-backed governments.        

Mr. Mubarak, 82, said he would remain in office until a presidential election in September and, in emotional terms, declared that he would never leave Egypt.        

&ldquo;The Hosni Mubarak who speaks to you today is proud of his achievements over the years in serving Egypt and its people,&rdquo; he said, wearing a dark suit and seeming vigorous in the speech broadcast on state television. &ldquo;This is my country. This is where I lived, I fought and defended its land, sovereignty and interests, and I will die on its soil.&rdquo;        

In Tahrir Square, crowds waved flags as the speech was televised on a screen in the square. &ldquo;Leave!&rdquo; they chanted, in what has become a refrain of the demonstrations.        

&ldquo;There is nothing now the president can do except step down and let go of power,&rdquo; said Mohammed el-Beltagui, a leader of the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt&rsquo;s most powerful opposition group, which has entered forcefully into the fray with Mr. Mubarak. Those sentiments were echoed by other voices of the opposition, including Mohamed ElBaradei, a Nobel laureate, and Ayman Nour, a longtime dissident.        

The speech and the demonstration, whose sheer numbers represented a scene rarely witnessed in the Arab world, illustrated the deep, perhaps unbridgeable, divide that exists between ruler and ruled in Egypt, the most populous Arab country and once the axis on which the Arab world revolved.        

The events here have reverberated across a region captivated by an uprising that in some ways has brought a new prestige to Egypt in an Arab world it once dominated culturally and politically. King Abdullah II of Jordan fired his cabinet after protests there on Tuesday, and the Palestinian cabinet in the West Bank said it would hold long-promised municipal elections &ldquo;as soon as possible.&rdquo; Organizers in Yemen and Syria, countries with their own authoritarian rulers, have called for protests this week.        

In his speech, Mr. Mubarak was pugnacious, accusing protesters of sowing chaos and political forces here of adding &ldquo;fuel to the fire.&rdquo; He fell back to the refrain that has underlined his three decades in power &mdash; security and stability &mdash; and vowed that he would spend his remaining months restoring calm.        

&ldquo;The events of the past few days impose on us, both citizens and leadership, the choice between chaos and stability,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I am now absolutely determined to finish my work for the nation in a way that ensures its safekeeping.&rdquo;        

American officials were clearly disappointed by Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s effort to stay in office for the next eight months, but Mr. Obama, saying, &ldquo;It is not the role of any other country to determine Egypt&rsquo;s leaders,&rdquo; stopped short of demanding that Mr. Mubarak leave office immediately.        

But if Mr. Obama pushed Mr. Mubarak, he did not shove him, at least in his public remarks. He commended the Egyptian military for its &ldquo;professionalism and patriotism&rdquo; in refusing to use force against the protesters, comments that clearly undercut Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s efforts to maintain control. He praised the protesters for their peaceful action, and he reinforced that &ldquo;the status quo is not sustainable.&rdquo;        

Mr. Obama was clearly hopeful that Mr. Mubarak would decide to leave office sooner. But he warned there would be &ldquo;difficult days ahead,&rdquo; a clear signal that he expected the transition period to be lengthy, and messy.        
Reporting was contributed by David D. Kirkpatrick, Kareem Fahim and Liam Stack from Cairo; Nicholas Kulish from Alexandria, Egypt; and David E. Sanger from Washington.
