
LONDON &mdash; The news reached London as the first dim glimmers of dawn crested the great dome of St. Paul&rsquo;s Cathedral.        

In the sprawling pup tents that constitute the base camp for Occupy London, anti-capitalist protesters who kept vigil through the night learned from their smartphones and laptops that the police had begun dismantling the camp in New York&rsquo;s Zuccotti Park known as Occupy Wall Street. The New York camp was the template for the London protest and scores like it around the world.        

Clustering in the tented canteens that serve the bowls of gruel and mugs of coffee that have become the daily menu for many of the London protesters, residents of the 200 tents that curve alongside St. Paul&rsquo;s and onto its iconic forecourt commiserated with their counterparts in New York and other American cities where municipal authorities have uprooted the protest encampments.        

After a meeting on the cathedral&rsquo;s steps of the free-for-all governing body for the London protest, a group of Americans from the encampment took the subway to Grosvenor Square, site of the American Embassy. There, flourishing their passports, the Americans unfurled a banner that read &ldquo;They cannot evict an idea.&rdquo; They met briefly with embassy officials, who reminded them that the evictions in New York and Oakland were local, not federal, matters.        

&ldquo;What they got was a lecture on the workings of American federalism,&rdquo; said Naomi Colvin, a British literary agent who accompanied the Americans. Ms. Colvin is among the hundreds of people who have gathered at the St. Paul&rsquo;s site, many of them unemployed but many others on leave from regular jobs.        

On Tuesday, the protesters here marked the passage of a month since, barred by the police from their initial plan to set up in a square front of the London Stock Exchange, they defaulted to their second-choice site, 100 yards away beside St. Paul&rsquo;s.        

But any impulse to celebrate the camp&rsquo;s continued existence was muted by an announcement on Tuesday by the City of London, the governing body for the capital&rsquo;s financial district, that it was resuming legal action to evict the protesters.        

The tented city at St. Paul&rsquo;s falls within the so-called Square Mile along the north bank of the Thames that constitutes London&rsquo;s equivalent of Wall Street. The cathedral, heavily endowed by the titans of British finance and regarded by them as something of a parish church, lies only a catapult&rsquo;s sling from many of the financial district&rsquo;s most powerful institutions, including the Bank of England.        

The governing body&rsquo;s statement gave no hint that it had been encouraged by the events in the United States. But it was imbued with a similar tone of distaste and urgency for a return to business-as-usual that marked pronouncements by opponents of the Occupy Wall Street protest in New York. The London camp, City officials said in their statement, was disrupting local businesses, blocking pedestrians, and causing &ldquo;quite a lot of mess.&rdquo;        

Still, the move came as a surprise. After saying in late October that it planned to go to court for an eviction order, it shifted its position, saying it would &ldquo;pause&rdquo; its plans to allow for negotiations over the camp&rsquo;s future among the protesters, city officials and representatives of St. Paul&rsquo;s.        

That led protest leaders to say they were confident of maintaining the encampment at the St. Paul&rsquo;s site into 2012, and to hint that a negotiated solution could lead to the parties settling on a date sometime in late winter or early spring for a voluntary dismantling of the camp.        

At least until the new threat of legal action, the London protesters &mdash; a dizzying assembly of libertarians and anarchists, Christian fundamentalists and Marxists, conspiracy theorists and individuals who appear mostly to be drawn by the daily camaraderie of camp life &mdash; had begun to see their presence at St. Paul&rsquo;s&nbsp;as a victory in the struggle against what they describe as the greed and exploitation of global capitalism.        

Within days of setting up the camp, they drew&nbsp;adversaries from among many of the most powerful people in Britain, from politicians like Prime Minister David Cameron and the London mayor, Boris Johnson, who supported legal moves for their eviction, to bankers and financiers who saw the camp as a threat to London&rsquo;s appeal as a financial center.        
(Page 2 of 2)
But the protesters&nbsp;found allies to match the establishment forces. A rancorous debate within the Church of England has had hard-liners&nbsp;retreating in the face of a powerful group of liberal theologians led by the archbishop of Canterbury, Most Rev. Rowan Williams, who have argued for an acceptance of the protesters and their cause. The liberals have seen the protest&nbsp;as an opportunity to steer the church toward a renewed embrace of Gospel teachings on social justice.        

The City of London said that obtaining a court order for eviction was &ldquo;likely to take weeks.&rdquo; It also said that &ldquo;no enforcement action would take place without further consultation.&rdquo; Letters will be delivered to the protesters on Wednesday, it said, asking them to clear the encampment; if these were ignored, it said, the eviction process would resume.        

Some protesters saw the threat of legal action as a tactic to prod them into negotiating a voluntary departure. Since the authorities backed away from the threat of imminent legal action two weeks ago, there have been signs that camp leaders have been laying plans for a much longer stay, possibly one that would make the camp a permanent feature of London life.        

Sturdier tents have been moved onto the site, and two canteens have been extended. A large Mongolian-style yurt has arrived, with camp residents saying it will help sustain the protest through what meteorologists say could be a severe winter. The chaos of the camp&rsquo;s early days has yielded to lengthy meetings before the cathedral&rsquo;s huge oak doors at which protest leaders sit cross-legged on the stone-flagged floor, poring over hand-lettered organizational charts. Visits to the camp by experts in child care, drug counselors and psychologists have been arranged. Trucks regularly service the site&rsquo;s portable toilets.        

&ldquo;Who knows what will happen to the camp in the longer term?&rdquo; said Ronan McNern, who is one of the camp&rsquo;s spokesmen.        

&ldquo;There are going to be many more camps like this across the U.K., and this one is already shaping up as a sort of H.Q. It&rsquo;s becoming more of a political center. In any case, the church authorities aren&rsquo;t pushing us for an end date. So we shall see.&rdquo;        
