
WASHINGTON &mdash; Some United States forces will remain as military trainers on 10 bases in Iraq even after an end-of-year deadline for all American troops to be out of the country, Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told a Senate committee on Tuesday.        

The forces will provide training in counterterrorism to Iraqis and also instruction in operating American-made tanks and F-16 fighter jets, General Dempsey said. The trainers are expected to remain largely on the bases, &ldquo;so this isn&rsquo;t about us moving around the country very much at all,&rdquo; he told the Senate Armed Services Committee.        

General Dempsey did not provide a number, although a military official later said there would be no more than 200 American military personnel in the country. Overall, there will be about 16,000 American Embassy personnel in Iraq, including a large number of civilian contractors as security guards. Currently there are some 24,000 American troops in Iraq.        

At a sometimes heated hearing, both General Dempsey and Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta tried to counter criticism from Republicans on the panel that the Obama administration was abandoning Iraq, but also sought to make their case that any military personnel left behind would have limited roles.        

Although the Pentagon wanted to leave as many as 20,000 troops in Iraq as a hedge against future violence, President Obama announced last month that all American troops would be home by the end of December.        

Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican who ran against Mr. Obama in 2008, was hardly satisfied with Mr. Panetta&rsquo;s and General Dempsey&rsquo;s endorsement of the president. He repeatedly asked them why the administration had failed to negotiate an agreement to leave some American forces behind in Iraq after eight years of war, and was skeptical of the administration&rsquo;s argument that American forces could not stay because the Iraqis had refused to give them immunity from prosecution in Iraqi courts.        

&ldquo;The truth is that this administration was committed to the complete withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq and they made it happen,&rdquo; Mr. McCain said testily to Mr. Panetta.        

&ldquo;Senator McCain, that&rsquo;s just simply not true,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta shot back.        

After some more back and forth, Mr. McCain rejoined, &ldquo;It is how it happened. I was there, Mr. Secretary. You were not.&rdquo;        

The two were not finished.        

&ldquo;This is about negotiating with a sovereign country, an independent country,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta said. &ldquo;This is not about us telling them what we&rsquo;re going to do for them or what they&rsquo;re going to have to do.&rdquo;        

Mr. McCain responded, &ldquo;This is about our needs as well, Mr. Secretary.&rdquo;        

Both Mr. Panetta and General Dempsey said that the United States would maintain a large military presence in the region, in part as a counterweight to Iran.        
