
VAN, Turkey &mdash; The once busy sidewalks of this city in eastern Turkey have morphed into a desolate maze of partly collapsed buildings, broken glass and windows hanging dangerously askew.        

It is here that the 16 members of the Yesilova family have made their home in a tent since Oct. 23, when a 7.2-magnitude earthquake hit this mostly Kurdish area, just about 60 miles from the border with Iran.        

&ldquo;It was a long shake, it seemed to get stronger and stronger,&rdquo; recalled Esin Unal, 33, an old friend of the Yesilovas, who has found refuge with the family. The earthquake rattled the nerves of the residents of the city as well as its infrastructure. The Yesilova family remains deeply unsettled weeks later.        

The quake collapsed six buildings and killed more than 600 people &mdash; but many of the structures around the city remained intact, or at least they appeared so.        

Underneath their facades, many recently spruced up in an attempt to beautify the city, was a deadly flaw: outdated, decrepit foundations and walls that were slowly cracking beneath the surface.        

No structure, it seemed, could be trusted. Though the initial quake left no visible damage to the Yesilovas&rsquo; home &mdash; a new four-story building in an area called Sabaniye, less than two miles from the city center &mdash; they decided to move out and put up a small tent in their backyard, away from other buildings and the danger of aftershocks and falling debris.        

&ldquo;All my children and their babies were in there,&rdquo; said Yusuf Yesilova, 77. &ldquo;I thought, if something collapses, that will be the end of my entire family.&rdquo;        

Like many of the people here, the members of the Yesilova family thought that the tent would be a temporary solution to a temporary problem. But now there is no end in sight to their new life of living in a tent.        

Yusuf Yesilova put his life&rsquo;s savings into the building, which he bought just last summer. If he and his family cannot return to it eventually, they have no idea where they will go.        

Emin Demirci, secretary general of the Eastern Anatolian Development Agency, said the government planned to hire 400 engineers to check the estimated 90,000 structures in Van. He said it would take three months.        

In the meantime, he said, half of Van&rsquo;s 400,000 residents have fled the city. Most of those who have remained are, like the Yesilovas, living in tents that have been set up throughout the city. Most of those tents &mdash; more than 70,000 of them &mdash; have been supplied by the government or relief agencies.        

Cetin Yesilova, 35, one of Yusuf&rsquo;s five sons, bought their tent at a supermarket. It was the only kind he could find &mdash; a summer tent, the kind used by families here on vacations to nearby Lake Van. All 16 of the Yesilovas could not fit inside, so 10 of them, mostly the children, slept inside; the rest slept in their cars.        

With winter approaching, icy winds blasted through the thin walls of the tent. After two nights they had had enough.        

&ldquo;It was not safe to go home,&rdquo; said Cetin Yesilova, who is a geologist at a nearby university, &ldquo;but we had no choice; tent life is very difficult. It was so cold and rainwater was coming in from the roof.&rdquo;        

For a week they lived at home and tried to get settled back into their routines. But Cetin and his brothers worried day and night that their home could fall apart.        

Someone donated a much larger, insulated tent, and the youngest Yesilova boy, Emre, 16, volunteered to put it up.        

&ldquo;I did it for my family,&rdquo; he said simply.        

Then on Nov. 9 the ground shook again, as they had feared, with a powerful aftershock. Though the subsequent quake claimed far fewer lives &mdash; seven so far &mdash; many of the damaged buildings collapsed &mdash; 25 in all &mdash; and the city was paralyzed psychologically.        

&ldquo;I died inside,&rdquo; said Mine Yesilova, 32, as she squatted in the muddy garden outside the tent and washed dishes in near-freezing water. &ldquo;The walls and windows and doors were bending in toward me. I grabbed my children, one under each arm, and ran outside.&rdquo;        

This time, the family agreed, there was no going back home.        

A few of the Yesilova women made one last dash into their home to get carpets, cushions, cups &mdash; anything to make the stark white domelike tent more comfortable. Heat poured out from a portable oven that Emre had rigged with wires and tubing.        

The night after the second quake, the family sat around the tent in little groups, some of the women wearing traditional headscarves, as they ate chocolates and looked at photographs on their laptops.        

&ldquo;I had to work a long time to get that woman,&rdquo; said Yusuf, pointing at his wife, Gungor, 67. He is a retired businessman, and he wore a smart suit jacket and had combed back his thick gray hair. &ldquo;She is a Turk. I am a Kurd.&rdquo;        

Twice, two of the women thought they felt small quakes and shouted. Cetin pulled out his iPhone to check if there was any news.        

&ldquo;No, it&rsquo;s nothing,&rdquo; he said, but the women shook their heads.        

A few minutes later the ground shook with three strong jolts &mdash; yet another aftershock of the kind that scientists predict will be occurring often over the next few months. (Early Tuesday, Van was shaken by a 5.2-magnitude aftershock.)        

Zeynep Yesilova, a thin 17-year-old who had been playing quietly with her cellphone, burst into tears and clutched her aunt.        

For a moment no one spoke.        

&ldquo;Only God knows when it will end,&rdquo; muttered Gungor, breaking her silence, her arthritic legs tucked beneath her, as she watched her family.        
