
SOKUR, Iraq &mdash; The name of this dusty little village means falcon in Arabic, a reference to its history as a residential community for workers at a nearby airport. But most people in Iraq call it Traitor Town.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not fair, but it&rsquo;s true,&rdquo; one market vendor here said about the nickname, pointing down the street to the walls of a now-empty American base just beyond.        

Years ago, the residents of this town formed an alliance with the Americans who had moved into the airport and renamed it Speicher Base.        

Nearly every young man in the town worked at the base, making this place an illustrative, if extreme, example of the unfortunate turn of fate for Iraqis who took jobs with the United States military during the nearly nine-year war, and who are now being left behind.        

A United States visa program for them is stalled in red tape, while the Iraqi government has no formal program to help. Though these workers were laid off months ago, they are now, finally and irrevocably, deprived of their job opportunities, off the bases and being shunned, or worse.        

&ldquo;At least they could come by to say goodbye, and say thank you, or maybe sorry to leave you in this disturbing situation,&rdquo; the mayor, Adel Turki, said of the Americans in an interview. &ldquo;But nobody said goodbye.&rdquo;        

Nobody denies, either, that the village had a heyday with the American base next door. Workers bought cars, built homes and started families.        

But back in February, &ldquo;the American guys say &lsquo;no more work in Speicher,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mustafa Nasser, a laborer, said in English, which is widely if imperfectly spoken in this town. Mr. Nasser made a gesture of washing his hands, and then of waving them in the air, as if showing helicopters disappearing into the sky.        

For the military&rsquo;s local allies in Iraq, this treatment is a contrast with, for example, the program four decades ago to move the Hmong tribes of Vietnam, who had allied with the United States, to America in a lengthy and costly resettlement effort. As with the venture in Iraq more broadly, military officers, and many Americans back home, seem ready to admit they have already done all they can.        

&ldquo;The opportunity to help Iraq with Iraq&rsquo;s problems is not to move everybody who worked for us to the United States,&rdquo; Gen. Jeffrey Buchanan, the military&rsquo;s top spokesman in Iraq, said in an interview. &ldquo;We gave them a means of employment for as long as we could.&rdquo;        

The Iraqi government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki is also a product of the United States occupation, of course, but has swiveled to adopt positions critical of the United States after elections in 2010, generally considered free and fair. The elections forced a coalition with the anti-American cleric Moktada al-Sadr, whose militia fought the United States for years, and who surely holds no sympathy for former base workers today.        

Iraqi employees received from the United States military plaques of appreciation and letters of recommendation, carefully saved now in clear plastic folders.        

But unfortunately for residents of Sokur, the closest jobs are in nearby Tikrit, Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s hometown, which is packed with people who hate them.        

Amir Abu Ali sidled into the town cafe around noon on a recent day, rubbing the sleep from his eyes. He is unemployed after working his entire adult life at Speicher Base, starting in 2003 as a 16-year-old, parlaying odd jobs for contractors into work as an interpreter, once he learned English.        

Mr. Abu Ali has a note, signed by an American lieutenant, that says, &ldquo;This letter of recommendation is testament to his personal character and selfless services to our men and women serving in the United States Armed Forces.&rdquo; The note adds that he &ldquo;provided information freely to my soldiers about current situations.&rdquo;        

Mr. Abu Ali said of the letter, &ldquo;When I want to die I&rsquo;ll show this to a business&rdquo; in Iraq while applying for a job.        
(Page 2 of 2)
The United States military once took the town under its wing. A symbiosis developed. About 500 of the town&rsquo;s 2,000 residents worked at the base. Residents do not deny they helped the Americans by, as Mr. Abu Ali put it, &ldquo;telling them who is the good guy and who is the bad guy.&rdquo;        

When, inevitably, the insurgents retaliated with threats and attacks, the United States military built a wall of dirt bags around Sokur; when it became too dangerous to shop in Tikrit, Humvees rolled through the streets, dropping off groceries; an Army doctor checked up on the children.        

Helicopters, flying to and from the base, swooped over so the pilots could throw candy out the window on the town they knew supported the Americans, to the smiling, waving children below.        

&ldquo;The Americans protected the town, and we protected the Americans,&rdquo; said one police officer, still working in the station built with help from the United States.        

Young men from elsewhere in Iraq moved here to take jobs at Speicher Base, turning it into a little eddy in the swirl of ethnic and sectarian violence in this country, a refuge for those who had one thing in common: a willingness to take the side of the United States.        

Ibrahim Kalo, who sells sodas from a refrigerator he bought secondhand at the base, said, &ldquo;I knew it was dangerous to work for the Americans, but I wasn&rsquo;t worried because we had the base here.&rdquo;        

But the base closed Oct. 20, in a ceremony to which residents of Sokur were not invited.        

At the peak of the United States deployment, 505 American bases operated in Iraq, meaning the problems of this town are far from unique. For Iraqis living in a country in the midst of a war that by United States military acknowledgment is still going on, with about a dozen insurgent groups active, even former employment with the Americans is a death sentence, if word slips out.        

Sticky bombs slapped onto cars severely wounded two suspected informants for the United States military in Diyala Province last month, for example.        

&ldquo;People hate us because we were traitors,&rdquo; said Haidar Mahsan, who sold DVDs on the base for seven years. &ldquo;Traitor Town. That is what they call us.&rdquo;        

Mr. Turki, the mayor, said he could not even count the number of death threats he had received. Through an intermediary, he said, insurgents once conveyed the following, unambiguous message: &ldquo;We will kill you, we will kill your sons, we will kill your family, we will burn down your house.&rdquo;        

In the embrace of the United States Army, he did not worry. Officers often stopped by his home for tea, and to hear his views on local conditions. &ldquo;Now, all we can do is protect ourselves,&rdquo; he said, nervously pulling back the lapel of his polyester jacket to reveal a pistol, scant help compared with the United States Army.        

&ldquo;We were expecting that maybe, before they withdrew, they would come and talk to us, discuss if we needed anything,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;But that didn&rsquo;t happen.&rdquo;        

In the last months the base operated, Mr. Turki took to standing in his front yard to watch the convoys roll past. He became convinced, he said, that the officers were ashamed to come by.        

&ldquo;They were avoiding us,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They would drive by, but not stop. They did not want to talk about these matters.&rdquo;        
