
BANGKOK &mdash; The Thai government faced a political uproar on Wednesday after details surfaced of a proposed prisoner amnesty that the country&rsquo;s opposition says is designed to pardon Thaksin Shinawatra, the prime minister ousted in the 2006 military coup.        

Thai officials did not provide details of the proposed amnesty, saying it was secret and needed approval from more than a dozen government committees before it could become law. But the prospect of an amnesty for Mr. Thaksin, who remains an extremely divisive figure in the country, stunned and angered opponents of the government &mdash; now headed by his sister &mdash; and risked aggravating old wounds.        

The government already faces major discontent over the handling of the country&rsquo;s worst flooding in decades. The authorities tried to protect the economy and the capital, Bangkok, channeling waters away from industrial sites and parts of the city but often increasing the damage to the rural areas that form Mr. Thaksin&rsquo;s main support base.        

The prisoner amnesty issue has reinforced resentments. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s so obvious that this was done specifically for Thaksin,&rdquo; said Abhisit Vejjajiva, the leader of the parliamentary opposition. &ldquo;Please stop,&rdquo; Mr. Abhisit advised the government. &ldquo;This will create disharmony.&rdquo; He criticized the government for raising the issue &ldquo;during a time when people are suffering,&rdquo; referring to the flooding in Bangkok and surrounding areas.        

As a measure of the passions surrounding Mr. Thaksin, one of the leaders of a protest group known as the yellow shirts, which helped push Mr. Thaksin from office in 2006 through mass demonstrations, called the proposed amnesty decree &ldquo;disgusting and vicious.&rdquo;        

Sondhi Limthongkul, the protest leader, accused the government of disrespecting King Bhumibol Adulyadej because the amnesty, if it is passed, will be officially issued by the king on his birthday, on Dec. 5, as is tradition. The king turns 84 this year, an important milestone in Thai culture, because it represents the completion of his seventh 12-year cycle.        

On Wednesday, Mr. Sondhi seemed to threaten more civil disobedience, saying, &ldquo;We will certainly not remain passive.&rdquo;        

Mr. Thaksin, a telecommunications billionaire, has in recent years publicly ruled out a return to politics and has deflected specific questions about ending his self-imposed exile in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.        

But the selection of his younger sister, Yingluck Shinawatra, as prime minister in August raised suspicions that Mr. Thaksin would continue to exert influence behind the scenes. Mr. Thaksin&rsquo;s advisory role has been obvious in recent months; at one point he held a meeting with members of Ms. Yingluck&rsquo;s cabinet via Skype, an Internet video conferencing service.        

Chalerm Ubumrung, the country&rsquo;s deputy prime minister, refused Wednesday to answer questions about whether the planned amnesty was designed to benefit Mr. Thaksin.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to answer that because everything is secret and hasn&rsquo;t reached a conclusion yet,&rdquo; he told reporters.        

Mr. Thaksin, 62, was convicted of corruption in 2008 but fled before a two-year sentence was handed down. The highly politicized case revolved around a land purchase made by his wife. The court found that Mr. Thaksin had violated laws barring people in public office and their spouses from entering into contracts with the state.        

Ms. Yingluck, the prime minister, deflected questions about the proposed amnesty during a news conference on Wednesday with Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, who was visiting en route to Bali, Indonesia, for an Asia-Pacific summit meeting.        

Mrs. Clinton began a meeting with Ms. Yingluck by commiserating with her. &ldquo;We know you&rsquo;ve been facing some challenges,&rdquo; she said.        

In a subsequent news conference Mrs. Clinton offered assistance for the flooding. But she also urged Thailand to pursue &ldquo;political reconciliation.&rdquo;        
