
SHANGHAI &mdash; The University of California, Berkeley announced this week that it plans to open a large research and teaching facility here as part of a broader plan to bolster its presence in China.        

The public university, which is struggling under budget constraints imposed by the state of California, said the Shanghai center would cater to engineering graduate students and be financed over the next five years largely by the Shanghai government and companies operating here. The program is expected to begin in July 2012.        

Berkeley&rsquo;s announcement comes as other prominent American universities are racing to build closer ties to China, hoping to attract new students, deepen research capabilities and set up sites to train business professionals to succeed in the booming Chinese market. New York University and Duke University are each building a campus in the Shanghai area, and Stanford is building a $5 million research center on the campus of the elite Peking University in the city of Beijing.        

&ldquo;This will be a platform or base of operations for us&rdquo; said Tsu-Jae King Liu, a professor of electrical engineering and computer sciences at Berkeley, and the associate dean for research at the College of Engineering. &ldquo;A major reason to do this is to enhance the opportunities for our students. We want them to be better prepared to become global leaders.&rdquo;        

China is eager to attract branches of world-class universities in the hope of upgrading its own universities. And big cities like Beijing and Shanghai are pushing for partnerships with prestigious American institutions to attract top students and to create research and development centers that they hope will form the base of a modern, high-tech economy.        

The scramble to set up American programs here is happening at a time when Chinese students are flocking to America&rsquo;s best colleges and universities and elite boarding schools. Chinese student enrollments in the United States are strengthening university budgets because many of the students are paying full college tuitions, which can range from $15,000 to $50,000 a year.        

Last week, the Institute of International Education, a nonprofit group in New York, said nearly 158,000 Chinese students were enrolled in American colleges and universities this academic year. That figure was up about 23 percent from the previous year and was the second consecutive year China topped India on the list of countries sending international students to the United States.        

American college administrators say creating programs here will help support fundraising efforts that target wealthy Chinese alumni; it could also help recruit undergraduate students and strengthen research programs by utilizing resources at Chinese institutions.        

Some education experts warn, though, that the universities could damage their reputations if the programs in China came to be viewed as lowering standards or profiting from charging high tuition, but relying on local, low-cost teaching staffs.        

The Chinese government requires foreign colleges and universities to form a partnership with a local institution, or be approved by the government. Such programs vary widely. In Berkeley&rsquo;s case, the university has signed a memorandum of understanding to open its Shanghai facility at the Zhangjiang High-Tech Park, a sprawling government-controlled campus that has attracted global companies like DuPont, Sony, Honeywell and Lenovo.        

What is unusual is that the Shanghai government and the company that operates the high-tech park have agreed to build a 50,000-square-foot building for Berkeley at no cost, with a five-year rent-free lease.        

The Zhangjiang High-Tech Park also agreed to raise at least $10 million a year over the next five years to finance Berkeley research in collaboration with Chinese institutions.        

The agreement was made with Berkeley&rsquo;s College of Engineering, which has a reputation for training some of the world&rsquo;s most capable engineers and computer scientists. The center will be established for graduate students who gain admission to Berkeley&rsquo;s main campus, as well as Berkeley-appointed researchers. There is no plan to establish an undergraduate or degree-granting program here.        

Several other Berkeley professional schools, including the Haas School of Business and the Law School, are also considering initiatives in China. Berkeley&rsquo;s chancellor, Robert Birgeneau, and the dean of its engineering school, S. Shankar Sastry, were in Shanghai last weekend to sign the agreement.        
