
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; President Hamid Karzai for the first time publicly laid out his vision of a long-lasting agreement that could keep the American military in Afghanistan for years, in a speech to Afghans on Wednesday that seemed both a warning to neighboring Pakistan and Iran and an attempt to win over a skeptical domestic audience.        

At turns nationalistic and pragmatic, Mr. Karzai, addressing the loya jirga, the traditional Afghan council gathering, called for a long-term agreement that would put detailed limits on American military operations while ensuring they could continue beyond the present 2014 deadline to withdraw troops. He evoked an image of a nation still fiercely proud, and even dangerous, if weakened by years of war.        

&ldquo;We should be respected as lions on our own soil,&rdquo; he said, speaking for nearly an hour in a strong voice, although he looked tired. &ldquo;In this case we are ready to sign a strategic partnership with the United States. If they want military facilities, we are ready to give them, but Afghanistan, its vision, its interests, should be clear.&rdquo;        

If his speech charted a confident path, it was also a very difficult one: trying to keep ambitious neighbors at bay by casting his lot with the Americans, convincing regional leaders hostile to an American presence that it is vital, and pinning the United States down to long-term military and financial help despite a budget crisis and electoral politics in Washington.        

&ldquo;President Karzai seemed to be playing to all constituencies,&rdquo; said a Western diplomat here, speaking on the condition of anonymity.        

Mr. Karzai spoke in some detail about his terms in the strategic partnership document that his government is negotiating with the United States, giving the clearest outline in some months about his current thinking.        

He demanded that the Americans halt house searches by foreign troops, end night raids and dismantle foreign-run detention facilities &mdash; all policies the Americans have said are crucial to fighting the Taliban.        

&ldquo;The United States has hoped that he wouldn&rsquo;t use the meeting to try to increase his leverage in the negotiations; they feel they don&rsquo;t have much room to maneuver &mdash; they are pretty close to their red lines,&rdquo; the diplomat said.        

In emphasizing those points, Mr. Karzai focused on some of the most controversial elements of the negotiations, and seemed to be trying to show his people that he understands their frustration with foreign troops. Many Afghans complain bitterly about the indignities of the night raids and their sense of being violated by the presence of Western troops in their homes.        

Mr. Karzai described Afghanistan as a lion that deserved respect, and suggested it could set the terms with the United States.        

&ldquo;The lion doesn&rsquo;t like it if a foreigner intrudes into his house. The lion doesn&rsquo;t like it if a stranger enters his house. The lion doesn&rsquo;t want his children to be taken away by someone else in the night, the lion won&rsquo;t let it happen,&rdquo; he said, to cheers from the jirga. &ldquo;They should not interfere in the lion&rsquo;s house: just guard the four sides of the forest. They are training our police. Their assistance is good for Afghanistan.&rdquo;        

Though he referred to Pakistan and Iran as &ldquo;dear neighbors&rdquo; in the speech, Mr. Karzai seemed intent on assuring Afghans of a defense against the insurgencies fostered next door, implicitly criticizing the two countries for not doing more to curb militants.        

The American Embassy said there would be no comment on Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s speech until after the jirga ends, expected Friday or Saturday. American officials emphasized that they had always supported Afghan sovereignty and had worked hard to increase the Afghans&rsquo; capacity to conduct their own military operations.        

Although the president appeared confident that the jirga would accept his outline of conditions for the agreement with the United States, some attendees sounded as if they had wanted to have a chance to offer suggestions about the strategic partnership&rsquo;s content and did not want to give Mr. Karzai carte blanche.        

&ldquo;They should have given us the main lines of the strategic partnership document with the United States, so that we could give them our view with full knowledge about the issue,&rdquo; said Kabir Ranjbar, a lawyer and former lawmaker who, like a number of others at the jirga, was perturbed that the assembly did not have a draft of the partnership document. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think we are looking at an already decided matter.&rdquo;        

Mr. Karzai also asked the gathering to offer recommendations on the future of efforts to start peace talks with the Taliban insurgents. Those efforts have foundered since September, when a supposed emissary from the Taliban turned out to be a suicide bomber, who killed the head of the High Peace Council, Burhanuddin Rabbani.        

There had been criticism of the loya jirga from Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s opponents and civil society organizations, but some of his leading critics did attend, including Atta Muhammad Noor, the governor of Mazar-i-Sharif, and the speaker of Parliament, Abdul Raouf Ibrahimi, both prominent members of the former Northern Alliance.        

The loya jirga is an advisory body appointed by the president. Its members are supposed to be representative of the country at large, but many believe Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s aides handpicked them.        

On Thursday morning, insurgents fired two rockets toward the site of the jirga, the closest landing just over half a mile away, wounding one person, The Associated Press reported, citing the Afghan Interior Ministry and a Kabul police official.        

Taliban insurgents attacked the previous jirga in Kabul, in 2010. This time, the authorities&rsquo; precautions included declaring a three-day holiday, closing businesses and government offices and flooding streets with police officers.        
Sangar Rahimi contributed reporting.
