
CAIRO &mdash; Brazen attempts by Egypt&rsquo;s interim military rulers to hold on to power long after elections have elicited a sharp reaction domestically and for the first time have prompted Washington to warn about the potential for new unrest.        

After months of mixing gentle pressure with broad support for the ruling military council, the Obama administration has sharpened its tone, senior administration officials say, expressing concern that the failure to move to civilian control could undermine the defining revolt of the Arab Spring.        

The shift in tone is part of a difficult balancing act for Washington, which is keen to preserve its ties to the military and its interests in the region, chiefly Egypt&rsquo;s role in maintaining peace with Israel. But Washington also hopes to win favor with Egypt&rsquo;s newly empowered political opposition while avoiding the appearance of endorsing the military&rsquo;s stalled transition to democracy. All things considered, some here have suggested, the change in tone may be intended to placate Egyptian public opinion rather than actually press the military to give up power.        

&ldquo;I think they are working for their own interests, particularly regarding the slow transition of power,&rdquo; said Shady el-Ghazaly Harb, a prominent liberal activist who was among the leaders of the Egyptian revolution. &ldquo;The U.S. wants to guarantee that the coming government will be on good terms &mdash; I won&rsquo;t say loyal, but friendly &mdash; and the support for SCAF is related to that.&rdquo; SCAF is the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, Egypt&rsquo;s ruling military council.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton underscored the shift in a speech last week that her aides later said was a deliberate warning to the military council, which assumed power after President Hosni Mubarak&rsquo;s ouster. The military had initially pledged to hand over control to civilians by September, but it now says that a presidential election will not occur before 2013. And last week it laid out a blueprint for the next constitution, giving the military special political powers and protection from civilian oversight into perpetuity.        

&ldquo;If, over time, the most powerful political force in Egypt remains a roomful of unelected officials, they will have planted the seeds for future unrest, and Egyptians will have missed a historic opportunity,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton warned.        

&ldquo;When unelected authorities say they want to be out of the business of governing,&rdquo; the United States expects them &ldquo;to lay out a clear road map&rdquo; and &ldquo;abide by it,&rdquo; she added.        

Given Washington&rsquo;s long support for Mr. Mubarak, and Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s comment last month approving of the military&rsquo;s extended timetable for electing a civilian president, there was suspicion over Washington&rsquo;s intentions. The shift occurred at the same time as a broader effort by the Obama administration to counter anti-American sentiment and reach out to opposition leaders across the political spectrum.        

The United States &ldquo;wants to have the cake and eat it, too,&rdquo; said Nabil Fahmy, a former Egyptian ambassador to Washington, arguing that the United States wants to promote democracy without dealing with the pressure it would put on American interests in the region.        

The military&rsquo;s attempts to protect its power and privileges indefinitely have created an awkward situation for Washington. The United States, through the Pentagon in particular, has long nurtured close ties with the Egyptian military, which still receives $1.3 billion in American aid each year. American officials hope that whatever government emerges will continue to support American policy, including maintaining ties with Israel and distance from Iran.        

At the same time, the United States&rsquo; standing in public opinion in Egypt and around the region continues to suffer because of decades of support for undemocratic governments like the military-backed system that controlled Egypt under Mr. Mubarak. Remaining aloof from the debate over the military&rsquo;s future role here risks reinforcing those criticisms at a time when democratic changes are giving public opinion new weight.        

As part of its broader outreach, the Obama administration has also met with the Muslim Brotherhood, the Islamist group whose political party is poised to win a major role in the country&rsquo;s new Parliament and remains the biggest political counterweight to the military council.        

Jacob Walles, a deputy assistant secretary of state, met for the first time this week with the leaders of the Brotherhood&rsquo;s newly formed Freedom and Justice Party at its new headquarters in Cairo. While American diplomats have had intermittent contacts for years with Brotherhood lawmakers in the Egyptian Parliament, officials here said Mr. Walles&rsquo;s meeting appeared to underscore Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s pledges to cooperate with Islamist parties that respect democracy.        

Others said it might instead have been a sign that Washington simply realized that the Brotherhood was certain to play a crucial role in Egypt&rsquo;s future and was likely to win a large bloc of seats in the parliamentary elections that begin this month.        
David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Cairo, and Steven Lee Myers from Washington.
