
MOSCOW &mdash; The imprisonment of a Russian citizen in Tajikistan has touched off reprisals against ethnic Tajik migrant workers in Russia who say they have been unjustly targeted for arrest and deportation.        

Immigration agents have rounded up at least 300 ethnic Tajiks in the last two weeks, according to the Federal Migration Service, though independent human rights workers said they believed that hundreds more might have been detained. Tajik officials said the first deportees began arriving home this week, though it was unclear how many would ultimately be expelled.        

&ldquo;Officers of the Federal Migration Service, together with agencies of the Interior Ministry, are conducting operations to expel citizens of Tajikistan, and we will do so rapidly,&rdquo; Konstantin Romodanovsky, the head of the Federal Migration Service, told the Itar-Tass news agency last week. &ldquo;We have been told to restore order, and we will employ the severest measures to do so.&rdquo;        

The roundup has underscored the vulnerability of the millions of migrant laborers who work and live in Russia, often in squalid conditions. Mostly from the former Soviet republics of Central Asia, including Tajikistan, they regularly suffer abuse by the police and violent nationalists, according to human rights monitors. They can also fall victim to the vagaries of international and domestic politics, as appears to be the case now.        

Apparent efforts by the authorities to co-opt rising anti-immigrant sentiment in Russia ahead of elections for Parliament in December seem to have compounded their troubles. Prominent public figures have voiced support for the crackdown on Tajiks, and Russia&rsquo;s president, Dmitri A. Medvedev, has ordered officials to conduct more checks for illegal immigrants.        

&ldquo;I have given instructions to our migration service to monitor the situation involving foreign citizens in our country,&rdquo; Mr. Medvedev said this week. &ldquo;This is a problem that worries a large number of people and, unfortunately, frequently leads to tensions, and even to clashes on the basis of ethnic divisions. We cannot close our eyes to this.&rdquo;        

The conflict erupted this month when a Tajik court sentenced the Russian, a pilot named Vladimir Sadovnichy, and his Estonian colleague to eight and a half years in prison on what Russia says were trumped-up charges of illegally entering Tajikistan and smuggling a plane engine.        

The two pilots were returning to Moscow from a cargo mission in Afghanistan in March when they say Tajik air traffic controllers refused to give them permission to land for a scheduled refueling at Kurgan-Tyube Airport in Tajikistan. They did so anyway, saying later they lacked enough fuel to return to Afghanistan. Tajik officials said that the pilots&rsquo; landing without permission and without proper documentation was proof enough to support the smuggling charge. The two were arrested and sent to prison, where they remain.        

Russian officials reacted angrily to the verdict, with some suggesting it was levied with an intent to extract a bribe to win the pilots&rsquo; freedom. Moscow has demanded that the pilots go free.        

Though they have denied any connection between the case and the crackdown on Tajiks in Russia, the authorities appear to be following a tried-and-true script. In addition to the detentions and deportations, Kremlin-connected youth groups have been sent to picket the Tajik Embassy here in Moscow, as they did in connection with recent spats with Georgia, Estonia and other countries.        

Russia&rsquo;s chief public health official, Gennady Onishchenko, has also been deployed. Frequently involved in Russia&rsquo;s testiest international conflicts, Mr. Onishchenko this week recommended barring Tajiks from entering the country, citing what he said were higher-than-normal incidences of H.I.V. and tuberculosis among them. Tajik community leaders called the assertions absurd.        

In the past Mr. Onishchenko has slapped bans on valuable foreign products like wine from Georgia, milk from Belarus and canned fish from Latvia at times of heightened tensions with those countries.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Tajikistan&rsquo;s most valuable export is people. More than a million Tajik migrants live in Russia at any given time, mostly working on construction sites or in the sprawling bazaars around Moscow, immigration experts say. Their remittances made up about 35 percent of Tajikistan&rsquo;s gross domestic product in 2009, according to the World Bank.        

A mass deportation could be disastrous for the Tajik economy, experts said. Once deported, a person cannot return to Russian territory for five years, according to Russian law.        

&ldquo;If we cannot reach an agreement, there could be chaos,&rdquo; said Karomat Sharipov, the head of the Moscow-based rights group for Tajik laborers. &ldquo;All these people will return home, and we know very well that the government of Tajikistan is not capable of taking care of them.&rdquo;        

Like citizens of most former Soviet republics, Tajiks do not need special visas to enter Russian territory, but they do require permits to work legally. Migration authorities say that all those currently detained were working illegally.        

At the Foreign Citizens Detention Center No. 1 on the outskirts of Moscow, detainees said that 400 to 450 people were being held inside. Most were Tajiks who had been rounded up in the last four or five days, the detainees said, shouting through open windows to a reporter outside.        

&ldquo;They told us that since we arrested their pilot, they would also hold us hostage,&rdquo; said a 21-year-old detainee, who said his name was Farkhat. He said that he had a work permit, but that a police official tore it up during questioning.        

His account could not be independently verified, though other detainees have made similar assertions, Tajik community leaders said. The director of the detention center refused to speak with a reporter.        

Apparently in response to the pressure, prosecutors in Tajikistan signaled this week that they might be willing to soften the sentence of the two pilots, though officials gave no indication that they would be freed, as Moscow has demanded.        

Among Tajik migrants there was little sense that the storm would pass soon.        

&ldquo;People are going into hiding,&rdquo; said a Tajik meat seller named Sharif, who said he hid in his kiosk to avoid arrest during a raid on Monday of the Viktoria Market in northeast Moscow. &ldquo;I have a work permit, but you have to be careful.&rdquo;        

Minutes earlier, a bus flanked by two police cruisers pulled away from the market, ferrying an unknown number of workers to a Moscow detention center.        
