
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; For the second day in a row, deserters from the Syrian Army carried out attacks on symbols of the Assad government&rsquo;s centers of power, targeting the youth offices of the ruling Baath Party on Thursday after firing rocket-propelled grenades on a military intelligence base on Wednesday, activists said.        

The attacks, along with fraying relations among Syria&rsquo;s religious communities, growing international pressure and a relentless crackdown, prompted Russia, Syria&rsquo;s closest ally, to say that the country was moving closer to a civil war.        

The attacks may have been more symbolic than effective, but could mark the increased ability of a growing number of defectors to publicize their exploits. Attacks on government installations &mdash; in the southern town of Dara&rsquo;a and the central city of Homs, for instance &mdash; have been reported since the start of the uprising.        

The attacks themselves paled before the bloodiest episodes of Syria&rsquo;s last uprising in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Then, insurgents stormed the office of the Aleppo Artillery School, killing 32 cadets. It was unclear whether anyone was killed or wounded in these attacks, but the constituency of armed strikes and the bold choice of targets has heightened the profile of Syria&rsquo;s armed insurgency.        

The Syrian government did not mention either attack, which activists reported, citing the accounts of local residents. But even without a firm picture of any damage, the attacks were, at a minimum, indicative of determination on the part of military defectors in the face of a crackdown that the United Nations says has killed more than 3,500 people.        

Army desertions &mdash; which have been reported since the start of the uprising and may now number in the thousands &mdash; have yet to undermine the unity of Syria&rsquo;s military. But the continued flow increases the pool of recruits for the armed defector groups. And some analysts said the defections might be increasing as Syria&rsquo;s last remaining allies peel away, including the Arab League, which has threatened to suspend Syria&rsquo;s membership in coming days if it does not abide by its call to stop the killing.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a huge boost to whoever wants to stand against the regime, both on a military level and on the level of civilians,&rdquo; said Hussein Shobokshi, a columnist with Asharq al-Awsat, a Saudi-owned newspaper published in London. &ldquo;This regime has expired, and the move will set the round for further defections, civilian protests and maybe even military intervention. It will also allow the international community to take further action like creating safe haven or no-fly zones.&rdquo;        

There is no unified opposition driving events in Syria. Many of the leaders calling for the downfall of the government have voiced concerns over the attacks and warned that they could lead to internal strife, similar to what happened in Syria&rsquo;s neighbors Lebanon and Iraq.        

&ldquo;I am opposed to internal fighting; the people of one country should not kill each other,&rdquo; said Fayez Sara, an influential opposition figure in Damascus. &ldquo;The operations against government forces should stop.&rdquo;        

On Thursday, the civilian toll continued to mount. The Local Coordination Committees, an opposition group, said at least 19 people had been killed across Syria, including four army defectors, seven civilians and two minors.        

In Moscow, Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov said that the international community should call on all sides in Syria to stop the bloodshed. &ldquo;There are more and more weapons that are being smuggled in from neighboring countries,&rdquo; Mr. Lavrov said. &ldquo;Today I saw a television report about some new so-called rebel Free Syrian Army organizing an attack on the government building, on the building belonging to Syria&rsquo;s armed forces.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This was quite similar to a true civil war,&rdquo; he added.        

In Turkey, once Syria&rsquo;s ally and now a sharp critic, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan denounced the lack of effective action against the Damascus government, questioning whether international players were ignoring the bloodshed because the country offered no precious resources.        
Hwaida Saad and Neil MacFarquhar contributed reporting from Beirut, and Sebnem Arsu from Istanbul.
