
BAGHDAD &mdash; Iraqi security forces controlled directly by Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki continue to hold and to torture detainees in secret jails despite his vows last year to end such practices, according to a statement from Human Rights Watch released Tuesday.        

The statement renewed longstanding criticism of Mr. Maliki that he has violated the Constitution by having some security forces in charge of pursuing terrorists report directly to his office. About 280 detainees are being held at Camp Justice, a military base in northern Baghdad, with no access to lawyers or their families, according to the report. They are being held by brigades that are supposed to report to the Defense Ministry, it said.        

After the disclosure of a secret prison last year, Mr. Maliki said the detainees would be transferred to the Ministry of Justice, under which they were expected to receive proper legal representation. But Human Rights Watch, citing internal government documents and interviews conducted in Iraq with government officials and detainees, said that this has not occurred. An official for the Minster of Justice, Busho Ibrahim, disputed that assertion.        

&ldquo;This news is incorrect, and all the prisons in Camp Justice belong to our ministry and under our authority as well,&rdquo; Mr. Ibrahim said. &ldquo;This false news is to discredit the reputation of Iraqi government.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;Why would Maliki have special prisons? Isn&rsquo;t he the leader of Iraq? The information is incorrect and there no forces or detainees being tortured.&rdquo;        

Kamil al-Dolaimi, a member of Parliament who represents the Sunni-dominated Iraqiya Party, said that the families of the detainees should present the evidence of torture to Parliament.        

&ldquo;The Parliament is now 10 times stronger than the recent one and it became the highest legislative authority,&rdquo; Mr. Dolaimi said. &ldquo;So we urge detainees&rsquo; families to show evidence if such information is true. Not Maliki or anyone else has the authority to play with the people&rsquo;s fate.&rdquo;        

The Human Rights Watch statement said that the detainees were transferred to Camp Justice from Camp Honor, a military base in the Green Zone in the center of Baghdad, just days before international inspectors were supposed to examine conditions at Camp Honor. Detainees there had been held for months without being charged and were tortured.        

The brigades, along with a counterterrorism group that also reports to Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s office, routinely conduct operations and make mass arrests without notifying the security ministries, the report said.        

Mr. Maliki created the brigades in 2008, and they have been a longstanding issue with Sunnis and others who have accused Mr. Maliki, a Shiite, of using the security forces as his personal militia. Those fears have been stoked by the fact that many detainees who have been held by the forces he commanded appear to be Sunnis.        

A high-ranking Interior Ministry official was quoted in the report as saying that these brigades and counterterrorism groups &ldquo;create confusion and a dangerous atmosphere where special units who have a separate authority storm in and take people.&rdquo;        

Human Rights Watch called on Mr. Maliki to honor his pledge to close the jails and transfer authority to the Minister of Justice.        

&ldquo;Revelations of secret jails in the heart of Baghdad completely undermine the Iraqi government&rsquo;s promises to respect the rule of law,&rdquo; said Joe Stork, deputy Middle East director for Human Rights Watch.        
Omar al-Jawoshy contributed reporting.
