
Stung by a surprise burst into Parliament by protesters, Kuwait&rsquo;s ruler ordered tighter security in the building on Thursday and vowed that his oil-rich country, which has so far dodged the Arab Spring upheavals that have shaken the region, would not tolerate &ldquo;preplanned sabotage.&rdquo;        

The decree by Kuwait&rsquo;s emir, Sheik Sabah al-Ahmed al-Jaber al-Sabah, came hours after dozens of protesters, including some lawmakers, muscled their way into the Parliament building on Wednesday night, demanding the prime minister&rsquo;s resignation.        

A YouTube video showed protesters crowding into the chamber and overpowering guards, while hundreds of sympathizers rallied outside in a scene reminiscent of the Tahrir Square crowds in Egypt that have come to symbolize the anti-autocratic upsurge in the Middle East.        

The Kuwait Interior Ministry said the protesters injured at least five security officials and &ldquo;led to the damage of public property,&rdquo; but officials did not elaborate.        

There was no word on whether any of the protesters were arrested or would be prosecuted. But Reuters quoted one opposition lawmaker, Musallam al-Barak, as threatening more protests. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t fear anything except God,&rdquo; he was quoted as saying.        

Kuna, the official news agency, said the emir led an emergency cabinet meeting at his palace on Thursday in response to the Parliament protest and ordered &ldquo;stricter measures to confront this chaotic behavior.&rdquo;        

The agency quoted the emir&rsquo;s spokesman, Ali Fahad al-Rashid, as saying &ldquo;the actions witnessed yesterday are unfamiliar to the Kuwaiti society and threaten the security and stability of the country&rsquo;s general system.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;Democracy in this country should not be contaminated or misused to serve questionable agendas. Kuwait will not be a place for preplanned sabotage.&rdquo;        

Kuwait is one of the Middle East&rsquo;s leading oil exporters and is an important American ally. In 1991, the United States led a coalition army to free the country from an Iraqi occupation, and it served as a staging ground for the American-led invasion of Iraq in 2003. It is also serving the same function for the American withdrawal from Iraq that is now under way.        

Kuwait has not experienced the large-scale protests that have forced out the leaders of Tunisia, Egypt and Libya this year and are threatening the leaders of Syria and Yemen. The reason lies largely in the government&rsquo;s strategy of heading off dissent and calls for political change with vast spending on its 1.3 million citizens, many of them employed by the state, who have come to expect a heavily subsidized life.        

Even so, the country, which has been ruled by the Sabah royal family since 1752, has a lively elected Parliament with an outspoken opposition movement. The opposition has been calling for the dismissal of the prime minister, Sheik Nasser Mohammed al-Ahmed al-Sabah, a member of the ruling family whom they suspect of corruption, an accusation he denies.        

The catalyst for the protest on Wednesday appeared to be anger over the government&rsquo;s rejection of a request by some opposition lawmakers to question the prime minister about the use of public funds.        

Labor tensions also had been building in Kuwait in recent weeks over demands by workers for higher wages and better working conditions. In September, the country was buffeted by strikes that included banking, health care and industrial workers. Last month, striking customs officers disrupted petroleum shipments from the country, which derives 95 percent of its income from oil; its reserves are the world&rsquo;s sixth-largest.        
