
LONDON &mdash; Adding new pressures on Tehran over its disputed nuclear program, the head of the United Nations nuclear watchdog group said Thursday that he wanted to send a high-level mission to Iran to investigate a report by his agency that Iranian scientists had engaged in secret and possibly continuing efforts to construct a nuclear weapon.        

Yukiya Amano, the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, was addressing the agency&rsquo;s 35-member board of governors at the start of a closed, two-day meeting at the group&rsquo;s headquarters in Vienna.        

The gathering is trying to formulate a resolution reprimanding Iran and seeking greater clarity about its nuclear intentions while avoiding language that would prevent support from China and Russia &mdash; two nations that have frequently differed with the West over Iran.        

The Associated Press quoted diplomats as calling the resolution a compromise that would express "serious concern" over Iran&rsquo;s defiance of the United Nations Security Council and the energy agency board.        

While avoiding any talk of an ultimatum or deadline, a draft of the resolution also spoke of &ldquo;deep and increasing concern about the unresolved issues regarding the Iranian nuclear program, including those which need to be clarified to exclude the existence of possible military dimensions,&rdquo; The A.P. said.        

Mr. Amano said he had written to Fereydoon Abbasi, the head of Iran&rsquo;s  atomic energy agency, on Nov. 2 to suggest the visit. &ldquo;I hope a suitable date can be agreed soon,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It is essential that any such mission should be well planned and that it should address the issues contained in my report.&rdquo;        

There was no immediate word of a response from Iran.        

&ldquo;Preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons is one of the I.A.E.A.&rsquo;s core responsibilities,&rdquo; Mr. Amano told the meeting, according to a text of the speech released by the agency.        

&ldquo;Throughout the past three years, we have obtained additional information which gives us a fuller picture of Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program and increases our concerns about possible military dimensions,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The information indicates that Iran has carried out activities relevant to the development of a nuclear explosive device,&rdquo; Mr. Amano said.        

&ldquo;I ask Iran to engage substantively&rdquo; with the United Nations agency &ldquo;without delay and provide the requested clarifications regarding possible military dimensions to its nuclear program,&rdquo; Mr. Amano said.        

He said that the agency&rsquo;s technical experts had gathered information about Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program &ldquo;painstakingly and objectively&rdquo; and that his organization believed the findings to be &ldquo;over all, credible.&rdquo; Some activities &ldquo;relevant to the development of a nuclear explosive device,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;may still be ongoing.&rdquo;        

The report has divided the world powers seeking to resolve the dispute over Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program and has drawn a sharp response from Tehran.        

Analysts said Iran&rsquo;s leaders seemed worried that the report could deepen Iran&rsquo;s isolation, undermining its frequent claims that its nuclear program is designed to produce energy for civilian use, not weapons.        

In remarks on Wednesday quoted by the state-run news channel Press TV, the Iranian foreign minister, Ali Akbar Salehi, was quoted as saying that Tehran would respond to the agency&rsquo;s report in a measured way and &ldquo;send an analytical letter with logical and reasonable responses&rdquo; to the meeting in Vienna.        

When the report was released last week, France, Britain and Germany indicated that they would join the United States in seeking new ways to pressure Iran, but Russia registered its opposition to new sanctions and China said it was noncommittal.        

President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran assailed the report upon its release, saying it had been orchestrated by Iran&rsquo;s enemies, principally the United States, which he said had dictated the report&rsquo;s findings.        

&ldquo;Why do you exploit the I.A.E.A.  dignity in favor of the U.S. administration?&rdquo; Mr. Ahmadinejad asked rhetorically in a question directed at Mr. Amano, who oversaw the production and content of the report.        

The dispute over Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program has been sharpened in recent weeks by speculation that Israel may be contemplating a military strike against Iranian nuclear facilities. Officials and experts said Israel was hoping that the latest energy agency report would force the introduction of painful sanctions that would force Iran to abandon its uranium enrichment program.        
