
KAMPALA, Uganda &mdash; It was one of the most notorious cases in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. In a normally sleepy lakeside town, more than 2,000 Tutsis driven from their homes accepted a local priest&rsquo;s offer of refuge in his church. But it was a ruse, and after days of siege the building was bulldozed, killing them all.        

About 4,000 other Tutsis were slaughtered in Kivumu, one of the bloodiest killing fields in the campaign to eradicate the ethnic minority, whom Hutu leaders called &ldquo;cockroaches.&rdquo;        

On Thursday, Kivumu&rsquo;s former mayor, Gr&eacute;goire Ndahimana, was found guilty of genocide and crimes against humanity, the 43rd conviction by the special United Nations tribunal covering the Rwandan genocide as it prepares to wrap up its mission. He was sentenced to 15 years in prison.        

The Rwandan government saluted the verdict but expressed dismay at the sentence.        

&ldquo;We welcome the conviction of Gr&eacute;goire Ndahimana, but think the court has been too lenient in sentencing,&rdquo; said Martin Ngoga, Rwanda&rsquo;s chief prosecutor. &ldquo;The judgment does not fully appreciate the role in the genocide of local authorities like Ndahimana, who were very instrumental in the killings.&rdquo;        

The tribunal&rsquo;s work has cemented many of the grim particulars of the storm of ethnic hatred that left more than 800,000 dead nationwide. Still, some suspects remain on the loose, and some critics have argued that the tribunal failed to investigate the current Rwandan government for its own abuses in the process of pacifying the country.        

Mr. Ndahimana hid in neighboring Congo for 15 years, spreading further violence as a member of the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda, or F.D.L.R., a rebel group primarily made up of fugitive Rwandan Hutus. The United States lists the group as a terrorist organization. He was arrested in 2009 by a special team of Congolese authorities and United Nations special operatives after the governments of Rwanda and Congo joined forces with the United Nations to oust the rebel Hutus.        
