
MacDILL AIR FORCE BASE, Fla. &mdash; The morning sun had barely cast its fresh light over Tampa Bay when Ardashir Safavi &mdash; born in Iran, a refugee to Turkey, educated in the mid-Atlantic states &mdash; was up and patrolling two dozen Persian-language Web sites, hunting militant adversaries in cyberspace.        

His mission was to scan news reports, blogs, social media and online essays to identify those he viewed as &ldquo;containing lies, misinformation or just misperceptions&rdquo; about American military operations and Pentagon policy across the Middle East.        

In recent months, Mr. Safavi and his teammates spotted posts that included doctored photographs of Osama bin Laden purporting to prove that Al Qaeda&rsquo;s leader had not died in an American commando raid. They turned up blogs stating that the Pentagon was accelerating war plans for invading many Muslim nations, and others amplifying Taliban accusations that American troops rape with impunity across Afghanistan.        

Mr. Safavi works as part of the Digital Engagement Team, established in 2008 by the military&rsquo;s Central Command to &ldquo;counter extremist ideology, promote cultural awareness and explain U.S. interests,&rdquo; said Maj. David E. Nevers, the team&rsquo;s chief officer, who must approve all responses before they are posted on foreign-language Web sites.        

The team includes 20 native speakers of Arabic, Dari, Persian, Pashto, Urdu and Russian, the latter a shared language across the Muslim countries of the former Soviet states of Central Asia. Given that Central Command is responsible for military actions in an arc of instability stretching from the Indian Ocean across the Persian Gulf to the Red Sea, people here call their headquarters &ldquo;Tampa-stan.&rdquo;        

The government&rsquo;s expanding efforts in computer-network warfare, offense and defense are among the most secret enterprises carried out by the military and intelligence community. To counter the adversary&rsquo;s use of the Internet, American cyberwarriors have hacked into extremist chat rooms to sow confusion, or to inject poisonous code to take down militant Web sites. Sometimes, they choose not to act, but silently track the online movements of jihadists to learn their plans.        

In contrast, the Digital Engagement Team operates in total sunshine: all of the online postings carry an official stamp acknowledging sponsorship by Central Command.        

The team&rsquo;s operators &ldquo;respectfully deflect baseless and often irrational insults, confront adversaries with factual evidence and expose extremist propaganda that might otherwise go unrefuted,&rdquo; Major Nevers said. &ldquo;All engagements are transparent and attributable.&rdquo;        

The only obfuscation is the use of online pseudonyms to protect the civilian contract employees from potential retaliation.        

Mr. Safavi&rsquo;s Internet pen name is drawn from a grand Persian dynasty. On a recent morning, he spotted a provocative Persian posting that inspired an energetic thread of responses criticizing the Pentagon&rsquo;s relationship with a complicated ally, Pakistan, mostly posing theories of Great Game conspiracies pitting spy vs. spy, insurgency vs. military, Washington vs. Islamabad.        

The discussion was relevant beyond Mr. Safavi&rsquo;s native Iran, since there are large Persian-speaking populations in Afghanistan and in its northern neighbor Tajikistan.        

&ldquo;You&rsquo;ve heard of the Iron Curtain, of course,&rdquo; Mr. Safavi said. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re here to pierce the Electronic Curtain because the military has decided that it cannot cede this information space to violent extremists.&rdquo;        

Mr. Safavi typed up a translated summary of the Internet exchange, which in a matter of minutes had grown to 29 entries read by thousands more. He proposed a response drawn from Pentagon and State Department policy statements: it described shared American and Pakistani security interests, citing as evidence the large number of Pakistanis in security forces who were killed in battles with insurgents within that country&rsquo;s borders.        

Then he sent a message up his chain of command to Major Nevers on a form labeled &ldquo;Permission to Engage.&rdquo;        

The Digital Engagement Team works in cyberspace but not at network speeds because translation and approval take hours. Yet it has tried to make a virtue of the demands of oversight. If an offending Web posting is spotted in the early morning, the response is online by early afternoon, landing just as computer users across the Middle East resume their Web surfing in the hours between dinner and sleep.        
Thom Shanker reported from MacDill Air Force Base in Florida, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.
