
CAIRO &mdash; Tens of thousands of Islamists jammed Tahrir Square on Friday, demanding the swift exit of Egypt&rsquo;s interim military rulers in the most significant challenge to their authority since the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak nine months ago.        

The huge turnout was the first time that Egypt&rsquo;s Islamists had so openly and aggressively challenged military rule, ending an uneasy truce that had prevailed as long as the military appeared willing to allow the Islamists as much of a say in Egypt&rsquo;s future as they could win at the ballot box.        

That truce fell apart, on the eve of parliamentary elections, after the military council spelled out for the first time its intention to preserve a decisive role for itself in Egyptian politics far into the future, elevating itself above civilian control and imposing rules to protect individual and minority rights. And after sitting out many of the protests organized by liberals since Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s ouster, Islamists took to the streets on Friday in a fierce backlash.        

&ldquo;The people didn&rsquo;t sacrifice hundreds of lives in the revolution so that the military would jump over their will,&rdquo; said Mohamed Ibrahim, a teacher at a religious school who traveled from Mansoura, about 75 miles away, to attend. &ldquo;If they can do that, what is the point of parliamentary elections?&rdquo;        

The rally represented the beginning of a new battle between Egypt&rsquo;s two most powerful political forces, the military and the once-outlawed Muslim Brotherhood, that leaves Egyptian liberals and leftists anxious and divided on the sidelines.        

&ldquo;Each side is drawing a line in the sand over its future role in the political process,&rdquo; said Prof. Emad Shahin, an Egyptian scholar at Notre Dame who was in Tahrir Square on Friday. &ldquo;The military forces would like to secure an exit from the transitional period with some kind of assurances of their future role in the political scene, and the Islamists think that this could put a check on their power even if they win in clean and fair elections.&rdquo;        

After sunset, as thousands of protesters prepared to camp overnight in the square, the military-led government declared in a statement that it refused to withdraw its guidelines but that it would continue to debate them with political leaders through the beginning of the coming elections. The move ensured that the deeply polarizing debate would continue to grip the country as voters go to the polls, beginning Nov. 28.        

Many liberals were torn between their fears of military rule and a religious takeover. Most liberals stayed home despite the stated democratic demands of the protest: giving power to elected civilians. In fact, some liberals appeared to be looking to the military council to act as a hedge against a religious takeover and to impose a &ldquo;bill of rights&rdquo; before elections that the Islamists might win.        

&ldquo;The liberals would rather prolong the transitional phase than accept the results of clean and fair elections, which shows they are not very sure about their weight in society and politics,&rdquo; Professor Shahin said, suggesting they preferred &ldquo;to cooperate with those in power.&rdquo;        

The April 6 Movement, a pivotal force in the uprising, was one of the few liberal groups to make a conspicuous presence on Friday. Its banners called the day &ldquo;the Friday of One Demand&rdquo; &mdash; meaning a transfer of power to the lower house of Parliament as soon as it is seated in April. The military initially pledged to cede power to a civilian authority by September, but is now expected to delay that transition until 2013 or later.        

An April 6 activist said its members had been told not to talk about the military&rsquo;s controversial guidelines. &ldquo;Of course there are fears of Islamists&rsquo; taking power,&rdquo; said Dina Allithy, 23, a recent college graduate and a member of the group. &ldquo;But today we are trying to ignore all of that.&rdquo;        

The Brotherhood, an organization that honed its discipline under decades of police scrutiny, sent hundreds of members on Thursday night to camp out and start setting up in Tahrir Square, the staging ground of a two-week sit-in that ousted Mr. Mubarak in February. By Friday morning, buses arrived carrying thousands of supporters from outside Cairo.        
Mayy el Sheikh and Liam Stack contributed reporting.
