
RAMADI, Iraq &mdash; The American military has not yet left an air base along the contested internal border between the semiautonomous Kurdistan region and the rest of Iraq, but a dispute has already broken out over which side will control the strategic site once the Americans leave.        

While there, American soldiers helped keep the peace along a dozen or so disputed portions of the border. They patrolled jointly with units from the Iraqi Army and Kurdish regional troops, for example.        

This is now coming to an end in an area seen as one of those more likely for possible clashes after the United States withdraws. And while vacating the base, the military is freeing up yet another valuable asset for the two sides to contest.        

The Kurdish-dominated local police in Kirkuk &mdash; the city where the post, Forward Operating Base Warrior, is situated, and a flash point in the conflict between Kurds and Arabs &mdash; for a time on Thursday blocked senior Iraqi Army officials from entering the base.        

Kurdish regional authorities say they want the airfield to become a civilian airport rather than an Iraqi air force base once the United States withdraws. The United States, however, is handing over all bases to an office of the Iraqi central government.        

The Iraqi Army was eventually allowed to enter the base on Thursday, with the understanding, said Kurdish officials, that it would guard the site until it could be transformed into a civilian airport.        

The Kurdish police force also objected to the Iraqi military&rsquo;s entering the city limits of Kirkuk, an inflammatory move in a volatile city. Reporters for Iraqi state television accompanied the military, a move seemingly intended to raise the profile of the disagreement and underscore the central government&rsquo;s claims.        

&ldquo;Kirkuk witnessed tension between the Iraqi police and army because of the mistrust between the central government and local government,&rdquo; the deputy head of the provincial council in Kurdistan, Rebo Talabani, said in an interview. &ldquo;We will wait for some time to pass and see if they turn it into a civilian airport.&rdquo;        

Jabar al-Yawer, a spokesman for the pesh merga, the Kurdish regional security force, called the standoff between armed groups &ldquo;just a misunderstanding,&rdquo; and said the Iraqi prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, had agreed to create a civilian airport at the former base.        

The base is one of nine still occupied by the American military in Iraq, down from a peak of 505 bases. All will be vacated before the end of the year.        

As the United States withdraws, disagreements that had been suppressed by its presence along what is sometimes called the northern fault line threaten to jolt back to life. The most contentious is over oil.        

The central government is now objecting that ExxonMobil, America&rsquo;s largest oil company, is heightening tensions through a new deal struck just last month, even as the American military was pulling out of the border region, for six exploration blocs in the north. Exxon has declined to comment on the arrangement.        

Ali al-Fayadh, the deputy chairman of the oil committee in the Iraqi Parliament, said in an interview that three of the six blocs were not in fact in the Kurdistan region, but in contested regions in neighboring Nineveh Province, north of Kirkuk.        
