
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; The armed militias that emerged from Libya&rsquo;s civil war and units of the fledgling Libyan National Army are pressing the interim government for places in a new cabinet, which is expected to be seated shortly.        

The military forces have staged heavily armed and sometimes competing marches and demonstrations in recent days, as Prime Minister Abdel Rahim el-Keeb huddles with various city council, tribal and militia leaders to form a compromise government.        

Mr. Keeb is supposed to present a list of candidates on Sunday for the governing Transitional National Council to confirm by Tuesday, after weeks of delays. It will be the government&rsquo;s second cabinet but the first since last month, when the hostilities ended with the capture and killing of the former leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.        

For weeks, traffic has been snarled in the capital by militia members demanding back pay and better assistance for their wounded comrades. But in recent days, the demonstrations have become more overtly political, with the apparent intent to influence the formation of the government.        

But they were overshadowed Thursday night when the new national army, only days old, put on a parade at the Tripoli racetrack complete with a fly-by from a MIG fighter plane and paratroopers dropping out of a Soviet-era helicopter. By the side of the army&rsquo;s highest-ranking commander, Abdel Hakim Belhaj, stood the acting justice minister, Mohammed al-Allagi &mdash; a sign of civilian political support independent of Mr. Keeb.        

&ldquo;The rebels need to have a place in the new Libya,&rdquo; Mr. Belhaj told the crowd of soldiers and their families. &ldquo;As we agreed with Prime Minister Keeb, we will have some rebel leaders at the head of ministries. We certainly hope he keeps his promise.&rdquo;        

It was one of the most overtly political declarations by Mr. Belhaj, who is competing with militia leaders from the towns of Zintan and Misurata to become the formal head of the new army. Having fought in Afghanistan against the Soviet Union and been detained for a time at the American base in Guant&aacute;namo Bay, Cuba, he would seem a strange partner for Mr. Keeb, an American-educated electrical engineer who is considered moderate in his religious beliefs. Mr. Belhaj is known for his Islamist ideals and ties to the Persian Gulf state of Qatar, which has independently armed some military units, to the consternation of more secular leaders.        

Mr. Keeb is expected to divide the positions of defense minister, army chief of staff and head of a new police force among competing factions. The current governing council has already endorsed Mr. Belhaj as official military commander in Tripoli, where most members of the new national army come from.        

But whether Mr. Belhaj will be able to consolidate control over the nation&rsquo;s fractured military units is far from certain. For now, he commands one of several forces vying for control of Tripoli, including the battle-hardened militias from Misurata and Zintan, which continue to occupy areas of the capital under their own commanders.        

To complicate matters further, Abdullah Naker, a competing commander and head of the Tripoli Revolutionary Council, has publicly refused to acknowledge Mr. Belhaj as leader of the armed forces. He claims to have thousands of fighters under his command.        

Mr. Keeb has made few public appearances since he was chosen by a deeply divided Transitional National Council nearly three weeks ago. His choices for the cabinet remain a closely guarded secret, and it is not clear he has the stomach for a fight. He has indicated he may simply compile a list of candidates for the council and let other leaders decide.        

For now, civilian leaders are confident they can unite the militias into a single army and disband any recalcitrant forces.        

&ldquo;All these fighters will fall under the army or security forces,&rdquo; Abdel Hafidh Ghoga, vice chairman of the Transitional National Council, said last week. &ldquo;After a month we will be able to do that.&rdquo;        

But there is little sign of progress so far.        

The Misurata militias did not join the parade on Thursday night, but their fighters conspicuously drove outside the racetrack during the parade in pickup trucks armed with heavy antiaircraft guns. There was a pushing match among rival fighters, and several drew their weapons, but no one fired.        

&ldquo;I take my orders from the Misurata military council,&rdquo; said Nordeen Omar Swese, who manned one of the heavily armed pickups. &ldquo;The Misurata brigades have not joined the national army.&rdquo;        

The Misurata fighters, who played a crucial part in the war, say they do not want Islamists to have outsize influence in the new military. At recent celebrations of the recent victory, their leaders have said they also will not accept former Qaddafi supporters in high positions in the government. Several officials in the National Transitional Council did serve in the old regime, and are considered candidates for the cabinet.        
