
MOSCOW &mdash; An elegant after-work crowd packed into the Estrada Theater last week, having shelled out as much as $250 for an evening devoted to laughing at Vladimir V. Putin.        



It was clear as soon as the stage lights went up that this was not some low-rent puny-autocrat shtick. Behind a desk on stage sat a fat poet, smiling wordlessly, like a giant cherub. Beside him stood an actor from a legendary Soviet theater dynasty, his long face projecting mirth and despair.        

The &ldquo;Citizen Poet&rdquo; project &mdash; conceived by three friends after a night of heavy drinking &mdash; is pushing the edges of Internet programming in Russia, delivering political satire to an audience that numbers in the millions rather than the thousands. It has also tapped into the sour response of many Russians to Mr. Putin&rsquo;s plan to return to the presidency, a mood made darker by the absence of any viable course of action.        

Unless poetry counts as a course of action. The actor began an uncanny imitation of the poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko, whose 1957 lament over a faithless friend had been rewritten to channel Mr. Putin&rsquo;s hurt feelings last spring when President Dmitri A. Medvedev differed with him in public:        

Here is what&rsquo;s befallen me        

My old friend does not come to me        

He even feels free        

To open his mouth and disagree        

Yes, I taught him to put on skis        

To keep the Kuril Islands from the Japanese        

Back then he was not so loud        

He barely ever made a sound.        

A little while later, he recited a sentimental, folkloric classic by the Soviet poet Aleksandr Tvardovsky, retrofitted as a commentary on Mr. Putin&rsquo;s stage-managed outings:        

Today after lunch        

Having finished our cutlets        

Medvedev and I were wondering        

How can we shake things up?        

We have done everything        

Amused the whole country        

We took the helm of airplanes        

Immersed ourselves in the depths        

We did not hide our tender friendship        

Sang rock &rsquo;n&rsquo; roll        

Milked cows        

Twitter, sweater, Macintosh        

Skiing, dancing, the whole nine yards        

To the clatter of our teacups        

The answer was spoken        

We have never once played badminton on combines!        

When they began, the progenitors of &ldquo;Citizen Poet&rdquo; &mdash; the poet Dmitrii L. Bykov, the actor Mikhail O. Yefremov and the producer Andrei Vasiliev &mdash; expected their weekly videos to be viewed at most by a few thousand people. But their first clip got 250,000 hits, Mr. Vasiliev said. Ten months and three dozen satirical poems later, that number is at 12 million to 14 million, according to Yuri Katsman, who publishes the poems on his Web portal, F5.        

That is nothing compared with the televised satire of the pre-Putin era, which was powerful enough to affect politicians&rsquo; approval ratings. The puppet show &ldquo;Kukly,&rdquo; which was forced off the air in 2002 as the government took control of Russia&rsquo;s popular channels, reached 80 million people every week, according to Viktor A. Shenderovich, who wrote scripts for the show.        

Still, &ldquo;Citizen Poet&rdquo; has managed to engage Russians who are politically passive but nonetheless alienated, much as Jon Stewart did with &ldquo;The Daily Show&rdquo; during George W. Bush&rsquo;s presidency.        

&ldquo;The government feeds us,&rdquo; said Mr. Vasiliev, a longtime journalist, as he waited to take the stage as master of ceremonies, drinking what seemed not to be his first cocktail. &ldquo;This is not a joke. The sillier they behave, the better our show is. Just imagine &mdash; the two of them went to harvest corn and to play badminton. Really, I cherish our government. They nourish us.&rdquo;        

Their act featured jokes about prison camps, however, suggesting at least a small edge of anxiety. In March, the general director of Dozhd, the progressive Internet television station that had commissioned the project, decided the Yevtushenko poem was too insulting to Mr. Medvedev. They edited the narrator&rsquo;s harshest lines about the president:        

He may at times cast glares of ire        

And huff and strain to look a tsar        

The shadow lies as I request        

And we&rsquo;ll be friends as in the past.        

Ultimately, she decided to cut the whole thing.        

At that point, the three men began to post their work on the Internet directly. They did not consult with officials about this decision, and the next month, when Mr. Putin invited Mr. Bykov and Mr. Yefremov to join him at a gathering of intellectuals and artists, neither man accepted. The project has since received sponsorship from the billionaire owner of the New Jersey Nets, Mikhail D. Prokhorov, who said he was proud to lend them his support, &ldquo;even though I have been on the receiving end of their cruel and unjust humor (twice!).&rdquo;        

Mr. Vasiliev likes to joke that they would be in jail already if their critiques were not presented in the style of classic poets. He recalled getting a worried call from Mr. Yefremov&rsquo;s mother, and responding: &ldquo;How can they lock him up? He&rsquo;s Lermontov! He&rsquo;s even wearing a jacket!&rdquo;        

Mr. Yefremov, for his part, said the project had no political purpose. He described himself as &ldquo;not Putin&rsquo;s fan,&rdquo; but said that the political alternatives make any change of leadership unappealing.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid that it will be even worse,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;That frightens me much more.&rdquo;        

Anyway, he added, every king&rsquo;s court includes a jester.        

&ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s good that they don&rsquo;t notice us so far, or pretend that they don&rsquo;t,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Maybe this thing is too small for them, for what they are doing.&rdquo; Otherwise, he added jovially, &ldquo;I might be on a train to Magadan.&rdquo;        

But the project has landed at an uncertain moment in Russian politics.        

Public support for Mr. Putin&rsquo;s system appears to be declining steadily despite efforts to shore it up; last week, the independent Levada polling center released new numbers showing that support for the governing party, United Russia, had dropped by nine percentage points over the previous two weeks, to 51 percent. Mr. Putin&rsquo;s approval rating is at 61 percent, still high by international standards but 17 points below where it was last November. Meanwhile, Mr. Putin&rsquo;s announcement that he will return to the presidency has sent the message that there is no potential for substantive political change for years to come.        

At the Estrada last week, that announcement was replayed on a huge video screen to sardonic voiceovers from Mr. Vasiliev, and the hall rang with laughter, the comforting sound of 800 people who shared exactly the same opinion.        

But Mr. Bykov&rsquo;s poems were not all funny, and they offered little in the way of hope. In a parody of Vladimir Mayakovsky&rsquo;s utopian anthem of 1929, &ldquo;Here Will Be a Garden-City,&rdquo; he paints a landscape in which the only certainty is Mr. Putin, &ldquo;a meek Lieutenant Colonel from the swamps of St. Petersburg.&rdquo;        

As agile as a lover, he found his way inside our skulls        

I am looking at the Lieutenant Colonel and I see that he is us        

All we can do is drink ourselves blind        

That is the only garden-city we will find.        
