
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The grand council of Afghan delegates known as the loya jirga drew to a close Saturday, choosing to support President Hamid Karzai&rsquo;s vision for negotiating a strategic agreement that could keep a long-term American military presence in Afghanistan.        



For the past four days, more than 2,000 delegates, including elders, local and regional leaders and government officials, met to discuss some of the country&rsquo;s weightiest issues, including the negotiations with the United States and another debate about how to start peace talks with the Taliban. But from the beginning, the jirga was called into question by both its timing &mdash; it seemed to undercut an active session of Parliament &mdash; and its composition, in which about 90 percent of the delegates were handpicked by Mr. Karzai or his aides.        

Important Afghan figures, including many members of Parliament, prominent civic leaders and political opposition, responded by boycotting the meeting. That undermined the traditional weight that jirgas are given in Afghan society, though this body was advisory only with no legal force behind it.        

Mr. Karzai called the jirga for just a few weeks before an international summit meeting on Afghanistan, scheduled for Dec. 5 in Bonn, Germany. Aides said he hoped the jirga would give him support for his effort to pin down a long-term American presence, which has alarmed some of Afghanistan&rsquo;s neighbors and enjoys little popularity in many parts of the country. The issue is already in negotiations with American officials, who have expressed reluctance to commit to a large-scale presence after the current 2014 troop withdrawal deadline.        

The jirga, as expected, supported Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s main aim, and also reacted strongly in favor to the president&rsquo;s desire to include tough limitations on the kinds of missions that American troops could undertake. Those include night raids, which are widely unpopular with Afghans but seen as vital by American commanders, who have made the issue a red line in talks with Afghan leaders.        

Afghans complain that night raids, in which suspected insurgents are arrested in their homes, violate Afghan customs and too often result in innocent casualties. That argument was buttressed Saturday in Ghazni, where two Afghan police officers were killed in a clash with what Afghan authorities said were American Special Operations forces in the midst of conducting a night raid, according to Abdul Ghani, head of security for the Ghazni police department. A spokesman for the American military said that two Afghan policemen were killed after they opened fire on a combined force of Afghan and American troops at a checkpoint.        

The second issue debated by the jirga, how to restart peace talks with the Taliban, was relatively inconclusive. It has become an article of faith among both Afghan and coalition officials that there is no purely military solution to the Afghan war. The Taliban, however, have publicly rejected peace talks, and even scuttled the chance of back-channel overtures in September when they assassinated Burhanuddin Rabbani, the head of the country&rsquo;s High Peace Council.        

The absence of prominent lawmakers and opposition figures was a clear weight on the meeting. Some lawmakers who chose to attend still complained about Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s timing. Although he is a supporter of a strategic agreement with America, Mohammad Naim Hamidzia, chairman of the internal security committee of Parliament, called the loya jirga illegal and unconstitutional because Parliament is still in session. &ldquo;The government is trying to undermine the Parliament,&rdquo; he said.        

The loya jirga, traditionally held in a tent, this time had a specially constructed hall, after a rocket attack had hit the tent at a loya jirga in 2010 and narrowly missed the president. Heavy security preparations this time blocked streets and closed nearly all businesses and offices in Kabul from Wednesday through Saturday. There was only one minor rocket attack, which did not cause any casualties.        

Despite the security precautions, Mr. Karzai made the short trip from the Presidential Palace to the jirga site by helicopter. For his return, there were four helicopters, two of them apparently decoys.        

The delegates agreed that the peace process in the future should be Afghan-led, and issued other general expressions of support for reconciliation, but no concrete plans or overtures.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m fully endorsing every one of your resolutions,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai told the delegates before leaving the loya jirga. Seventy-six resolutions were read out in all, and mostly they incorporated the president&rsquo;s recommendations.        

Even before the delegates, divided into 40 working committees, began to take up the jirga&rsquo;s main issues on Wednesday, there was the thorny matter of Committee 39.        

In recent years, Afghans have come to strongly associate that number with pimps, considered the absolute dregs of Afghan society. Most Afghans are so touchy about it that they won&rsquo;t buy a car with 39 on the license plate, or even use a telephone number with those digits in it.        

In the end, the delegates agreed to rename it Committee 41. Easy enough. But the matter was still on delegates&rsquo; minds, and so when the 76 final resolutions were read out on Saturday, it was tough to hear the contents of the 39th because of all the nervous laughter that greeted it.        

Nadera Geyaa, a delegate from Kunduz, was not amused. &ldquo;There is no religious or academic basis for hating this number; it&rsquo;s just a superstition,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It makes me sad that even our intellectuals and elders worry about such useless issues.&rdquo;        
Sangar Rahimi and Jawad Sukhanyar contributed reporting.
