
CAIRO &mdash; A police action to roust a few hundred protesters out of Tahrir Square on Saturday instead drew thousands of people from across Egyptian society into the streets, where they battled riot police officers for hours in the most violent manifestation yet of growing anger at the military-led interim government.        

In a battle reminiscent of the clashes that led to the ouster of former President Hosni Mubarak nine months ago, a mass of protesters converged on Tahrir Square, fled before an onslaught of riot police officers firing tear gas and rubber bullets, and then surged back to retake and hold the square through the early hours of Sunday.        

State media reported that more than 650 people had been injured, including 40 riot police officers, and at least one civilian was killed.        

Coming a day after a huge Islamist demonstration and just more than a week before the first post-Mubarak parliamentary elections, the outpouring of anger was the strongest rebuke yet with the military&rsquo;s attempts to grant itself permanent governmental powers. And it was a reuniting of Islamist and liberal protest movements that had drifted apart since the early days of the uprising.        

This time, instead of chanting for the fall of Mr. Mubarak, the demonstrators were chanting for the fall of the ruling military council that initially presented itself as the revolution&rsquo;s savior.        

&ldquo;The generals said to us, &lsquo;We are your partners,&rsquo; and we believed them,&rdquo; said Tarek Saaed, 55, a construction safety supervisor who used a cane to walk among the boisterous crowds in the square. &ldquo;Then the next day we find out they are partners with Mubarak,&rdquo; he added, calling the day a turning point for Egypt.        

The crowd only grew as state news media reported that the military said it would step back from a blueprint it had laid out this month for a lasting political role under the new constitution. Many of the protesters, and some outside observers, argued that the confrontation marked a significant setback to the military.        

&ldquo;The military council now feels that the political street will not accept that the military is going to hold the power for a long time,&rdquo; argued Mahmoud Shokry, a former Egyptian ambassador and veteran political insider. &ldquo;I think the military is going to reconsider the situation once more.&rdquo;        

After pledging to turn over power to civilians by September, the military has postponed the handover until after the ratification of a constitution and election of a president, sometime in 2013 or later. Then this month the military-led government put in writing a set of ground rules for a next constitution that would have given the military authority to intervene in civilian politics while protecting it from civilian oversight &mdash; setting off a firestorm.        

&ldquo;An extremely big mistake,&rdquo; Mr. Shokry said.        

Opposition to those guidelines brought the Muslim Brotherhood, the Islamist group, back to the streets in force Friday as part of a rally tens of thousands of Islamists and a smaller contingent of liberals calling for an end to military rule.        

In response, the military-led interim government announced Saturday morning that its constitutional guidelines would no longer be binding, only advisory. The government also revised the rules to say that the only role of the armed forces was protecting the country and &ldquo;preserving its unity,&rdquo; rather than the broader writ to guard Egypt&rsquo;s &ldquo;constitutional legitimacy.&rdquo; Many, especially Islamists, believed the phrase had granted the authority to intervene at will in the civilian government.        

In another bid to placate the protesters, the revisions also explicitly place the military under civilian government. &ldquo;Like other state institutions,&rdquo; the new text declares, the military should &ldquo;abide by the constitutional and legislative regulations.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The president of the republic is the supreme commander of the armed forces and the minister of defense is the general commander of the armed forces,&rdquo; the revised declaration said.        

Still though, the military has not agreed to cede power once a Parliament is elected, or while the constitution is being drafted. Nor has it backed away from its right to set other nominating procedures for the constitutional drafting committee or to impose other rules on the final text.        
Mayy el Sheikh, Dina Amer and Amina Ismail contributed reporting.
