
For the United States, the weekend clashes in Cairo crystallized the defining policy quandary of the Arab Spring: how to square contradictory American impulses that include support for democratic change, a desire for stability and wariness of Islamists who have become a potent political force.        

The violent confrontations of security forces with thousands of people in Tahrir Square to protest military rule bear a resemblance to the heady days of February when Hosni Mubarak was ousted. But they were perhaps more accurately seen as early skirmishes in what is likely to be a long and chaotic struggle for power, with an uncertain outcome and huge challenges for American policy makers.        

The immediate worry is that protests could spiral out of control and meet with a military crackdown that might endanger the first parliamentary elections to follow Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s ouster, with some voting set to begin Nov. 28.        

&ldquo;This weekend of violence should be a matter of very great concern in Washington,&rdquo; Stephen McInerney, executive director of the Project on Middle East Democracy in Washington, said in an interview from Cairo.        

&ldquo;People on Tahrir Square see the administration as backing the SCAF,&rdquo; Mr. McInerney said, using the acronym for the military ruling body, the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think that&rsquo;s entirely fair, but that&rsquo;s the perception.&rdquo;        

The outcome of the political turmoil in Egypt, by far the most populous country in the Arab world, is of enormous consequence to the United States. It will set an influential precedent for smaller countries in the region, determine whether the Muslim Brotherhood&rsquo;s brand of Islam is compatible with democracy and decide the future of relations with Israel.        

In the longer run, there is concern that the Brotherhood, which showed its clout by turning out tens of thousands of demonstrators on Friday, could eventually pose its own threat to democratic values and minority rights by imposing conservative religious rule. Brian Katulis, of the Center for American Progress, said the administration had been actively reaching out to the Brotherhood to keep communications open and encourage its leaders to send a message of respect for basic human rights.        

Both Mr. McInerney and Mr. Katulis are members of the Working Group on Egypt, American experts who have met since well before the Arab Spring to discuss developments in that country and have been consulted by the White House.        

On Thursday, the working group called on the administration to require the military to loosen its grip on power as a condition of continued American military aid, now $1.3 billion a year and providing nearly a quarter of Egypt&rsquo;s military budget.        

&ldquo;Today, the outcome of the revolution remains mired in doubt, and it is far from clear that the SCAF is willing to truly give up the reins of power,&rdquo; the group&rsquo;s statement said. It noted that the country&rsquo;s military rulers have postponed lifting Egypt&rsquo;s state of emergency and moved to protect officers&rsquo; entrenched economic privileges.        

Even before the weekend&rsquo;s confrontations, the Obama administration had begun to publicly caution Egyptian military commanders, longtime American allies and beneficiaries whose power survived Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s departure, that they could not continue to cling to political control.        

&ldquo;If, over time, the most powerful political force in Egypt remains a roomful of unelected officials, they will have planted the seeds for future unrest, and Egyptians will have missed a historic opportunity,&rdquo; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said this month.        

That message may have been reinforced by the extraordinary show of force on Friday by the Muslim Brotherhood, which demanded an end to military rule, and by the mix of Islamists and liberals who battled the police in the weekend showdowns. The military responded with force on the streets, but also retreated from its initial proposals, announcing Saturday that its constitutional guidelines would be only advisory, not compulsory.        

Paul J. Sullivan, a specialist on the Egyptian military at Georgetown University, said top Egyptian officers regarded with alarm the current raucous political competition, including the Muslim Brotherhood, the more conservative Islamists known as Salafis and secular liberals of various stripes.        

&ldquo;The military has a fear of chaos,&rdquo; Mr. Sullivan said. &ldquo;They see a sailboat with 15 people wrestling for the tiller.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
American military aid and personal relationships between American and Egyptian commanders give the United States great influence, and the two sides are in daily communication formally and informally, Mr. Sullivan said. But American military officials keep their messages private, as they should, he said.        

&ldquo;We should not make it look like we&rsquo;re deeply involved in trying to solve this,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Most Egyptians would not appreciate that.&rdquo;        

The struggle for a new order in the Arab world is unfolding against a boisterous American presidential election soundtrack. At a debate focusing on foreign policy on Nov. 12, Republican candidates expressed skepticism about foreign aid and about the outcome of the Arab Spring, with particular concern about violence against Egypt&rsquo;s Coptic Christian minority.        

Newt Gingrich, the former speaker of the House, said that United States aid for Egypt &mdash; totaling roughly $3 billion annually between military and nonmilitary assistance &mdash; would &ldquo;certainly be completely rethought&rdquo; if he became president.        

&ldquo;And candidly, the degree to which the Arab Spring may become an anti-Christian spring is something which bothers me a great deal,&rdquo; he said.        

For his part, the businessman Herman Cain accused President Obama of being &ldquo;on the wrong side in nearly every situation in the Arab world.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Our relationship with Egypt may not survive, because when this president backed the opposition, it turned out that the opposition was more of the Muslim Brotherhood, which could end up with a majority of control of this new government,&rdquo; Mr. Cain said.        

Such remarks may presage a who-lost-Egypt theme on the campaign trail in the event that Islamists ultimately hold the balance of power. But for the Obama administration, countering such attacks may have to wait until Egypt&rsquo;s voters go to the polls next week for their own unfamiliar experiment in electoral democracy.        
