
CAIRO &mdash; The future of the Arab world, perched between revolt and the contempt of a crumbling order, was fought for in the streets of downtown Cairo on Wednesday.        

Tens of thousands of protesters who have reimagined the very notion of citizenship in a tumultuous week of defiance proclaimed with sticks, home-made bombs and a shower of rocks that they would not surrender their revolution to the full brunt of an authoritarian government that answered their calls for change with violence.        

The Arab world watched a moment that suggested it would never be the same again &mdash; and waited to see whether protest or crackdown would win the day. Words like &ldquo;uprising&rdquo; and &ldquo;revolution&rdquo; only hint at the scale of events in Egypt, which have already reverberated across Yemen, Jordan, Syria and even Saudi Arabia, offering a new template for change in a region that long reeled from its own sense of stagnation. &ldquo;Every Egyptian understands now,&rdquo; said Magdi al-Sayyid, one of the protesters.        

The protesters have spoken for themselves to a government that, like many across the Middle East, treated them as a nuisance. For years, pundits have predicted that Islamists would be the force that toppled governments across the Arab world. But so far, they have been submerged in an outpouring of popular dissent that speaks to a unity of message, however fleeting &mdash; itself a sea change in the region&rsquo;s political landscape. In the vast panorama of Tahrir Square on Wednesday, Egyptians were stationed at makeshift barricades, belying pat dismissals of the power of the Arab street.        

&ldquo;The street is not afraid of governments anymore,&rdquo; said Shawki al-Qadi, an opposition lawmaker in Yemen, itself roiled by change. &ldquo;It is the opposite. Governments and their security forces are afraid of the people now. The new generation, the generation of the Internet, is fearless. They want their full rights, and they want life, a dignified life.&rdquo;        

The power of Wednesday&rsquo;s stand was that it turned those abstractions into reality.        

The battle was waged by Mohammed Gamil, a dentist in a blue tie who ran toward the barricades of Tahrir Square. It was joined by Fayeqa Hussein, a veiled mother of seven who filled a Styrofoam container with rocks. Magdi Abdel-Rahman, a 60-year-old grandfather, kissed the ground before throwing himself against crowds mobilized by a state bent on driving them from the square. And the charge was led by Yasser Hamdi, who said his 2-year-old daughter would live a life better than the one he endured.        

&ldquo;Aren&rsquo;t you men?&rdquo; he shouted. &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s go!&rdquo;        

As the crowd pushed back the government&rsquo;s men, down a street of airline offices, banks and a bookstore called L&rsquo;Orientaliste, Mr. Abdel-Rahman made  the stakes clear. &ldquo;They want to take our revolution from us,&rdquo; he declared.        

The Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt&rsquo;s largest opposition force, has entered the fray. In a poignant moment, its followers knelt in prayer at dusk, their faces lighted by the soft glow of burning fires a stone&rsquo;s throw away. But Mr. Abdel-Rahman&rsquo;s description of the uprising as a revolution suggested that the events of the past week had overwhelmed even the Brotherhood, long considered the sole agent of change here.        

&ldquo;Dignity&rdquo; was a word often used Wednesday, and its emphasis underlined the breadth of a movement that is, so far, leaderless. Neither the Brotherhood nor a handful of opposition leaders &mdash; men like Mohammed ElBaradei or Ayman Nour &mdash; have managed to articulate hopelessness, the humiliations at the hands of the police and the outrage at having too little money to marry, echoed in the streets of Palestinian camps in Jordan and in the urban misery of Baghdad&rsquo;s Sadr City. For many, the Brotherhood itself is a vestige of an older order that has failed to deliver.        

&ldquo;The problem is that for 30 years, Mubarak didn&rsquo;t let us build an alternative,&rdquo; said Adel Wehba, as he watched the tumult in the square. &ldquo;No alternative for anything.&rdquo;        

The lack of an alternative may have led to the uprising, making the street the last option for not only the young and dispossessed but also virtually every element of Egypt&rsquo;s population &mdash; turbaned clerics, businessmen from wealthy suburbs, film directors and well-to-do engineers. Months ago, despair at the prospect of change in the Arab world was commonplace. Protesters on Wednesday acted as though they were making a last stand at what they had won, in an uprising that is distinctly nationalist.        

&ldquo;He won&rsquo;t go,&rdquo; President Hosni Mubarak&rsquo;s supporters chanted on the other side. &ldquo;He will go,&rdquo; went the reply. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re not going to go.&rdquo;        
Nada Bakri contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon.
