
PARIS &mdash; The brewing conflict over the fate of two high-ranking Libyan figures &mdash; Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi, once Libya&rsquo;s heir apparent, and Abdullah Senussi, the former intelligence chief &mdash; is not only a test for the country&rsquo;s stated commitment to the rule of law, but also a moment of reckoning for the International Criminal Court as it tries to expand its reach.        

Both men, who were captured over the past two days by different militia groups, are wanted by the international court on charges of crimes against humanity, and Libya&rsquo;s transitional government had promised to hand them over to the international court in The Hague once they were caught.        

Within hours of Mr. Qaddafi&rsquo;s capture on Saturday, the court&rsquo;s prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, announced that he would be traveling to Libya, a message that seemed intended as a reminder that the court had to have its say in the case.        

But that is already in question, with the transitional government appearing to waver in the face of domestic pressure to try the men in Libya.        

Cooperation with the international court in this case would mean either handing over Mr. Qaddafi and Mr. Senussi, who was captured Sunday, or recognizing that it is for the court to decide if they can be tried in Libya. For months, the prosecutor&rsquo;s office in The Hague had been preparing for the arrest of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, who was killed last month, his son Seif al-Islam and Mr. Senussi, the intelligence chief, as Mr. Moreno-Ocampo and his staff have worked closely with members of Libya&rsquo;s Transitional National Council.        

The prosecutor has been hoping for a compromise to hold two trials, one in The Hague, another in Tripoli, lawyers familiar with the prosecutor&rsquo;s thinking said.        

Talks between the different sides have included a plan to send Mr. Qaddafi to The Hague as soon as possible to start a first, narrowly focused trial on charges of crimes against humanity. Those charges are limited to events in late February, when Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s government cracked down against peaceful protesters and dissidents, before a full-scale conflict erupted between Qaddafi loyalists and rebel forces.        

According to this plan, Libya could subsequently try Mr. Qaddafi, who is 39, in a domestic court dealing with a far wider range of allegations of crimes during his father&rsquo;s reign, including corruption, abuse of state funds, killings and torture.        

Holding a first trial in The Hague, lawyers and diplomats said, would have the benefit of keeping Mr. Qaddafi in a secure place and allow time for Libya to stabilize. The country also needs to build up a justice system, virtually from scratch, that is able to handle credible trials.        

But Libyans both inside and outside the new government appear deeply divided over the idea of sending Mr. Qaddafi and Mr. Senussi to The Hague first. Lawyers said that a third option might be that the International Criminal Court&rsquo;s judges could sit in Tripoli, meaning that the trial would be held in Libya, but not by Libyans.        

If Libya wants to try Mr. Qaddafi at home for crimes against humanity or other charges, while respecting international rules, its first step is to challenge the proceedings started in The Hague, which it has a right to do. Libya is not a signatory to the court, but its case has landed there on instructions from the United Nations Security Council.        

Libya, like any country, is to be given priority to try its own citizens, according to the international court&rsquo;s statute. The court was set up to complement, not to replace, national courts. But Libya will have to convince the judges in The Hague that it is willing and able to deliver a fair trial at home.        

It faces a number of obstacles: it has no working court system that will pass international standards; it has the death penalty, which the international court does not; and the killing of Colonel Qaddafi last month at the hands of his captors may not inspire the judges with confidence.        

The role of the prosecutor will be to explain the legal steps to officials in Tripoli, and perhaps convince them that The Hague for the moment is the better option. Ultimately, it is up to the judges whether to hand over the cases against Mr. Qaddafi and Mr. Senussi to the Libyans. Libya could simply ignore the court, which 119 countries have recognized.        

But Mr. Moreno-Ocampo also has additional reasons to be seen in Libya and to remind the world of the court&rsquo;s legal authority over Mr. Qaddafi and Mr. Senussi.        

Several weeks ago, a number of Western officials, American and British among them, caused a stir by declaring that Libyans should try their former leaders at home.        

Much to the chagrin of the court&rsquo;s supporters, the officials&rsquo; statement appeared to brush aside the international court&rsquo;s current process and the Security Council&rsquo;s decision that set it in motion.        
