
LONDON &mdash; In one sense, almost everything unfolding in Court 16 at the Old Bailey is d&eacute;j&agrave; vu. In the first week of a murder trial that is expected to last many weeks, the jury has heard a grim recounting of the death of Stephen Lawrence, a black teenager who was stabbed on a chilly south London street in 1993, an event that has been exhaustively chronicled through years of public inquiries, inconclusive court proceedings and graphic coverage in Britain&rsquo;s newspapers.        

But in another sense, legal experts and commentators say, the case may be one of the most resonant ever heard in the Old Bailey, where many of Britain&rsquo;s grimmest murder trials have been conducted since the 1750s. Some say the trial of Gary Dobson, 36, and David Norris, 35, who deny being part of a gang of five white youths who attacked Mr. Lawrence, 18, and another black teenager as the two waited for a bus, is Britain&rsquo;s most important trial in decades.        

For many Britons, it is a test of the system&rsquo;s ability to deliver race-blind justice in this increasingly multicultural country, and to achieve closure in a killing that they say has strained race relations more than any single episode in memory.        

The trial centers on the evening of April 22, 1993, when Mr. Lawrence and his friend Duwayne Brooks were heading home from a community center in Eltham, a suburban district about 10 miles from central London. The area is a tapestry of leafy side streets, high-rise apartments and one of Britain&rsquo;s oldest golf courses, Royal Blackheath. Its population in 1993, as it is now, was heavily white and middle-class, with black families like the Lawrences accounting for less than 5 percent. Racial tensions were running high in Eltham, and racially motivated youth gangs were active.        

Testimony from eyewitnesses &mdash; including bystanders at the bus stop, passers-by who had a close view of what happened, ambulance attendants who tried to aid Mr. Lawrence as he bled to death, as well as Mr. Brooks himself, now 36 and a local councilor in Eltham &mdash; have described what appeared to be an unprovoked racial assault on the teenagers. Witnesses say a pack of white youths ran across the road, with one shouting a racial epithet, then pounced on Mr. Lawrence as Mr. Brooks broke loose.        

One man who was at the bus stop, Royston Westbrook, told the court that Mr. Lawrence had gone down through the &ldquo;sheer weight of numbers&rdquo;; he said the attackers had rained blows and kicks on Mr. Lawrence in silence, then &ldquo;walked off quite casually,&rdquo; with the whole attack taking less than 10 seconds.        

Mr. Brooks testified in tears that he had seen one youth with a &ldquo;shiny metal weapon&rdquo; about a foot long thrust it downward at Mr. Lawrence, who had fallen to the sidewalk. Mr. Lawrence got to his feet and tried to flee after Mr. Brooks, but he made it only 220 yards, asking his friend as he stumbled forward, &ldquo;What&rsquo;s happened?&rdquo; He then collapsed, bleeding heavily, and died shortly afterward. A pathologist testified that Mr. Lawrence succumbed to two five-inch-deep stab wounds in a shoulder and his neck; both severed arteries.        

Similar accounts have been made public many times before in court hearings and public inquiries. But the judge in the Old Bailey trial, Colman Treacy, wary of a mistrial, instructed jurors to ignore all that they had read or heard about the case before, and to observe an &ldquo;absolute prohibition&rdquo; on Internet searches. He imposed tight restraints on the news media as well, banning all but the most general references to previous court proceedings, an inquest and other investigations.        

The restrictions extend to an exhaustive inquiry led by a judge whose 1999 report said Scotland Yard&rsquo;s handling of the Lawrence case, and its failure to arrest and charge any suspect for many years, had displayed &ldquo;pernicious and persistent institutionalized racism,&rdquo; a finding that led to an upheaval in the police&rsquo;s handling of race-related issues that continues today. They also cover a 1996 trial that resulted from a private criminal prosecution initiated by Mr. Lawrence&rsquo;s parents, who immigrated to Britain from Jamaica in the 1960s.        

Justice Treacy restricted reporters to saying the 1996 trial had collapsed for a lack of evidence. But that trial played a significant part in the history of the case, fostering widespread unease across Britain at the failure to hold anybody responsible for the killing, and prompting one of the most significant legal reforms in decades.        

A law that took effect in 2005 set aside the centuries-old &ldquo;double jeopardy&rdquo; protection against being prosecuted twice for the same offense if fresh evidence becomes available. The prosecution in the current trial says its new evidence is forensic: traces of Mr. Lawrence&rsquo;s blood that an independent laboratory identified on a jacket belonging to Mr. Dobson and in an evidence bag used to hold the jacket, microscopic fibers from the defendants&rsquo; clothing found on garments cut from Mr. Lawrence&rsquo;s body and two strands of hair matching Mr. Lawrence&rsquo;s found in an evidence bag that held Mr. Norris&rsquo;s jeans.        

Together, the prosecution says, this new evidence demonstrates that the two defendants were at the scene of the attack, a point on which the 1996 trial foundered. Lawyers for Mr. Dobson and Mr. Norris say the two men can show they were elsewhere at the time.        

Mr. Lawrence&rsquo;s parents &mdash; Neville Lawrence, 69, a retired carpenter and plasterer who now lives mainly in Jamaica, and Doreen Lawrence, 59, a special-needs teacher in 1993 and a human rights campaigner now &mdash;divorced nearly 10 years ago. But they have sat together in the courtroom with their second son, Stuart, 34, through most of the testimony so far, in seats only about 10 feet from the defendants, though they barely glance at the two men.        

The couple&rsquo;s campaign for justice for their son &mdash; denied so far, they say, because he was black &mdash; and for wider rights for blacks in Britain has won acclaim, including medals bestowed by Queen Elizabeth II in 2002. Now, they hope the Old Bailey trial will be the final turning point in their personal quest.        
