
A simmering rivalry between Iran&rsquo;s president and powerful adversaries within the conservative hierarchy spilled into the open on Monday when security forces briefly arrested his top media adviser, who also runs the official news agency and a leading newspaper, witnesses and Iranian news accounts said.        

The witnesses said the adviser, Ali Akbar Javanfekr, was handcuffed for an hour in a raid on his Tehran office and released only after President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad threatened to come personally and free him. The security forces used tear gas when they barged into the office, the witnesses said, and they arrested at least 32 other people. It was not clear whether the others had been released.        

Mr. Javanfekr is the chief executive of the official Islamic Republic News Agency, known by its acronym, IRNA, and the manager of IRNA&rsquo;s print affiliate, Iran, the official daily newspaper. He is one of the most powerful figures in publicizing Iran&rsquo;s government policies and messages to the outside world.        

Details on the exact circumstances of the raid were not clear. But the episode appeared to be the most dramatic instance in which the friction between Mr. Ahmadinejad and conservatives in the government emerged in the open; the president&rsquo;s conservative critics have increasingly challenged him over what they regard as a &ldquo;deviant current&rdquo; of presidential advisers who want to subvert the authority of the Islamic clergy.        

The catalyst for Mr. Javanfekr&rsquo;s arrest appeared to be a ruling on Sunday by an Iranian court that Mr. Javanfekr had offended Islamic values by questioning the Islamic dress code for women. The court ordered him imprisoned for a year and barred him from working in journalism for three years, but Mr. Javanfekr had a few weeks to appeal the punishment.        

The Mehr News Agency, among the Iranian news outlets that had reported Mr. Javanfekr&rsquo;s arrest, said he was taken into custody on Monday by judiciary officers on charges of &ldquo;disrespecting Islamic and moral principles.&rdquo; The agency said he was released later after &ldquo;consultations between administration officials and the Judiciary.&rdquo; There was no word on the status of the charges against him.        

IRNA itself said reports of Mr. Javanfekr&rsquo;s arrest were inaccurate. But the account by Mehr and a similar account by the Iranian Students&rsquo; News Agency, coupled with a burst of Persian-language postings on Facebook pages by people who said they were present during the arrests, told a different story.        

The postings said security forces acting on behalf of the judiciary entered his offices and handcuffed him after he gave a news conference to Iranian journalists in which he challenged his conviction and sentencing. The postings also said the forces had used tear gas.        

After an hour, the postings said, Mr. Javanfekr was freed, but only after Mr. Ahmadinejad warned the officials who had arrested Mr. Javanfekr to &ldquo;release him or I&rsquo;ll come do it myself.&rdquo; That detail could not be independently confirmed.        

The BBC&rsquo;s Persian service said at least one person was injured during the raid and was visited in the hospital by Tehran&rsquo;s provincial governor, Morteza Tamadon. The BBC did not cite the source for its report.        

Iranian political analysts said the motive for Mr. Javanfekr&rsquo;s arrest might not have been the court&rsquo;s ruling and sentence. Another likely reason, they said, was an interview with Mr. Javanfekr published Sunday by Etemad, a reformist newspaper in Iran, in which he disparaged some of Mr. Ahmadinejad&rsquo;s conservative rivals. Etemad was immediately ordered closed for two months for &ldquo;disseminating lies and insults to officials in the establishment,&rdquo; other Iranian news media reported.        

The power struggle between Mr. Ahmadinejad and religious conservatives became clear in April when Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader who has the last word on affairs of state in Iran, embarrassed Mr. Ahmadinejad by reinstating the intelligence minister, whom the president had dismissed.        

A banking scandal unfolding in Iran has also been viewed as a political battleground between Mr. Ahmadinejad and his conservative rivals. The authorities have arrested dozens of people in what they call a wide-ranging $2.6 billion embezzlement scheme, and opponents of Mr. Ahmadinejad have repeatedly accused his chief of staff, Esfandiar Rahim Mashaei, of close ties to the lead suspect.        

Ayatollah Khamenei, who backed Mr. Ahmadinejad&rsquo;s victory in the disputed 2009 election, also suggested recently that he was not opposed to abolishing the office of an elected president. Some Iranian political analysts interpreted that suggestion as another signal of the ayatollah&rsquo;s displeasure with Mr. Ahmadinejad, whose final term expires in 2013.        

Mr. Ahmadinejad is intensely religious, but he has clashed with Iran&rsquo;s traditional clergy. He has said Muslims do not need the intercession of clerics to contact the Hidden Imam, a messianic figure in the Shiite branch of Islam that prevails in Iran. Conservatives have denounced the president&rsquo;s circle as a &ldquo;deviant current&rdquo; and often singled out Mr. Mashaei.        
