
HONG KONG &mdash; Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of Myanmar&rsquo;s main opposition movement, is likely to run for Parliament in a coming election, senior members of her party said on Monday. It would be the first time Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel laureate who is the face of democracy in Myanmar, has run for office.        

Her party, the National League for Democracy, announced last week that it would rejoin the political system after more than two decades campaigning against the military&rsquo;s control of Myanmar, which is also called Burma. Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi will be among candidates contesting 48 vacant seats in Parliament, U Win Tin, a senior member of her party, said by telephone from Yangon, the main city in Myanmar.        

Her candidacy is contingent on the party&rsquo;s successfully reregistering and her winning support from the party&rsquo;s central committee, Mr. Win Tin said.        

&ldquo;She has much confidence that she can carry out the job in Parliament,&rdquo; Mr. Win Tin said. &ldquo;She will carry the day.&rdquo;        

The elections, which have yet to be scheduled by the government, will be the first electoral test for the National League for Democracy since 1990, when the party won an overwhelming victory, though Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi was not a candidate. The military government ignored the results of that election and ruled by fiat over the next two decades, a period of economic stagnation and political isolation for the country.        

Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi, who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991, was kept under house arrest for much of that time.        

Elections held last November, the first since 1990, were boycotted by the National League for Democracy. But the party now says that it believes a new military-backed civilian government that came to power in March is sincere in its efforts to pursue economic and political reforms.        

Myanmar&rsquo;s political system nonetheless remains heavily stacked against the democracy movement, with one quarter of the seats in Parliament reserved for the military. Most of the top officials in the new government are former generals.        

Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi is eligible to run for Parliament under the Constitution that came into effect in March. But scholars say she is barred from becoming president, in that the Constitution says anyone with a spouse, parents or &ldquo;legitimate children&rdquo; who are &ldquo;subject of a foreign power or citizens of a foreign country&rdquo; cannot be president.        

Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi&rsquo;s late husband, Michael Aris, was British and the couple&rsquo;s two children have lived in the West for most of their lives.        
