
CAIRO &mdash; The cabinet offered its resignation on Monday to Egypt&rsquo;s transitional military rulers as security forces carried out an increasingly lethal crackdown on three days of violent street protests, reviving the uncertainty about Egypt&rsquo;s future that marked the earliest days of the Arab Spring.        

Egypt&rsquo;s military had been seen as the linchpin of the political transition after the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak.        

It was the institution Islamists hoped would steer the country to early elections that they were poised to dominate. Liberals regarded it as a hedge against Islamist power. And the Obama administration considered it a partner that it hoped would help secure American interests.        

But the cabinet&rsquo;s offer to resign, in a bow to the protesters&rsquo; demands, was the latest blow to the tenuous legitimacy of the ruling military council, just a week before Egypt is scheduled to hold its first parliamentary elections since Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s ouster nine months ago.        

Reeling from the swift collapse of the military&rsquo;s authority, the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt&rsquo;s largest Islamist group, urged protesters to show restraint or risk delaying the elections. But other Islamists, some more conservative and others more moderate, joined secular parties in calling for a protest Tuesday &mdash; &nbsp;expected to be the largest yet &mdash; demanding that the military hand power to a civilian authority.        

The ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces did not respond to the cabinet&rsquo;s offer to resign, but state television reported that the council was seeking a new prime minister. The culture minister, Emad Abu Ghazi, has already resigned in protest over the demonstrators&rsquo; brutal treatment at the hands of security forces.        

Victoria Nuland, a spokeswoman for the State Department, called the violence &ldquo;deplorable&rdquo; and urged that elections take place on schedule.        

The escalating uncertainty came after a bloody third day of battles between the protesters who have reoccupied Tahrir Square at the center of the capital and the security forces massed around the headquarters of the Interior Ministry. The Health Ministry said at least 23 people had died, and several doctors treating patients at a field clinic and nearby hospital said several had been killed by live ammunition, contrary to denials by the Interior Ministry. More than 1,500 people have been seriously injured in the clashes, the Health Ministry said.        

But the crowd in Tahrir Square &mdash; the heart of the Arab Spring &mdash; continued to grow to tens of thousands on Monday. Alarmed at the crackdown on unarmed civilians, a broad cross section of the political elite, from liberal groups to ultraconservative Islamists, pledged for the first time to join the demonstrators on Tuesday in a so-called million man march.        

After a meeting on Monday of about two dozen political groups, several delivered a collective apology to the protesters for not joining them sooner and &ldquo;for not providing them with a political cover for the past 72 hours,&rdquo; as the liberal political leader Amr Hamzawy put it in a message on Twitter.        

But though all the political leaders called for elections to begin on schedule next week, a growing number acknowledged privately that the violence was likely to force their delay &mdash; potentially adding to the unrest. And even as the political leaders unified around the demands, new divisions emerged among them over how the military might begin to hand over power.        

The Muslim Brotherhood was the only major political group that announced it would hold back from Tuesday&rsquo;s demonstrations. It said in a statement that it did not want to be involved in a protest that might delay the elections and thus the transition to democracy.        

In a statement on the Web site of the group&rsquo;s Freedom and Justice Party, one of its leaders, Mohamed Beltagy, told protesters that &ldquo;in spite of my complete appreciation of the reasons for their rage,&rdquo; they should &ldquo;not be involved in an escalation that could lead to a case of chaos and damage&rdquo; or &ldquo;give a chance to those who seek to justify delaying a complete transition of power to an elected civilian power with full authority (parliament, government and president) so that we can continue on the path of our glorious revolution.&rdquo;        

Others argued that the group did not want to jeopardize its commanding lead in outreach and organizing, and at one point Monday angry protesters chased Mr. Beltagy out of the square.        
Liam Stack, Mayy el Sheikh and Dina Amer contributed reporting. 
