
PARIS &mdash; With the humiliating defeat on Sunday of the Socialists in Spain, the two-year euro crisis has already toppled eight governments, sending shivers of anxiety through the &Eacute;lys&eacute;e Palace and even the White House.        


The main theme of recent elections has been voters&rsquo; unhappiness with austerity, uncertainty and whatever party or coalition happens to be in power. But under the pressure of the markets and the demands of Germany, Europe&rsquo;s de facto financial leader, new governments have largely had to promise more of the same.        

As the markets have swung from one vulnerable target to another, Ireland, Portugal, Greece, Italy, Finland, Denmark and Slovakia have all altered their governments, through either elections or parliamentary maneuverings.        

President Nicolas Sarkozy of France fears being next, with French bond costs rising to record highs, growth flat and a presidential election in April. The danger of a downgrade of French bonds has weakened Mr. Sarkozy, undermining his efforts to stay a full partner in the Franco-German couple that is leading efforts to solve the euro crisis.        

For now the problem is one of contagion and market confidence. In general the markets want to see Europe and especially Germany stand behind the solvency of Italy. And Germany wants to find a way to do so that will not put German taxpayers on the hook any more than they already are for Italian, Spanish, Portuguese and Greek bond purchases.        

Germany, already dominant but not quite big enough to have its own way, is adamant about a set of changes to the treaty governing the European Union that would impose German-style fiscal discipline on the 17 countries in the Union that use the euro, known as the euro zone, but in the process further divide the 27-member European Union.        

The German disagreement with its partners is on two broad and fundamental issues, one immediate and one longer-term: whether and how to use the European Central Bank to stabilize the euro crisis, and how to reshape the euro zone &mdash; and thus the European Union itself &mdash; for the future. Both issues are fraught, with France in sharp disagreement with Germany over the role of the central bank and also uneasy about any fundamental reshaping of political power in the bloc, which has historically been weighted to France&rsquo;s benefit.        

But while Germany is pressing its partners for a longer-term solution to the institutional failings of the euro zone, it has had little useful to propose about the immediate crisis of market speculation over Italy and now France. Instead, it has objected to every suggestion to create a form of collective bond or to use the European Central Bank as a lender of last resort.        

&ldquo;Everyone is waiting for Germany to present a short-term solution, but the only points where they present a solution are medium and long-term,&rdquo; said Henrik Enderlein, professor of political economy at the Hertie School of Governance in Berlin. &ldquo;I can understand there&rsquo;s a lot of frustration with this type of leadership.&rdquo;        

There have been many players with lots of suggestions. The most recent is the European Commission and its president, Jos&eacute; Manuel Barroso, who has been pushed to the side in the crisis. He has been vocal in pleading for European solidarity and for finding a way to make bond issuance a collective endeavor for euro zone members. Mr. Barroso will present proposals this week for the issuing of collective bonds, so-called &ldquo;stability bonds,&rdquo; which could involve limited national guarantees.        

But both France and Germany, with their own credit ratings at stake, have opposed any form of Eurobond until the euro zone countries are more aligned economically, which would take some years and more integration.        

While France is eager to be an important player in a more integrated European &ldquo;core&rdquo; &mdash; the 17 euro zone nations &mdash; France disagrees with Germany about how to shape it. They also disagree about whether a new treaty would be necessary, a project that would take at least three years. The prospect of a euro zone with its own separate rules and internal obligations sharply displeases the 10 countries in the European Union that currently are outside the euro zone, though all but Sweden, Denmark and Britain, which have opted out of the euro, are obligated to work to one day join the currency &mdash; if it survives.        
Nicholas Kulish reported from Berlin.
