
BEIJING &mdash; It was the kind of moment that the organizers of the Asia Society&rsquo;s cultural mission to China had been hoping for. As the Chinese-American cellist Yo-Yo Ma performed an eclectic, quirky concert showcasing American culture, one of China&rsquo;s rising political stars gave her blessing, standing up to wave to the crowd between pieces.        

With tensions rising between the two powers, the concert was a rare moment when art really did seem to transcend politics.        

The event was part of the U.S.-China Forum on the Arts and Culture, which brought over such artists as Mr. Ma, the actress Meryl Streep, the director Joel Coen and the authors Amy Tan and Michael Pollan. It included an organic cooking class (in the land of MSG and pesticides), a discussion on media censorship (in a country with elaborately monitored Internet), movie screenings and, at the Friday night concert, the improbable sight of Mr. Ma and Ms. Streep mock-kowtowing to each other, ending up prostrate on the floor and leaving the mostly Chinese audience in stitches.        

&ldquo;Our intention was to be spontaneous and somewhat risk-taking,&rdquo; said Orville Schell of Asia Society, who organized the festival. &ldquo;That was initially unsettling to the Chinese, but I think they were intrigued to see this engine of innovation at work.&rdquo;        

The program was widely covered and praised in the official Chinese media and on informal social networking sites. It was embraced by the senior official, Liu Yandong, a member of the Communist Party&rsquo;s powerful Politburo and the country&rsquo;s highest-ranking female politician. Mr. Schell said there were already discussions about a return engagement next year.        

But its success raises an uncomfortable question for the United States: Why are there not more programs like it?        

Many Chinese are fascinated by the United States, and it remains a top destination for China&rsquo;s young people to study. Some American programs do send musicians or speakers to China and invite Chinese opinion makers to see the United States firsthand. But the four-day U.S.-China Forum event highlighted how unusual it was for the United States to provide broad access to American culture beyond pirated Hollywood movies.        

&ldquo;They&rsquo;re not nearly as proactive as other countries,&rdquo; said Alex Pearson, a Briton who runs an independent bookstore in Beijing and an international literary festival, of the United States. &ldquo;Their embassy has an arts section,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;but they don&rsquo;t seem to have any money.&rdquo;        

It was not always thus. During the cold war, the United States Information Agency ran extensive cultural programs, including America Centers that were part of the fabric of many countries. In places like South Africa, the agency helped foster democracy and civil society. It was a victim of the post-Soviet &ldquo;peace dividend;&rdquo; it was eliminated in 1999 and most of the centers were closed.        

Some financing was restored after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, but the efforts were then aimed mostly at the Muslim world.        

&ldquo;Since 9/11, the U.S. has been in a very risk-averse position,&rdquo; said Nicholas J. Cull, professor of public diplomacy at the University of Southern California. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s gone into a shell.&rdquo;        

The State Department runs a Bureau for Educational and Cultural Affairs with a budget of nearly $500 million, but most of its money goes to programs that invite foreigners to the United States to study or visit. Officials said only $16 million goes to cultural diplomacy around the world. The officials said they could not provide a precise figure for the total spent in China, but suggested that it could be as much as $2 million.        

By contrast, the four-day U.S.-China Forum last week cost $1 million to produce. It was sponsored by Asia Society, the Aspen Institute and other private organizations.        

American officials say they are trying to do more. The United States Embassy said spending was increasing, including a program of matching grants to set up America Centers at Chinese universities.        

&ldquo;Our programs are generally addressed to Chinese opinion leaders, youth, and policy experts,&rdquo; the embassy statement said, &ldquo;and seek to supplement and fill out the great flow of information about the U.S. offered by the thousands of cultural, educational, and professional exchange programs planned and operated by the nonfederal sector.&rdquo;        
Barclay Walsh contributed reporting from Washington.
