
ISTANBUL &mdash; Syria&rsquo;s political opposition widened its outreach on Monday, sending representatives to Britain as the Syrian government withstood signs of further isolation over an uprising that is increasingly resembling a prolonged armed struggle to oust President Bashar al-Assad.        

William Hague, Britain&rsquo;s foreign secretary, met with the opposition representatives, the Foreign Office said on its Web site. Mr. Hague did not specify what type of assistance, if any, was discussed, but he said in a statement that &ldquo;we want to continue to step up the international pressure on the Assad regime, a regime that has long since lost its legitimacy in the eyes of the wider world.&rdquo;        

The Arab League has suspended Syria, and a growing number of countries, led by the United States and members of the European Union, have penalized Mr. Assad with economic sanctions. Turkey, which Mr. Assad had once counted as a friend, has also castigated him, given sanctuary to an insurgent group and threatened further action. Turkey&rsquo;s president, Abdullah Gul, who was about to begin a three-day visit to Britain, said in an interview with the BBC on Monday that Mr. Assad was not serious about meeting the legitimate demands of his political opponents, &ldquo;so therefore we don&rsquo;t have any more trust.&rdquo;        

The developments came as anti-Assad activist groups reported 12 new deaths on Monday in the Syria uprising, which has claimed more than 3,500 lives by the United Nations&rsquo; count since it began in March.        

Reuters said the latest civilian deaths included two youths killed by Syrian security forces in the central city of Homs, a center of the movement, as the forces were looking for a Syrian soccer celebrity, Abdelbasset Saroud, who has been leading protest rallies against Mr. Assad.        

The Syrian government heavily restricts foreign press access, and there was no way to corroborate the reports.        

The violence in Syria also claimed its first Turkish civilian casualties, as a bus convoy transporting Turkish Muslims home from Saudi Arabia was shot at by unidentified assailants as it traversed Syrian territory. Turkish news reports said at least two Turks were wounded.        

The Foreign Ministry of Turkey, which had issued an advisory to its citizens on Sunday urging them to avoid travel to Syria, confirmed there was an attack and said it was making inquiries but did not report any details.        

&ldquo;We were driving in a convoy of eight to nine buses, before a red car with four people came on our way, and started firing on us,&rdquo; Cemil Karli, an injured pilgrim, was quoted as telling Turkey&rsquo;s Anatolian News Agency. &ldquo;As they realized that we were going to continue our way, four more people appeared in distance and fired on us.&rdquo;        

Mr. Karli, who was shot in his abdomen and left leg, and Naci Ozata, the driver, were treated at the public hospital in Hatay, a Turkish border town.        

The driver of one of the buses had missed the turn for the border gate while crossing through Homs in central Syria and had asked for directions before armed men in uniforms opened fire, said NTV, a private Turkish television news channel.        

Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey would not comment on the bus shooting, but he reiterated his call on Mr. Assad to end violence against peaceful protesters.        

&ldquo;If you believe and trust yourself as a leader, you would open up the ballot boxes and your people walk to them, and if they name you as the government, you would then govern that country,&rdquo; Mr. Erdogan said in Istanbul. &ldquo;However, governments can last only until one point with tanks and shells. One day you would also leave, because those seats are not eternal but temporary.&rdquo;        

In Washington, the State Department announced that Robert S. Ford, the ambassador to Syria who was abruptly withdrawn from the country last month, would not go back there by Thanksgiving, as had been previously planned. A State Department spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, told reporters at a news briefing that the United States would &ldquo;be consulting with our allies and partners on the appropriate timing for his return.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ford, an outspoken critic of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s crackdown on dissent, left Syria because of what American officials called threats to his safety.        
Rick Gladstone contributed reporting from New York.
