
LONDON &mdash; The actor Hugh Grant said Monday that British tabloid newspapers had broken into his home, accessed medical records and menaced his family as part of a &ldquo;cowardly, bullying and shocking&rdquo; press culture whose targets were not just celebrities, politicians and the police, but also people left vulnerable by misfortune.        

Through two hours of testimony before an official inquiry into press practices, Mr. Grant raised new accusations that broadened the debate to include all of the mass-circulation British tabloids, not just those owned by the News Corporation, Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s media empire. Mr. Grant displayed a barely contained animosity toward press intrusion that contrasted starkly with the boyish congeniality of his film roles.        

The inquiry was prompted by accusations that The News of the World, the weekly tabloid that the News Corporation shut down in July, had intercepted the voice mail messages of nearly 6,000 people, including Mr. Grant and some of his former girlfriends. But many of his accusations on Monday were aimed at The Daily Mail and The Mail on Sunday, two papers belonging to Associated Newspapers that are among the best selling in Britain; they had previously been untainted by the phone-hacking scandal.        

Mr. Grant said he could not &ldquo;for the life of me think of any conceivable source&rdquo; for an article in The Mail on Sunday in 2007 that claimed that his relationship with the socialite Jemima Khan was imperiled by late-night conversations with a &ldquo;plummy-voiced&rdquo; British-born film executive, &ldquo;other than the voice mails that were on my mobile telephone.&rdquo; He sued and won damages, he said, because the claim of any intimate relationship was false.        

In a statement issued shortly after his testimony on Monday, The Mail on Sunday strongly denied hacking his phone and said its information had come instead from a freelance journalist who spoke to a source close to Ms. Khan. &ldquo;Mr. Grant&rsquo;s allegations are mendacious smears driven by his hatred of the media,&rdquo; the paper said.        

At the inquiry, Mr. Grant, 51, insisted that he was not pursuing a vendetta against the press over coverage of a 1995 scandal, when the police in Los Angeles caught Mr. Grant in a car with a prostitute he picked up on Sunset Boulevard and he was fined $1,180.        

&ldquo;I totally expected there to be a press storm&rdquo; after that, he said, and he saw the matter as fair game. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m the man who was arrested with a prostitute,&rdquo; he said later, noting wryly that his career survived the humiliation.        

But he saw no fairness in what happened next: Mr. Grant said that in the aftermath of the prostitution scandal, the door to his London apartment was taken off its hinges and his apartment broken into. Nothing was taken, he said, but details of his interior furnishings were published a few days later, an episode he said was the work of a cynically intrusive tabloid press ready to break the law in pursuit of scoops and profits, not of truth.        

He described a more recent episode in which the grandmother of his infant daughter was &ldquo;menaced&rdquo; by a paparazzi photographer who was staking out her home: when she snapped a picture of the photographer, Mr. Grant said, the photographer drove his car straight at her in the street outside her home.        

Mr. Grant said he suspected that his medical records had been illegally obtained for at least two articles in different newspapers, and that the police were tipping off journalists about calls from celebrities. &ldquo;A photographer or a journalist would show up on your doorstep before a policeman,&rdquo; he said.        

The judge heading the inquiry, Sir Brian Leveson, has said that one of his main tasks will be to consider whether there should be tighter regulation and stronger penalties for newspapers that use abusive techniques.        

Mr. Grant said he is a strong supporter of a freewheeling press as fundamental to democracy, but is opposed to the &ldquo;privacy-stealing industry&rdquo; that the tabloids had become. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m the reverse of a muzzler,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;but I personally feel that the license the British tabloid press has used to expropriate the right to privacy is a scandal that weak governments have allowed to continue for too long.&rdquo;        

Britain, he said, has a long national history of standing up to bullies, and the phone-hacking scandal had given the country the chance to rein in a bullying tabloid culture that he and fellow celebrities saw as the worst in the world. &ldquo;I just think a section of the press has been allowed to become toxic,&rdquo; he said.        

Referring to the journalists and private investigators implicated in the scandal at The News of the World, he said, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s highly unlikely they were practicing dark arts for only one title.&rdquo;        

The inquiry also heard from the parents of Milly Dowler, a 13-year-old schoolgirl who was abducted and murdered in 2002. The News of the World has admitted hacking into her voice mail in the days before her body was discovered, and deleting messages when her in-box was full to make room for more.        

Her mother, Sally, told the inquiry on Monday that discovering the deletions had given her what proved to be painfully false hope that her daughter was still alive and checking her voice mail. She called on Mr. Murdoch to use the scandal &ldquo;as an opportunity to put things right in future, and have some decent standards, and uphold them.&rdquo;        

The inquiry has revealed startling statistics about the practice of voice mail interceptions, based on 11,000 pages of notes seized by the police from Glenn Mulcaire, an investigator employed by The News of the World. Mr. Mulcaire received 2,266 requests for interceptions from 28 journalists, his notes suggest. At least 16 former News of the World employees have been arrested in the matter so far.        

The Dowlers and Mr. Grant are among the movie stars, bereaved families, former intelligence officials and soccer players, among others, who are scheduled to testify in the coming days on the &ldquo;culture, practice and ethics of the press,&rdquo; the subject of the inquiry. The actors Steve Coogan and Sienna Miller, the author J. K. Rowling and the father of another missing child, Madeleine McCann, are among those expected to testify.        

At the outset of the hearing, the presiding judge denied a request from a lawyer for a British newspaper group to question the witnesses. He said he would afford the witnesses something they said the press had denied them: &ldquo;a right of reply.&rdquo;        
