
Three students at the American University in Cairo were arrested and accused of participating in violent protests in the Egyptian capital, the university said Tuesday, after images of the men were broadcast on satellite and cable television channels around the world.        

The Egyptian state broadcaster, Nile TV, showed police video of the men standing against a wall in front of a table displaying bottles filled with colored liquid &mdash; identified as firebombs &mdash; along with several identification cards and at least one Indiana driver&rsquo;s license said to belong to one of the men.        

A spokesman for the Justice Ministry, Adel Saeed, said the men had been arrested by the police on Monday &ldquo;for throwing Molotov cocktails from atop the A.U.C. building&rdquo; near Tahrir Square, the epicenter of Egyptian protest. The university has a campus near the square with several low buildings; the main campus building had been used by government forces during the revolutionary battles in the square in February.        

As of Tuesday afternoon local time, the men remained in police custody, the ministry spokesman said. &ldquo;We are waiting for them to be transferred to the prosecutors office,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;A lawyer from the embassy is with them now.&rdquo;        

The United States Embassy in Cairo said that it was &ldquo;unable to confirm reports of detention of any specific American citizen&rdquo; but that it was investigating &ldquo;all reports.&rdquo;        

The arrests of the three Americans came as deadly street clashes between security forces and protesters stretched into a fourth day, with hundreds of thousands of people converging on Tahrir Square to voice their opposition to the military-led government.        

The men were studying abroad for the semester and were scheduled to return to the United States at the end of this term, said a spokeswoman for the American University in Cairo, Morgan Roth.        

After contacting their families, the university identified the students as Gregory Porter, 19, of Glenside, Pa.; Luke Gates, 21, of Bloomington, Ind.; and Derrik Sweeney, 20, of Jefferson City, Mo.        

Messages posted over the weekend to a Twitter account under the name of Luke Gates and with references to the American University in Cairo and a picture resembling one of the arrested men included several messages related to the protest. One message read: &ldquo;yes live bullets we have the shells, i was here!!&rdquo; and included a link to a news report on deadly street clashes. Another message was: &ldquo;we were throwing rocks and one guy accidentally threw his phone.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gates, a junior at Indiana University, is pursuing a double major in political science and near Eastern languages and culture, said Ryan Piurek, a university spokesman.        

Mr. Porter is a sophomore and an international area studies major at Drexel University in Philadelphia. In a statement, the university said it was in contact with his parents, as well as the American University in Cairo and the American Embassy, in order &ldquo;to have Porter released and returned home safely.&rdquo;        

A spokeswoman for Georgetown University, where Mr. Sweeney is a junior, said in a statement that the university was also working with American officials on his case.        

"He looks absolutely terrified," said Nicole Sweeney, Mr. Sweeney&rsquo;s sister, in an interview with CNN on Tuesday.        
Dina Salah Amer contributed reporting from Cairo, and Timothy Williams from New York.
