
PARIS &mdash; Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the former head of the International Monetary Fund, struck back Tuesday against a political foe and several newspapers and magazines over their coverage of the latest sex scandal to which he has been linked.        

Lawyers for Mr. Strauss-Kahn and his wife, the journalist Anne Sinclair, said they had filed suit against the newspaper Le Figaro, claiming invasion of privacy. They added that they planned to sue several other publications over their &ldquo;outrageous&rdquo; reporting on the investigation of an international prostitution ring, to which Mr. Strauss-Kahn has been linked in news reports.        

The lawyers said in a statement that the couple also planned to file a defamation complaint against Henri Guaino, an aide to President Nicolas Sarkozy, over a television interview in which Mr. Guaino commented on allegations that a prostitution ring was run out of the Hotel Carlton in Lille in northern France.        

The police there have placed several people, including a top police official, under investigation in connection with reports that they were involved in procuring prostitutes for sex in places as far afield as Washington, the headquarters of the International Monetary Fund. Mr. Strauss-Kahn has denied any connection to what has become known here as the Carlton Affair.        

&ldquo;Neither Anne Sinclair nor Dominique Strauss-Kahn intend to limit the free expression of ideas or the dissemination of information, but they also do not accept that their privacy should be abused for commercial benefit,&rdquo; lawyers for the couple said.        

Richard Malka, a lawyer for the couple, did not return telephone calls seeking comment.        

While trading sex for money is legal in France, soliciting or trafficking in prostitutes is not.        

There are also allegations that some of the sex sessions were billed to a French construction company, Eiffage, which has dismissed an employee at the center of the investigation, saying it had discovered suspect expenses totaling &euro;50,000, or nearly $70,000.        

Before an encounter with a housekeeper in a New York hotel led to his arrest in May on charges of sexual assault, Mr. Strauss-Kahn had been seen as the most likely Socialist nominee against Mr. Sarkozy in France&rsquo;s presidential elections next year. Mr. Strauss-Kahn was cleared of the assault charges, but not before resigning from the I.M.F.        

In a television interview, Mr. Guaino compared the Carlton Affair to the New York imbroglio. &ldquo;The story of the Carlton &mdash; excuse me, but it&rsquo;s exactly the same thing,&rdquo; Mr. Guaino said in the TV appearance.        

Mr. Guaino&rsquo;s office did not respond to a request for comment.        

The French news media, stung by criticism of its previous hands-off approach to the private lives of Mr. Strauss-Kahn and other politicians, has been following the Carlton Affair with zeal.        

Even text messages, allegedly exchanged between Mr. Strauss-Kahn and associates, in which they appear to discuss plans for nights on the town in cities like Vienna, Madrid and Washington, have found their way into the papers this time around.        

Yet French privacy protections are among the strictest in the Western world. The Constitution guarantees a right to privacy, as does the European Convention on Human Rights.        

While the specifics of these rights are not spelled out under French law, the courts have often interpreted laws in a way that favors public officials seeking to keep their affairs under wraps.        

Thomas Roussineau, a lawyer here who specializes in privacy issues, said the lawsuits against newspapers could become benchmark cases in defining the relationship between public figures and the news media in France.        

Under existing interpretations of the law, he said, there are generally only two permitted exceptions to public officials&rsquo; privacy protection. One is if the events in question have some bearing on an official&rsquo;s ability to carry out his or her job; the other is if the person has volunteered information.        

Because Mr. Strauss-Kahn is no longer a public official and did not seek disclosure, Mr. Roussineau said it could be difficult for the publications to prove either exception in their reporting on the Carlton Affair.        

&ldquo;D.S.K. is nothing anymore, so you do really have to ask yourself the question seriously, whether anyone had a right to know about this,&rdquo; he said.        

But there are gray areas, he added. Momentum for the investigation of the Carlton Affair picked up after the events in New York. So the courts could decide that there was a link to Mr. Strauss-Kahn&rsquo;s former role at the I.M.F., when events in his private life had a bearing on his ability to do the job.        
