
Iran&rsquo;s main government-run newspaper was published Tuesday without a front-page headline, replaced by photographs of its headquarters during an assault a day earlier by forces working for the judiciary who briefly arrested the newspaper&rsquo;s top official &mdash; the media adviser to the president &mdash; and more than 30 others.        

The presentation of the front page appeared to be an act of protest by the newspaper over the unusual episode on Monday, which judiciary officials described as a riot carried out by newspaper employees.        

The arrests underscored the bitter rifts between the president and adversaries in the Iranian government who have accused him of overstepping his authority and trying to subvert the role of the Islamic clergy in Iran.        

The president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, had threatened to personally intervene on Monday to free his media adviser, Ali Akbar Javanfekr, who is the chief executive of the official Islamic Republic News Agency and the manager of its affiliated newspaper, called Iran.        

Mr. Javanfekr was handcuffed for an hour in his office of the Tehran-based newspaper by armed officers of the judiciary, which is run by Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, a member of a powerful conservative family in Iran that has aligned itself against Mr. Ahmadinejad. Among the others who were arrested, at least one was beaten and hospitalized.        

While Mr. Javanfekr was later released, the fate of the others is not known, nor are the precise reasons clear for the assault on the headquarters. But the smattering of Iranian news accounts about the episode have hinted at the brutish underside to the political rivalries among the conservatives who dominate in Iran.        

Some news accounts have said the judiciary was executing a warrant for the arrest of Mr. Javanfekr after a court had convicted him on Sunday of disrespecting Islam by publicly questioning the strict dress code for women.        

But the timing suggested another possible reason: the raid happened shortly after Mr. Javanfekr held a news conference in his office in which he defended critical remarks he had made about religious conservatives in an interview published over the weekend by Etemad, a reformist Iranian newspaper.        

Iran&rsquo;s prosecutor-general, Abbas Jafari Dowlatabadi, said in an interview carried Tuesday by the Fars news agency and other Iranian news services that Mr. Javanfekr had been warned not to make such remarks and that his news conference was an act of intolerable defiance, so judiciary officers were sent to arrest him.        

&ldquo;Unfortunately Mr. Javanfekr resisted both the legal directive against him and the judiciary forces, and subsequently called employees of the newspaper in person and via telephone to riot,&rdquo; the prosecutor-general was quoted as saying.        

Mr. Ahmadinejad has not commented publicly about the episode. But his legal adviser, Fatemeh Bodaghi, was quoted by Fars as saying in response to a question about Mr. Javanfekr&rsquo;s arrest: &ldquo;All people are equal before the law and the Ahmadinejad administration has no demands of the judiciary other than to respect this fact.&rdquo;The friction between Mr. Ahmadinejad and his conservative adversaries within the Iranian hierarchy has grown more heated in recent months. Iranian political analysts said Mr. Ahmadinejad, unlike his predecessors, has made enemies of many Iranian religious figures by aggressively arrogating more power to his office than they would like.        

&ldquo;This particular president seems defiant and reluctant to accept a back seat and marginalization,&rdquo; said Ray Takeyh, an expert on Iran at the Council on Foreign Relations in Washington. &ldquo;But the institutions of the state are arrayed against him. He&rsquo;s provoking a fight that he&rsquo;s unlikely to succeed and win.&rdquo;        
Artin Afkhami contributed reporting from Boston.
