
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Bowing to pressure from a local militia holding one of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons as a prisoner, Prime Minister Abdel Rahim el-Keeb on Tuesday appointed the militia&rsquo;s commander to be the new defense minister.        

The appointment came as the prime minister named a new cabinet after weeks of bargaining among the competing cities, tribes and militias that formed the loose coalition that overthrew the Qaddafi government but are now struggling to share power.        

The selection of Osama al-Juwali, the head of the military council in Zintan, to lead the Defense Ministry, perhaps the most critical post in the government, did not come as a surprise, but it underscored the weakness of the interim government.        

It will now be Mr. Juwali&rsquo;s responsibility to disarm and merge divergent militias from around the country into a united army and a national police force. His partner in that effort will be Fawzi Abdelal, the powerful militia leader from the city of Misurata, whom Mr. Keeb appointed as interior minister in an effort to assuage that competing group.        

The new cabinet will govern until an election for a new national assembly scheduled for the middle of next year.        

Zintani fighters were crucial during the war in creating a southern front and in the final taking of Tripoli, the capital. But since then, they have been increasingly aggressive about flexing their muscle to demonstrate their independence from the interim central authority. They have set up roadblocks around the capital and disobeyed orders from the governing Transitional National Council to leave Tripoli.        

Over the weekend, leaders in Zintan ratcheted up the pressure after their fighters seized Seif al-Islam el-Qaddafi, the former dictator&rsquo;s son and onetime heir apparent, on Saturday outside an oasis town in the desert. They refused to hand Mr. Qaddafi over to the central authorities until they were satisfied that a strong government was in power and a working judiciary was in place.        

It is not clear whether they will now release Mr. Qaddafi to the central government or will press for more concessions.        

Militia fighters from Misurata have also projected their power by setting up barricades around the country, far from their city and independent of the new national army.        

Mr. Keeb said his cabinet choices were designed to &ldquo;achieve national reconciliation,&rdquo; adding that the new government would aim for &ldquo;freedom, democracy, development, justice and a state of law and institutions.&rdquo;        

Oil executives were also heavily represented in important ministries. Abdulrahman Ben Yezza, a former executive with the Italian oil company Eni, the biggest foreign producer in the country, will be the new oil minister. Hassan Ziglam, an executive with the national oil company, was named finance minister.        

As Mr. Keeb and the Transitional National Council settled on a cabinet, they also had to confront the questions of where and when Mr. Qaddafi would be tried and under what conditions. Those questions have also become an international concern.        

Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, arrived in Tripoli on Tuesday to review with Libyan officials the treatment of Mr. Qaddafi and how he would be tried. Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said that Mr. Qaddafi as well as the former Qaddafi intelligence chief, Abdullah Senussi, may be tried in Libya as long as the international court is involved. It was not immediately clear if the prosecutor&rsquo;s remarks meant that the court would have to agree to hand over its cases against the two men to the Libyan authorities, or if international judges would participate in proceedings inside Libya.        

Libyan officials insist that they will not send either of the men to the international court in The Hague for trial. &ldquo;In a nutshell, we are not going to hand him over,&rdquo; Acting Justice Minister Mohammed al-Alagi said.        

At issue are different types of proceedings planned against Mr. Qaddafi and Mr. Senussi.        

The international court in June issued arrest warrants against both men, as well as one for Colonel Qaddafi, for narrowly based charges of crimes against humanity.        

The charges involved the violent crackdown by the Qaddafi government on civilian protesters and dissidents in February, which evolved into the rebellion that toppled Colonel Qaddafi in August. He was killed last month in the custody of rebel captors, making the Hague indictment against him moot.        

Members of Libya&rsquo;s transitional council had promised to hand over the defendants to the international court if they were caught. But more recently, in the face of growing opposition, they have said that they want to try the former officials in Libya on much broader charges, including crimes like corruption, abuse of state funds, torture and murder &mdash; accusations that cover a number of years.        

&ldquo;The law says the primacy is for the national system,&rdquo; Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said in Tripoli. &ldquo;If they prosecute the case here, we will discuss with them how to inform the judges and they can do it. But our judges have to be involved.&rdquo;        
Marlise Simons contributed reporting from Paris.
