
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Husain Haqqani, the embattled Pakistani ambassador to the United States, resigned Tuesday in the wake of accusations that he had sought American help to rein in the powerful Pakistani military.        

Although he had hoped to stay on, Mr. Haqqani offered to resign last week. But on Tuesday, the prime minister said he should resign so that an investigation into the accusations could be &ldquo;carried out properly.&rdquo;        

The accusations center on a memo that Mansoor Ijaz, an American businessman of Pakistani origin, said Mr. Haqqani asked him to have delivered to Adm. Mike Mullen, then the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. According to Mr. Ijaz, the memo asked for American help in heading off a possible military-led coup and promised concessions in return.        

The accusations, which Mr. Haqqani denies, created a political storm in Pakistan, where anti-American feelings run high and Mr. Haqqani is considered by some to be an apologist for the United States.        

He has also made enemies among some in the military for his criticisms of the army before he became ambassador. Some analysts believe that the military&rsquo;s leaders, who wield the real power in the country, pushed for the government to oust Mr. Haqqani.        

Some American officials on Tuesday expressed concern that Mr. Haqqani&rsquo;s exit could complicate attempts by the United States and Pakistan to repair badly strained relations.        

Political commentators said President Asif Ali Zardari, who considered Mr. Haqqani a close aide, appeared to have decided to distance himself from the controversy for political considerations.        

Mr. Zardari and his party hope to maintain power past elections in 2013, and analysts say that he was likely to be reacting to the military, opposition figures and the country&rsquo;s aggressive news media, which had all begun to pummel him for a lack of action on the memo.        

&ldquo;The fact that Mr. Haqqani has been virtually sacked speaks of which way the wind is blowing,&rdquo; said Arif Nizami, editor of the English-language daily newspaper Pakistan Today. &ldquo;The military had never been in love with Mr. Haqqani and was critical of his role in Washington, D.C.&rdquo;        

He added that by handing over the investigations to Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani, who is not thought to have a soft spot for Mr. Haqqani, Mr. Zardari had already indicated that he was not willing to worsen the considerable tensions that exist between the civilian government and the military.        

In a text message on Tuesday evening, Mr. Haqqani said he would continue to serve Pakistan and its democracy in whatever way possible.        

&ldquo;I have resigned to bring closure to this meaningless controversy threatening our fledgling democracy,&rdquo; he said.        

A former spokesman for Admiral Mullen said last week that he had received the memo, but did not find it credible and took no action. The memo was unsigned, the former spokesman said.        

Talat Masood, a retired lieutenant general and political analyst based in Islamabad, said the resignation would not greatly affect Pakistan-United States relations, even though Mr. Haqqani had been a vocal supporter of close cooperation between the two countries.        

&ldquo;The relationship between Pakistan and the U.S. is transactional and based on strategic reasons. It won&rsquo;t be affected by one person,&rdquo; Mr. Masood said.        

Several other American officials said they were worried about the impact. At the very least, said one, Mr. Haqqani&rsquo;s replacement, who has not yet been named, would be likely to face a steep learning curve at a moment of deep mistrust between the countries.        
Matthew Rosenberg contributed reporting from Washington.
