
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Afghanistan will suffer a recession in 2014 and beyond after foreign troops leave and aid dwindles, and if the security situation gets worse, the country could face complete economic collapse, according to an ominous report released in Kabul on Tuesday by the World Bank.        

The country&rsquo;s near-total dependence on aid &mdash; more than 90 percent of the $17.1 billion national budget comes from foreign donations &mdash; puts it in the company of Gaza, the West Bank and Liberia as one of the most aid-reliant places in the world, according to the World Bank. Much of the Afghan government&rsquo;s revenue is derived from American military and civilian spending.        

&ldquo;Transition will have a profound impact on the economy and political landscape well after 2014,&rdquo; said Josie Bassinette, the acting country director for the World Bank, referring to the shift of responsibility for running every aspect of Afghan affairs to the Afghan government. She said the bank forecasts a $7 billion deficit in the Afghan budget annually through 2021.        

Western diplomats who had been given private briefings on the report over the past week said the news was grim. &ldquo;We have an enterprise on our hands that is totally unsustainable from a fiscal point of view,&rdquo; one said.        

Another diplomat recalled going to an American combat outpost last spring and asking an officer how many Afghans worked there; the officer replied that about 25 were involved in building projects at the post.        

&ldquo;What is going to happen next spring to those 25 people and their families when we pull up stakes?&rdquo; the diplomat said. &ldquo;Think about how many outposts there are like that.&rdquo;        

Over all, income per person in Afghanistan is $528 a year, but Ms. Bassinette said that figure conceals pockets of worse poverty because aid money has not been evenly spread: money has poured into unstable areas while bypassing more peaceful ones.        

The World Bank forecast echoed a report last June by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which questioned the assumption that plentiful aid and higher incomes for local Afghans would foster security, a major part of the counterinsurgency strategy. Both reports raise the possibility that many foreign aid projects give little more than a temporary economic jolt to Afghans.        

Afghanistan faces a difficult decision over whether to go ahead with plans to expand its security forces to 352,000 soldiers, or to scale back to leave more room in the budget for education, health care and infrastructure. There will not be enough money for both, the World Bank report indicates.        

&ldquo;If the security side is covered, the civilian side will suffer; if the civilian side is covered, security will suffer,&rdquo; Ms. Bassinette said.        

The report is based on moderately optimistic assumptions, including the development of a large copper mine at Aynak in Logar Province and an iron mine in Bamian Province. Many Western observers doubt that the country will be secure enough to develop the mines and ship ore abroad any time soon.        

Even if the mines begin to produce income, the country will run an annual deficit of $7 billion, and its economic growth will be 5 to 6 percent by 2018, considerably less than the current pace of 9 to 10 percent, the report forecast. Without the mines, growth will be slower still, about 4 percent a year, the bank said, and could fall to zero or below if security deteriorates.        

The Afghan government&rsquo;s ambivalence about foreign aid further complicates humanitarian work. It wants the money but is sensitive about seeming unable to care for its people.        

Recently a group of organizations, including Save the Children, Oxfam and CARE, released a statement saying that Afghans in 14 areas of the country were at risk of hunger and disease in the coming months because of drought and bad harvests, and would be unreachable after winter snows set in. Instead of welcoming the group&rsquo;s effort to raise money, Mohammed Asif Rahimi, the agriculture minister, appeared to take offense, viewing it as a criticism of his ministry&rsquo;s efforts. He held a news conference on Tuesday to berate the groups.        

&ldquo;Recent NGO fund-raising publicity has incorrect data and ignores the important progress so far,&rdquo; he said in a statement on Tuesday, referring to nongovernmental organizations.        

Three coalition soldiers died in separate episodes in southern Afghanistan on Monday, according to a NATO statement.        
