
MOSCOW &mdash; With parliamentary elections 11 days away, Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said Wednesday that the country could not afford to let political opposition or disagreement jeopardize &ldquo;stability, sovereignty, the welfare of the people,&rdquo; and he implored lawmakers to unite behind his tightly controlled rule &ldquo;so that the boat does not really turn over.&rdquo;        

In an address at the final legislative session before the elections on Dec. 4, Mr. Putin sought to make a forceful case for continuing the government that he has now led for 12 years &mdash; first as president and now as prime minister &mdash; and that he plans to continue leading by returning to the presidency next year. But there were also signs of the growing frustration among his opponents.        

Several opposition members of Parliament did not stand when Mr. Putin entered the chamber, a sign of disrespect that he noted in his opening remarks. &ldquo;Today, I want to address my words of thanks to all deputies of the State Duma regardless of their party affiliation,&rdquo; Mr. Putin said. &ldquo;To those who stood up today here in this hall and those who didn&rsquo;t deem it possible to stand up; many thanks to all of you for teamwork.&rdquo;        

The show of disdain, mostly by members of the Communist Party and the Just Russia Party, came just days after Mr. Putin was booed by fans at a mixed martial arts fight &mdash; an unexpected public relations debacle that left the Kremlin scrambling for explanations.        

One analysis, offered by Mr. Putin&rsquo;s press secretary, was that the fans were not jeering Mr. Putin but the American contender in the fight, Jeff Monson, who lost to his Russian opponent, Fedor Emelianenko. But that only seemed to make the situation worse, as hundreds of Russian fans posted messages on Mr. Monson&rsquo;s Facebook page to make clear that their boos were for the prime minister. And Mr. Putin felt compelled to telephone Mr. Monson and congratulate him on his effort.        

Ilya V. Ponomaryov, a member of Parliament from the Just Russia faction who was among those who did not stand, said Mr. Putin&rsquo;s appearance came as a surprise. &ldquo;If we had known, I would have prepared a whistle and I think some of my colleagues would have done the same,&rdquo; Mr. Ponomaryov said in a telephone interview.        

There is no doubt that Mr. Putin&rsquo;s party, United Russia, will win the elections. But a sharp decline in public support could send a signal that Mr. Putin&rsquo;s hold on power is not as tight as he insists. Still, if he is at all ruffled by the new gurgles of discontent that seem to be rippling across Russia, he has not shown it in public.        

Mr. Putin&rsquo;s speech on Wednesday was heavily layered with thanks to the lawmakers, who are generally viewed as having neither the ability nor much desire to challenge the executive branch. And he seemed not at all concerned about highlighting the legislators&rsquo; powerlessness as he made some jabs, apparently directed at Western democracies that have struggled at times to respond to the financial crisis.        

&ldquo;I find that during the crisis the great advantage of our country compared with other nations was the coordinated work of the government and Parliament,&rdquo; Mr. Putin said. &ldquo;You know when decisions have to be made quickly, endless arguments about what could have been done better and failure to take a decision is much more dangerous than making a decision even with certain discrepancies and shortcomings.&rdquo;        

Mr. Putin also said it might be &ldquo;vain wishes&rdquo; to expect that political opponents &ldquo;would behave calmly and wouldn&rsquo;t rock the boat,&rdquo; but he insisted that in the face of opposition the governing party would tighten its grip. While he seemed to be speaking philosophically, his remarks were generally interpreted on Russian television and news sites as warning that he would not tolerate much in the way of dissent as he prepares to return to the presidency for perhaps two more terms, spanning 12 years.        

&ldquo;This is what the opposition is for,&rdquo; Mr. Putin declared, &ldquo;for the ruling party, the ruling force, to grip the helm stronger and be able to prove to the society that the paths along which the country develops are correct.&rdquo;        
