
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Pakistan quickly appointed a new ambassador to the United States on Wednesday, a day after the previous envoy was forced out over allegations that he sought American help in reining in the country&rsquo;s powerful military, which now appears to be solidifying its role in managing Pakistan&rsquo;s foreign affairs and national security policy.        

The controversy fueled by the allegations against the outgoing ambassador, Husain Haqqani, brought into sharp relief the military&rsquo;s discomfort with him personally and its fears that he and American officials ultimately aimed to curtail the army&rsquo;s power. Mr. Haqqani, a former political activist and academic who maintained a high profile in Washington, was seen by Pakistan&rsquo;s top generals as too critical of their outsize influence and too close to the country&rsquo;s unpopular president, Asif Ali Zardari, to be trusted in dealings with the United States.        

Pakistan&rsquo;s generals have &ldquo;taken it for granted that relations with America is their cup of tea, but Mr. Haqqani continued to interfere and overstretched himself,&rdquo; said Muhammad Ziauddin, the executive editor of The Express Tribune, an English-language daily in Karachi.        

In the new ambassador, Sherry Rehman, the generals get a longtime Pakistani politician who knows the United States &mdash; she studied at Smith College in Massachusetts &mdash; and broadly shares their views on the country&rsquo;s biggest foreign policy and national security challenges: the need to be treated as an equal in the fraught alliance with the United States and the necessity of securing Pakistani interests in neighboring Afghanistan as the American withdrawal there picks up pace.        

&ldquo;The military had been cultivating her&rdquo; since she stepped down as information minister in 2009 over differences with President Zardari, Mr. Ziauddin said.        

At the same time, Ms. Rehman, a lawmaker from the governing Pakistan Peoples Party, has strong relationships with Pakistan&rsquo;s political elite. She remains on good terms with Mr. Zardari and Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani, who never warmed to Mr. Haqqani.        

Ms. Rehman also carries proven credentials as a social progressive; she&rsquo;s advocated for women&rsquo;s and minority rights. She was forced last year to live under police guard after receiving death threats from Islamist extremists over her opposition to Pakistan&rsquo;s draconian blasphemy laws, which are often used to settle personal scores, especially against minority Christians and Hindus.        

American officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they did not want to be seen as meddling in Pakistan&rsquo;s internal affairs, said they hoped Ms. Rehman&rsquo;s range of contacts within Pakistan&rsquo;s military and its government and among rights groups could potentially make her a more effective interlocutor than her predecessor, who was very much seen as Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s man, although he did argue the military&rsquo;s case when needed.        

The American officials were also pleased by Ms. Rehman&rsquo;s speedy appointment, which assuaged fears of prolonged standoff between the military and civilian authorities over the ambassadorship, arguably Pakistan&rsquo;s most important diplomatic posting. &ldquo;The military doesn&rsquo;t need more excuses to disregard the president and prime minister,&rdquo; said one American official. &ldquo;That they all found a way to agree quickly is a positive. They need an ambassador in Washington; we need them to have an ambassador in Washington.&rdquo;        

But experts in Pakistan and the United States cautioned that American officials should not view Ms. Rehman&rsquo;s social liberalism, which is common among Pakistan&rsquo;s elite, as a sign that she will fall in line with Washington&rsquo;s views on what is best for Pakistan.        

&ldquo;Folks in Washington will expect her national security agenda to be as liberal as her domestic agenda,&rdquo; said Shamila N. Chaudhary, a South Asia analyst at the Eurasia Group who previously served as the director for Pakistan and Afghanistan at the National Security Council.        

&ldquo;She&rsquo;s coming here to represent the government, and that includes the military,&rdquo; Ms. Chaudhary said.        
Salman Masood reported from Islamabad, and Matthew Rosenberg from Washington.
