
SANA, Yemen &mdash; After more than three decades of autocratic rule, President Ali Abdullah Saleh signed an agreement on Wednesday that immediately transferred power to his vice president, bowing to unrelenting street protests and raising hopes for an end to a political crisis that brought this impoverished nation to the brink of collapse.        

If the agreement holds up, it will make Mr. Saleh the fourth Arab leader to be forced from power this year by popular uprisings that have shaken the Middle East and North Africa. But the deal offers no guarantee that it will restore calm to a nation fractured by 10 months of political instability and suffering from a power vacuum that groups linked to Al Qaeda have exploited with increasing boldness.        

Troubled by the collapse of security, the United States, other Western powers and Persian Gulf leaders had aggressively pushed for the agreement, even as protesters argued that it would preserve the status quo by keeping the country&rsquo;s elite, including members of Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s family, in power. On Wednesday, some of the movement&rsquo;s leaders indicated that they would not back down without more fundamental changes.        

It remains unclear how the country&rsquo;s interim leaders will resolve a bitter three-way power struggle between Mr. Saleh and two rivals &mdash; including a renegade general who commands well-armed defectors &mdash; that has recently eclipsed the popular protests.        

Under the terms of the deal, a presidential election will be held in three months; a consensus figure, probably the vice president, is expected to be the only candidate. &nbsp;In the meantime, a national unity government, consisting of members of the Yemeni opposition and the current ruling party, will be formed, along with a military commission to restructure the country&rsquo;s badly fractured armed forces.        

In Sana&rsquo;s &ldquo;Change Square&rdquo; on Wednesday, a tent city that has become one of the epicenters of the revolt, protesters held aloft photographs of colleagues killed by Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s security forces or his loyalists in a crackdown that left hundreds of demonstrators dead. Many protesters, who said they felt that their popular revolt had been hijacked by political elites and their foreign backers, were especially angered by reports that the president and his family would receive immunity from prosecution.        

&ldquo;We will never accept any agreement that does not meet our goals,&rdquo; Hamzah Alkamaly, a 23-year-old activist, said Wednesday night. &ldquo;We will stay in the square.&rdquo;        

The deal, signed in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, allows Mr. Saleh to retain his title and certain privileges until new elections are held. Yemeni lawmakers are also expected to pass a law granting him immunity from prosecution, said Abdullah al-Saidi, the former Yemeni ambassador to the United Nations.        

It was unclear when, and if, the president intended to return to Yemen.        

Mr. Saleh, a former military officer with little formal education, survived for decades in part by dividing or co-opting rivals and building a patronage system that he alone controlled, leaving Yemen with a barren political environment and hollow institutions. Moreover, Saudi Arabia, Yemen&rsquo;s wealthy and autocratic neighbor to the north, has never wanted to see democracy flourish&nbsp;in its backyard.        

Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s move on Wednesday appeared to take Yemenis by surprise after months of broken promises and skillful political maneuvering that confirmed his reputation as a canny politician.        

The president had agreed to sign similar agreements several times, then backed out &mdash; once standing up diplomats who were waiting to witness the deal and found themselves trapped for hours in a building by hundreds of armed Saleh supporters.        

In a signal of how wary Yemenis have become of Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s intentions, there was little public rejoicing on Wednesday, a day that could prove to be a crucial turning point for the country.        

Although the signing was the first time Mr. Saleh actually agreed to give up formal authority, it is unclear how big a political presence he hopes to maintain. A son and three nephews retain powerful posts in the military and intelligence service.        
Kareem Fahim reported from Sana, and Laura Kasinof from Greencastle, Pa. Neil MacFarquhar contributed reporting from Beirut, Robert F. Worth from Cairo,and Helene Cooper from Washington.
