
BAGHDAD &mdash; A series of three explosions in a crowded market on Thursday killed at least 10 people and wounded dozens more in the southern city of Basra, an important center of the Iraqi oil industry where many international companies have offices.        

As is often the case in Iraq, the bombs were timed to go off in succession, according to the police and local news reports. The first panicked the crowd, sending people running toward where a second bomb had been hidden.        

A third explosive detonated as soldiers and emergency workers arrived to help the wounded. A local television station broadcast video showing the bodies of dead soldiers and civilians strewn on a sidewalk, along with debris and damaged cars.        

A hospital worker said 10 people were killed. The Associated Press, citing health and police officials, reported that 19 people were killed, many of them soldiers, making the attack one of the most lethal in recent weeks.        

Although the United States is withdrawing all of its soldiers from Iraq by the end of the year, security in the country is still tenuous, as was underscored by bombings in Basra. The Iraqi government had declined to grant immunity from prosecution to United States soldiers if the deadline for an American withdrawal were extended.        

Basra is a predominantly Shiite city and a center of support for the government of Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki. The attack there, like others in mostly Shiite areas, seemed intended to undermine the government&rsquo;s authority by demonstrating that the police were unable to provide security.        

Residents of the city who called into Fayha, the local television station, on Thursday evening seemed dismayed about the bombings and lashed out at the security forces, though many of their members were among the victims. &ldquo;We can do more than the people of Egypt,&rdquo; one caller said, referring to huge protests in Cairo this week against the Egyptian government. &ldquo;We can make a change.&rdquo;        

Another caller said: &ldquo;I&rsquo;m just asking the security forces, why are there so many checkpoints around this market? But I never see anybody checking the trunks of cars.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;What a scandal this is for the security forces,&rdquo; he added.        

The Iraqi government has blamed two wings of the Sunni insurgency for most of the recent violence; one is linked to Al Qaeda and other Islamic extremists and the other is a Sunni nationalist movement said to have ties to remnants of the disbanded Baath Party, which ruled under Saddam Hussein.        

Shiite militias have also been active in the nation&rsquo;s south.        

Basra, a port city, is pivotal to the country&rsquo;s postwar economic development, which elevates the importance of security there. The vast majority of Iraq&rsquo;s oil output of 2.8 million barrels per day is pumped from three major fields &mdash; Romaila, Zubair and West Qurna &mdash; that are within about 60 miles of the city.        

It was unclear whether the bombings were timed to coincide with the opening of the Basra International Oil and Gas Conference, scheduled for Friday, which will be attended by international petroleum company executives. Three weeks ago, bombs hidden in motorcycles killed three people and wounded about 30 others in the city.        
An Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Basra.
