
CAIRO &mdash; Egypt&rsquo;s interim military rulers and the masses of protesters demanding their exit dug in Thursday for a prolonged standoff as the generals vowed to forge ahead with parliamentary elections despite a week of violence that is certain to tarnish the vote.        

State news organizations reported that at least one political party &mdash; the Social Democrats, perhaps the best established of the liberal parties founded in the burst of hope after the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak nine months ago &mdash; would boycott the elections as a sham intended to prop up military rule.        

By day&rsquo;s end on Thursday, the Muslim Brotherhood also appeared to distance itself from the military council. The powerful Islamist group stands to gain the most from early elections and for the moment had stepped to the sidelines of the protests.        

As clashes with the security police stopped for the first time this week, the crowd in Tahrir Square grew larger on Thursday than the day before, reaching tens of thousands. A broad spectrum of civilian leaders &mdash; excluding the Brotherhood &mdash; joined calls for a &ldquo;million man march&rdquo; on Friday.        

The generals were unmoved. &ldquo;Egypt is not Tahrir Square,&rdquo; Maj. Gen. Mukhtar el-Mallah, a member of the military council, declared early Thursday at a news conference. The generals claimed an open-ended mandate to hold power long after Monday&rsquo;s parliamentary vote. &ldquo;We will not relinquish power because of a slogan-chanting crowd.        

The declaration, after six days of violent confrontation in the capital and around the country, shifted the political struggle to a new and murkier phase.        

Fulfilling a promise made in negotiations with political parties earlier in the week, the military pulled back the security forces who had battled protesters and constructed a concrete wall bisecting the street where most of the clashes had taken place.        

The generals, meanwhile, issued an unusual apology for the deaths of at least 38 people during the week of unrest and the injuries of more than 2,000. But even as they hailed the dead as &ldquo;martyrs,&rdquo; the generals also appeared to justify killing them as criminals who had attacked the Interior Ministry. And they denied &mdash; despite the statements of many witnesses, doctors and even the health ministry &mdash; that security forces had fired live ammunition or birdshot in their clashes with protesters, further inflaming anger.        

&ldquo;The police are very committed to self-control, but I can&rsquo;t give orders to anyone not to defend themselves,&rdquo; General Mallah said.        

Then, late in the day, the generals announced over the state news media that they would name a 77-year-old former Mubarak lieutenant, Kamel el-Ganzoury, as their new prime minister, though many Egyptians mocked him as &ldquo;a dinosaur.&rdquo;        

The appointment of Mr. Ganzoury follows the resignation this week of the previous prime minister, in capitulation to street protesters&rsquo; demands. The last prime minister was a functionary serving the military council, and the demonstrators, as well as most civilian parties, are now calling for the council to hand over real authority to a successor.        

But the council made clear in its news conference on Thursday that it was not ready to surrender any power, and the choice of Mr. Ganzoury appeared to show the generals&rsquo; preference for a prime minister who would serve in a subordinate role, as Mr. Ganzoury did under Mr. Mubarak. Several others also reportedly turned the post down.        

The selection of Mr. Ganzoury may also have provoked the Muslim Brotherhood, the one major political force that had agreed to a deal with the military council for it to retain full power until early elections. As prime minister in the late 1990s, Mr. Ganzoury presided over the incarceration or torture of scores of Islamists who now lead the movement.        

In a statement released shortly after Mr. Ganzoury&rsquo;s name was floated, the Brotherhood&rsquo;s new Freedom and Justice Party pointedly declared that the next prime minister &ldquo;must enjoy general national consensus and popular acceptance and have to stand at one distance from all political forces.&rdquo; The group said that its leaders had not met with the council on Thursday, meaning they had not been consulted.        
May el Sheik and Dina Salah Amer contributed reporting from Cairo and Alan Cowell contributed reporting from Paris.
