
CAIRO &mdash; An Egyptian court on Thursday ordered the release of three American students who had been arrested during protests in Cairo&rsquo;s landmark Tahrir Square, and an Egyptian-American journalist said that she had been beaten and sexually assaulted while in detention.        

In addition, a prominent documentary filmmaker, Jehane Noujaim, was arrested at the scene of the worst clashes in downtown Cairo, near the Interior Ministry and not far from Tahrir Square. She was freed late on Thursday after an appeal from the Committee to Protect Journalists.        

Interior Ministry officials said the three American students &mdash; Derrik Sweeney, Gregory Porter and Luke Gates &mdash; were ordered released on Thursday. They had been attending the American University in Cairo on a semester-long study abroad program.        

Reuters reported late Thursday that the students had been freed, but there was no immediate confirmation, and it remained unclear whether the order had been carried out. Interior Ministry officials said the students needed only to be processed through Egypt&rsquo;s labyrinthine court system.        

The students appeared on Egyptian television on Tuesday, and the broadcast cited an Interior Ministry official who said they had been detained for throwing gasoline bombs at police officers guarding the Interior Ministry. Some of the worst clashes since the fall of President Hosni Mubarak in February erupted this week around that building.        

The Egyptian-American journalist, Mona Eltahawy, who was detained on Wednesday in the same area, was freed on Thursday. She said that during her 12 hours of detention, she was sexually assaulted and beaten so badly that her left arm and right hand were broken.        

On her Twitter account, she wrote, &ldquo;5 or 6 surrounded me, groped and prodded my breasts, grabbed my genital area and I lost count how many hands tried to get into my trousers.&rdquo; She said the beating and assault stopped once she was transferred from the police to the military, though military interrogators kept her blindfolded for hours.        

&ldquo;I can barely imagine what my family and loved ones were going through those 12 hours &mdash; I know they were worried about me to begin with,&rdquo; she added.        

A military official in Cairo, Col. Islam Jaffar, who came into contact with Ms. Eltahawy while she was in detention, acknowledged her accusation.        

&ldquo;She complained to me that she was beaten and sexually assaulted by Central Security Forces,&rdquo; Mr. Jaffar said. &ldquo;But what did she expect would happen? She was in the middle of the streets, in the midst of clashes, with no press card or form of ID. The press center had not given her permission to be in the streets as a journalist. The country is in a sensitive situation. We are under threat. She could be a spy for all we know.&rdquo;        

The Committee to Protect Journalists, which is based in New York, called on the authorities to investigate Ms. Eltahawy&rsquo;s assertions.        

&ldquo;Filming is not a crime, and authorities must release Noujaim immediately,&rdquo; Mohamed Abdel Dayem, the group&rsquo;s Middle East and North Africa program coordinator, said in a statement before her release. &ldquo;The military and the police must stop using physical violence and detention to silence or intimidate journalists.&rdquo; Ms. Noujaim won acclaim in 2004 for &ldquo;Control Room,&rdquo; a documentary about the Arabic satellite channel Al Jazeera.        

The group said it had documented 17 assaults on journalists on Sunday and Monday.        
Dina Salah Amer contributed reporting.
