
The primacy of the Roman Catholic Church and the centrality of the pub are not the only staples of Irish life under threat. Fresh potatoes are losing their place as the carbohydrate of choice on the Irish plate, prompting a national campaign to arrest the decline.        

Bord Bia, the Irish Food Board, has commissioned research to determine why pasta, rice, noodles, couscous and other carbohydrates are all claiming parts of the potato&rsquo;s traditional market share. The government-financed board will then seek advice on ways to overcome the vegetable&rsquo;s stodgy image.        

&ldquo;We believe that, emotionally, most Irish consumers still love to eat their potatoes, but several key issues negatively impact on their consumption,&rdquo; the board said this month in a document for research applicants.        

These include the mistaken belief that potatoes are fattening, the continuing influence of the protein-rich Atkins Diet on the avoidance of carbohydrates and the time it takes to prepare potatoes compared with the main alternatives.        

Although potatoes remain the most popular carbohydrate on Irish dinner plates, consumption has fallen by around 25 percent since 2005, according to Kantar Worldpanel, a market research company. There has also been a steady trend toward processed potato products like frozen French fries, a trend that has led to calls from politicians for a &ldquo;fat tax&rdquo; to ward off an impending obesity epidemic.        

&ldquo;In terms of overall nutrition and including vitamin C, the potato is head and shoulders above pasta and rice,&rdquo; said Paula Mee, a prominent Dublin-based dietician. &ldquo;But pasta will often win out, particularly when you&rsquo;re busy. I don&rsquo;t know any child who doesn&rsquo;t eat it. The packaging is more colorful, you don&rsquo;t have to peel it, and it&rsquo;s quick and fast to prepare.&rdquo;        

Although Bord Bia has identified some obvious reasons for an increasing preference for quicker alternatives, Ms. Mee says she believes that the solutions may be more elusive.        

&ldquo;There is a legacy attached to the potato, and it obviously isn&rsquo;t a happy one,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It is in our DNA to regard the potato as a peasant food linked to a past we would obviously all rather leave behind us.&rdquo;        

Ms. Mee was referring to the potato&rsquo;s status as a staple food source in Ireland in the 19th century, and particularly to the great famine of the 1840s, when potato blight all but wiped out the crop year after year. An estimated one million people died in the famine years and another million emigrated, reducing the country&rsquo;s population by one-quarter, even though the island remained a net exporter of food, because the Irish rural poor depended almost entirely on the failed potato crop for sustenance.        

In a modern, urbanized Ireland, however, the historical causes of the rise in the popularity of alternatives to the humble spud are far more recent. Any campaign to tackle the potato&rsquo;s falling popularity will have to win back consumers like Vicky Leahy, a French-language lecturer and busy single mother in Dundalk, a town near the border with Northern Ireland.        

&ldquo;To state the obvious, spuds take half an hour to prepare, while pasta takes 10 minutes and rice slightly longer,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;But it&rsquo;s deeper than that. Potatoes personify the Ireland of my father&rsquo;s generation, where meat and two vegetables were on the table at 6 o&rsquo;clock every single night. That&rsquo;s what I associate them with, but we&rsquo;ve all traveled and we&rsquo;ve moved on.&rdquo;        

Liam Glennon, president of the Irish Potato Federation, which represents growers and suppliers, welcomes the Bord Bia initiative but says he believes it must be part of a broader strategy to stem the rising popularity of the interlopers.        

&ldquo;We have to tackle the &lsquo;poor relation syndrome&rsquo; where potatoes are associated with the pre-Celtic Tiger times,&rdquo; he said, referring to Ireland&rsquo;s decade-long economic boom that began in the mid-1990s. &ldquo;I would hope we are not in terminal decline &mdash; and I don&rsquo;t believe we are. Because potatoes are so strongly associated with Ireland, such a scenario would be unthinkable.&rdquo;        
