
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; In a humiliating affront for the Syrian government, Arab foreign ministers called Thursday for Syria to agree to admit international monitors within 24 hours or face economic sanctions, while activists reported new clashes between army troops and defectors that left 29 dead across the country.        

The announcement from the Arab League ministers came after the European Union said Thursday that safeguarding civilians against President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s ferocious crackdown had become a priority. The death toll in eight months of violence now exceeds 3,500, the figure cited by the United Nations in early November.        

&ldquo;Protection of civilians in Syria is an increasingly urgent and important aspect of responding to the events in country,&rdquo; said Maja Kocijancic, a European Union spokeswoman, in a statement.        

But the European Union stopped short of endorsing a proposal floated Wednesday by Foreign Minister Alain Jupp&eacute; of France to set up humanitarian corridors &mdash; with or without the consent of the Syrian government &mdash; to allow aid groups into the country. Such a step would be a major escalation of foreign involvement in what has become one of the bloodiest of the Arab Spring uprisings.        

In a special meeting in Cairo, the Arab League called on Syria to agree by Friday to admit a mission of 500 civilian and military observers to monitor the human rights situation and oversee efforts to carry out a peace plan that Syria agreed to on Nov. 2.        

The Arab League suspended Syria this month after it failed to comply with the plan, under which it had pledged to withdraw all military units from the streets, stop killing protesters and allow the monitors to enter the country.        

The league said that if Syria refused to admit the monitors, it would meet again on Saturday to discuss sanctions that could include the suspension of all trade except for essential humanitarian goods, a ban on flights to Syria, a travel ban on Syrian officials, and the freezing of all transactions with the central bank and of all Arab economic projects under way in Syria.        

If enacted, the new penalties would deal a stinging blow to an economy already suffering under sanctions from the European Union and the United States. Syria&rsquo;s two most vital sectors, oil and tourism, which account for more than a third of the government&rsquo;s revenues, have all but come to a halt.        

By late Friday, after the Arab League deadline had passed, there was still no official response from Syria. But Syrian state television had said earlier that the government would reject the deal as an infringement on its sovereignty.        

While the diplomatic wheels turned, violence continued unabated throughout the country, which has appeared in recent weeks to be sliding inexorably into civil war. Activists said that at least 29 people were killed Thursday, 28 of them in Homs in central Syria and its surrounding villages, and one in Talkalakh in northern Syria, according to the Local Coordination Committees, a group of activists who are involved in planning and documenting the uprising.        

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said that at least 11 soldiers were also killed in Houla, a village on the outskirts of Homs, during clashes with army defectors. The group, which is based in London, added that security forces killed 15 defectors who were hiding in Rastan, one of the most volatile areas of Homs Province, where large numbers of the deserters are believed to be hiding.        

Homs has been the scene of horrific sectarian clashes between the majority Muslims and sizable minorities of Christians and Alawites, the Muslim sect that provides much of the country&rsquo;s leadership. In recent weeks there have been reports of beheadings, frequent drive-by shootings and revenge killings. The situation there is described by activists as grave, with shortages of food, water and medical supplies.        

&ldquo;We are running out of basic food items and don&rsquo;t have gas to turn heaters on,&rdquo; said one resident from Homs who gave his name as Muhammad. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know how we are going to survive.&rdquo;        

Because of the appalling conditions in Homs and some other rebellious cities, the government is reluctant to admit the monitors, said Samir Nachar, a member of the opposition Syrian National Council.        

At the same time, he said, the Syrian government is desperate to avoid having the issue taken up again by the United Nations, which has yet to impose sanctions.        

&ldquo;They are torn between allowing the monitors in and facing a scandal, or not allowing them and facing the United Nations&rdquo; and the Arab League&rsquo;s sanctions, Mr. Nachar said.        

In his proposal, Mr. Jupp&eacute;, the French foreign minister, called for sending international monitors to Syria, with or without its approval, but he added that the observers would need an armed escort for their protection. He said he was in contact with the United Nations, the United States and the Arab League over setting up humanitarian corridors, which could be used by groups like the Red Cross to carry aid to the worst-hit areas.        

Mr. Jupp&eacute; called the situation in Syria &ldquo;no longer tenable&rdquo; and accused Mr. Assad of &ldquo;repression of a savagery we have not seen in a long time.&rdquo;        

He told French radio that if the effort to set up the humanitarian corridors was stymied, then &ldquo;we&rsquo;d have to look at other solutions with international observers.&rdquo;        

In contrast to their stance on Libya, Arab leaders have opposed any military intervention in Syria.        
Hwaida Saad and an employee of The New York Times contributed reporting.
