
AMMAN, Jordan &mdash; Jordan&rsquo;s new prime minister began consultations with key political groups, including the Muslim opposition, on Wednesday. The talks came a day after King Abdullah II, caught in a regional wave of discontent, sought to stave off growing public unrest by firing his government and vowing reform.        

Even before meeting with the prime minister, Marouf al-Bakhit, leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood here condemned him as a poor choice because of his ties to the military and because what they want is more democracy rather than a change of personnel. But other vital constituents, including former military officers and tribal leaders, were pleased by his selection, and that seems to have been the king&rsquo;s first concern in a country where tribal ties to the monarchy are central. Many here said the king had calmed an important part of public anger and won time for changes.        

&ldquo;This Friday will be the first in a month that we will not go out into the streets to demonstrate,&rdquo; Salem Daifallah, a colonel active in the High National Council for Retired Military Men, representing some 160,000 people, said in an interview. &ldquo;We will bide our time and see what the new cabinet looks like.&rdquo; The Muslim Brotherhood and leftists are expected to demonstrate again this week, but most predictions are for smaller turnouts than in recent weeks.        

The former army officers, like other so-called East Bankers, meaning the original Jordanians, have been upset over privatization and economic changes that have reduced their standard of living. The security services are almost entirely made up of East Bankers. Recent government efforts to reduce the role of the state in the economy and link Jordan to the global marketplace have thus ended up alienating the king&rsquo;s most loyal subjects. Responding to the anger, the king recently reversed some changes at great state cost &mdash; increasing fuel and food subsidies and civil service pay. Changing his cabinet was part of the same effort.        

Mr. Bakhit, 63, has served as prime minister before and is also a former ambassador to Israel and Turkey and considered a reliable, conservative selection by many East Bankers. He said he would select his cabinet only after days of consultations with various groups. Cabinet changes occur in Jordan on an average of every year and a half, but this was the first time in Abdullah&rsquo;s 12-year rule that a shift had been forced on him by public pressure, which grew as demonstrators in Tunisia and Egypt created major political change. But the public here is divided on the changes it wants, meaning a revolutionary shift is unlikely.        

Analysts, diplomats and average Jordanians make the point repeatedly that Jordan is not Tunisia or Egypt. It is a monarchy, and thus far the legitimacy of Hashemite family rule here remains largely unchallenged. Moreover, the two groups that make up the country&rsquo;s six million people &mdash; the East Bank tribes on one hand and Palestinians on the other &mdash; have distinctly different interests, meaning the king is not expected to face a unified movement for change.        

&ldquo;Jordan is not even close to being about to blow up,&rdquo; a Western diplomat here said. &ldquo;It remains a stable place.&rdquo;        

Undercurrents of discontent with Abdullah and especially with his wife, Rania, are nonetheless evident in quiet talk of their lavish life. The king has not been able to match the adoration among his people of his father, King Hussein, who died in 1999.        

But as Nabeel Ghishan, a columnist for the independent daily Al-Arab al-Youm, said in an interview: &ldquo;Jordanians feel they have a contract with the Hashemites. As long as they are able to preserve that contract &mdash; and they&rsquo;ve been able to so far &mdash; the people will stay with them.&rdquo;        
