
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; North Korea warned on Thursday that any military clash on a disputed maritime border could escalate into an attack on the presidential office in Seoul, threatening to engulf the South Korean leadership &ldquo;in a sea of fire.&rdquo;        

The threat came one day after South Korea conducted military drills near Yeonpyeong, a front-line island west of Seoul. The display of firepower was timed to mark the first anniversary of the North Korean artillery attack on Yeonpyeong, which killed two marines and two civilians.        

North Korea called the drills &ldquo;a renewed political and military provocation.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;If one single shot drops in our sacred waters and territory again, the sea of fire on Yeonpyeong-do will spread to a sea of fire on the Blue House, and that deluge of fire will sweep away the stronghold of the group of traitors,&rdquo; the Supreme Command of the North&rsquo;s People&rsquo;s Army said in a statement carried by the official Korean Central News Agency.        

The Blue House is the office of President Lee Myung-bak in Seoul. Mr. Lee&rsquo;s office had no immediate comment on the threat.        

North Korea often issues strident rhetoric when the American or South Korean militaries conduct drills on the peninsula. But its pointed mention of Mr. Lee&rsquo;s office testified to the simmering tensions between the two Koreas.        

When Mr. Lee took office in early 2008 and reversed South Korea&rsquo;s policy of courting North Korea&rsquo;s goodwill by providing significant humanitarian aid, relations quickly plummeted. A South Korean warship sank in March of last year in what Seoul called a North Korean torpedo attack. Forty-six sailors were killed.        

Last November, North Korea launched an artillery barrage on Yeonpyeong, claiming that the attack was provoked by the South Korean military&rsquo;s live-fire exercises in its waters. Waters around the island are controlled by South Korea but are also claimed by the North. The two sides never agreed on a sea border when the 1950-53 Korean War ended in a truce.        

South Korea&rsquo;s drills this week involved aircraft, rocket launchers, artillery and naval destroyers. Taking place around five South Korean islands along the southwestern coast of North Korea, they tested South Korea&rsquo;s ability to strike enemy sites in case of a North Korean provocation.        

After the island attack last year, the South Korean military beefed up its arsenal on the islands, setting up a separate defense command, installing additional radars, and deploying attack helicopters and precision-guided rockets designed to take out North Korea&rsquo;s coastal artillery. The rules of engagement were changed to allow the military to respond faster and more aggressively to enemy provocations.        

Concerned about the possibility of military skirmishes, the United States has sought to stabilize the peninsula. While reaffirming its military commitment to defend the South, it has also recently begun engaging North Korea in bilateral talks.        

On Wednesday, President Lee repeated his demand for a North Korean apology for the shelling of Yeonpyeong.        
