
JERUSALEM &mdash; President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority and the leader of the rival Islamic group Hamas met Thursday and the sides agreed to go ahead with elections in the Palestinian territories next year, according to officials, even as they failed to resolve differences over an interim unity government to prepare for the vote.        

The meeting, in Cairo, was the first between Mr. Abbas, chief of the mainstream Fatah movement, and his rival, Khaled Meshal, the political leader of Hamas, since the two men signed a reconciliation accord in May. Even since then, the leadership of the Palestinian territories has remained divided, with Mr. Abbas&rsquo;s authority confined to the West Bank while Hamas controls the coastal enclave of Gaza.        

It remained unclear even after the meeting on Thursday whether the two sides were indeed committed to a further narrowing of their differences, and whether they would take any tangible steps toward power sharing soon or at all.        

The May accord, brokered by Egypt, called for a transitional unity cabinet of unaffiliated technocrats to prepare for presidential and parliamentary elections within a year. Despite rosy public statements after their meeting on Thursday, the two men remained deadlocked over the makeup of that government, according to officials.        

Mr. Abbas has insisted on retaining Salam Fayyad, an American-educated economist who is well regarded internationally, as prime minister. Hamas rejected that plan. Both sides insisted on Thursday that their differences were being ironed out and said they would meet again starting Dec. 20.        

&ldquo;We discussed all the details about reconciliation and would like to tell you that there are no differences between us at all on any of the issues,&rdquo; Mr. Abbas told reporters after the meeting. &ldquo;You will see all of this in the coming days and weeks.&rdquo;        

Mr. Meshal, who is based in Damascus, Syria, said that the atmosphere was positive. &ldquo;With this meeting we have opened a new page of a high level of understanding,&rdquo; he said.        

Neither of the leaders directly addressed the deadlock over the appointment of a unity government.        

Fawzi Barhoum, a Hamas spokesman, said by telephone from Cairo that the sides had agreed to continue the discussions in committees. Azzam al-Ahmad of Fatah said that consultations would continue and that Mr. Abbas and Mr. Meshal would meet again to determine the makeup of the government and other issues.        

But differences between the sides clearly prevailed, and since the signing of the accord disincentives for further cooperation have mounted.        

Hamas rejects Israel&rsquo;s existence and is classified as a terrorist organization by the United States, the European Union and Israel. Israel and the West say they will not deal with a Palestinian government that includes Hamas unless the Islamic group recognizes Israel, renounces violence and accepts all previous Israeli-Palestinian agreements.        

Hamas has shown no sign of agreeing to those conditions, and the prospect of a unity government threatens the Palestinian Authority&rsquo;s relations with Israel, Europe and the United States. It also jeopardizes its finances. Israeli officials have withheld the transfer of about $100 million a month in taxes and customs duties that Israel collects on behalf of the Palestinians, in part waiting to see the outcome of the latest unity talks. Meanwhile, for Hamas, the Arab Spring has buoyed hopes of new opportunities for Islamist parties across the region.        

The hostility and distrust between Fatah and Hamas continues to run deep. Hamas won parliamentary elections in 2006, forcing Fatah, which dominates the Palestinian Authority and controls the presidency and much of the government and security services, to share power with it for the first time. The two formed a national unity government that did not hold for long. After a short but bloody factional war in Gaza, Hamas routed Fatah officials from the coastal enclave, confining Mr. Abbas and his authority to the West Bank.        

This latest effort to present a unified front comes as peace efforts with Israel have stalled. Mr. Abbas&rsquo;s recent bid for full membership for Palestine at the United Nations has also faltered. United Nations Security Council members are concerned, among other things, about whether the Palestinians qualify as a state when Mr. Abbas has no control over Gaza.        

Hamas received at least a temporary lift from its recent prisoner swap with Israel, in which the Islamic militant group exchanged one captive Israeli soldier for hundreds of Palestinian prisoners. But Hamas remains isolated in Gaza, and the upheaval in Syria has made the Hamas leadership&rsquo;s base there precarious.        

Mr. Barhoum said that the two sides agreed to some confidence-building measures, like stopping politically motivated arrests, and that they had also reached understandings on a political program defining relations between Israel and the Palestinians and the shape of a future Palestinian state. He did not elaborate on the content of those understandings.        
Isabel Kershner reported from Jerusalem, and Fares Akram from Gaza.
