
KANDAHAR, Afghanistan &mdash; Six children were among seven civilians killed in a NATO airstrike in southern Afghanistan, Afghan officials said Thursday.        

The deaths occurred on Wednesday in the Zhare district of Kandahar Province, an area described by coalition forces as largely pacified in recent months, and two insurgents were also killed, the Afghan officials said.        

A spokesman for the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force, Master Sgt. Christopher DeWitt, said the authorities were aware of the strike and had sent a team to the district to investigate. He said the assistance force had not previously issued a news release on the deaths.        

Zalmai Ayoubi, a spokesman for the governor of Kandahar, said that a NATO reconnaissance aircraft spotted five militants planting mines in the village of Siacha, in the Zhare district, on Wednesday. The plane targeted the insurgents, killing two and wounding a third, and then pursued the other two suspects as they carried their wounded comrade away.        

&ldquo;The plane chased them, the insurgents entered a street where children were playing and, as a result of its shooting, seven people have been killed, including six children, and two girls also have been injured,&rdquo; Mr. Ayoubi said. The victims were members of two families.        

Abdul Samad, an uncle of four of the children who were killed, disputed the government&rsquo;s version of the attack. He said his relatives were working in fields near their village when they were attacked without warning by an aircraft.        

His brother-in-law, Mohammad Rahim, 50, had his two sons and three daughters with him. They were between 4 and 12 years old and all were killed, except an 8-year-old daughter who was badly wounded, Mr. Samad said.        

&ldquo;There were no Taliban in the field; this is a baseless allegation that the Taliban were planting mines,&rdquo; Mr. Samad said. &ldquo;I have been to the scene and haven&rsquo;t found a single bit of evidence of bombs or any other weapons. The Americans did a serious crime against innocent children, they will never ever be forgiven.&rdquo;        

American soldiers have destroyed numerous dwellings in Zhare to deny insurgents hiding places, and they have also built new roads across farmland because existing ones were so heavily mined. Residents were quickly compensated by the military, however, and in recent months the area, one of several districts near the city of Kandahar that were once Taliban strongholds, has been relatively quiet.        

The area is also known as the ancestral home of the Taliban leader Mullah Muhammad Omar.        
Taimoor Shah reported from Kandahar, and Rod Nordland from Kabul, Afghanistan.
