
WASHINGTON &mdash; Ever since tens of thousands of protesters converged on Tahrir Square in Cairo for the first Day of Revolution exactly 10 months ago, the Obama administration has struggled to strike the right balance between democracy and stability. In the early morning hours on Friday, President Obama came out on the side of the Arab street, issuing a call for the Egyptian military to quickly hand over power to a civilian, democratically elected government.        

In so doing, the president opened up a litany of risks, exposing a fault line between the United States and the Egyptian military which, perhaps more than any other entity in the region, has for 30 years served as the bulwark protecting a critical American concern in the Middle East: the 1979 Camp David peace treaty between Egypt and Israel.        

In explicitly warning the military to swiftly begin a &ldquo;full transfer of power&rdquo; to a civilian government in a &ldquo;just and inclusive manner,&rdquo; the White House served notice that the army in Egypt would continue to receive the Obama administration&rsquo;s support only if it, in turn, supported a real democratic transition.        

The statement, issued at 3:03 a.m. in Washington, was timed to greet the news of the military&rsquo;s selection of a new prime minister in Egypt and to get in front of protests in Cairo that drew hundreds of thousands, the largest turnout of a tumultuous week. It signaled, foreign policy experts said, the beginning of a shift in how the United States deals with a fast-changing Arab region and tries to preserve the Egypt-Israel peace accord.        

&ldquo;What we&rsquo;re now doing is saying to the military that if you think you&rsquo;re going to maintain military power, we&rsquo;re not going to support that,&rdquo; said Martin S. Indyk, director of foreign policy at the Brookings Institution and the former United States ambassador to Israel. &ldquo;We want you to play the role of midwife to democracy, not the role of military junta.&rdquo;        

But the strategy &ldquo;is a high-risk one, because the ones who benefit most from it are the people who don&rsquo;t necessarily have our best interests in mind &mdash; the Islamists &mdash; who might not be as wedded to the peace treaty as the military,&rdquo; Mr. Indyk said. &ldquo;We are essentially coming down on the side of democracy.&rdquo;        

The strategy risks straining Washington&rsquo;s deep ties with Egypt&rsquo;s military, as well as a potential backlash in Egypt if the United States, which is not popular from a long history of supporting the former president, Hosni Mubarak, is seen to be meddling. But administration officials were apparently judging that the bigger risk may be to the Egyptian public, which will need to be won over if Egypt becomes fully democratic, as the administration says it hopes.        

The Obama administration appears now to be openly hedging its bets, trying to position the United States in such a way that regardless of who comes out on top &mdash; the army or the protesters &mdash; it will still maintain some credibility, and ability, to influence the government and ensure a level of stability in Egypt, and to continue to uphold the Egyptian-Israeli peace deal, which the United States views as central to stability in the region as a whole.        

Obama administration officials said Friday that the United States would continue to work closely with the Egyptian military, which still receives more than $1.3 billion a year in American aid. But American diplomats said that there had been increasing concern over how the military had handled the latest demonstrations, and in particular over the tactics of the security forces in confrontations with protesters this week that killed at least 41 civilians and injured more than 1,000.        

Senior officials at the White House, the State Department and the Pentagon have been on the phone with their Egyptian counterparts urging restraint; Secretary of Defense Leon E. Panetta called the army field marshal, Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, late Wednesday night to express &ldquo;just how fundamental the United States believes the matter of responding to the legitimate aspirations of the Egyptian people&rdquo; is, one senior official said on Friday, speaking on grounds of anonymity. Anne W. Patterson, the American ambassador to Egypt, has also been in talks with Egyptian officials.        

Administration officials have also been talking to Lt. Gen. Sami Hafez Enan, the second in command and American military favorite, who is viewed as a potential successor to Field Marshal Tantawi and perhaps more amenable to making a swift change to democracy.        
David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from Cairo.
