
CAIRO &mdash; Egypt&rsquo;s interim military rulers faced the most significant challenge in a week of escalating protests on Friday as the Obama administration threw its weight behind the Egyptians who flooded into Tahrir Square to demand that the generals relinquish power, and new signs of unity emerged among street protesters and the political elite.        

The developments added to a convergence of pressures on the tenuous legitimacy of the military-led government in Egypt. It was once held in high regard for helping to usher out President Hosni Mubarak 10 months ago, but it is now increasingly criticized for exerting the same oppressive force as he once did.        

&ldquo;The military has got to be frightened to death,&rdquo; said Robert Springborg, a scholar of the Egyptian military at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, Calif. The crux of the protesters&rsquo; demands, he said, has now gone beyond the ouster of a president to threaten the underlying power structure in place since Gamal Abdel Nasser&rsquo;s 1952 military coup. &ldquo;It would be the first time since 1952 that a civilian was in the driver&rsquo;s seat,&rdquo; Mr. Springborg said.        

The White House statement, issued shortly after 3 a.m. in Washington on Friday to coincide with the Egyptian morning, took aim at the ruling military council&rsquo;s appointment late Thursday of a new prime minister charged with appointing a government to execute the generals&rsquo; directions, without independent authority. &ldquo;The United States strongly believes that the new Egyptian government must be empowered with real authority immediately,&rdquo; the White House said in the statement.        

It amounted to the Obama administration&rsquo;s most direct and public rebuke of the military council since it seized power with Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s ouster. Until recently the administration had voiced only approval for the generals&rsquo; slow and shifting timetables for handing power to civilians. And although the impact of the change in the American position was hard to assess, some speculated about a potential anti-American backlash.        

The current wave of protests grew out of simmering resentment at the military&rsquo;s increasingly explicit efforts to grant itself permanent political power and privileges, including protection from civilian oversight. But the anger exploded into the open last Saturday when the military police used force to clear a small tent camp of protesters from Tahrir Square. Thousands ran to the streets to beat back the police, and since then each of the generals&rsquo; moves to suppress, divert or appease public anger has expanded the backlash.        

By Friday, the toll from the week&rsquo;s clashes had risen to 41 deaths and more than 1,000 injuries. And public rage at the military galvanized around a new spokesman, the activist Ahmed Harara. After losing one eye to birdshot or a rubber bullet fired by the police during the uprising against Mr. Mubarak, he lost the other in the clashes last week.        

Mr. Harara led a march of thousands into the square on Friday morning, guided by others, including Wael Ghonim, the Google executive whose Web page helped build support for the first stage of the revolt in January. Mr. Ghonim wore an eye patch in solidarity with the scores who have been injured battling the police.        

There were reports Friday of violent clashes with soldiers or police officers at protests in Alexandria and elsewhere. But in Cairo a cease-fire that the military had imposed on the fighting around Tahrir Square lasted a second day. The peace lured even more families and young professionals into the square, giving it the feel of the broad-based demonstrations that toppled Mr. Mubarak.        

The protesters and the political elite appeared to coalesce on Friday for the first time around a specific team of civilians representing diverse ideologies, whom protesters hoped could assume leadership of the transition as a civilian &ldquo;presidential council.&rdquo;        

Among them were three rival presidential contenders: the liberal former diplomat and Nobel Prize winner Mohamed ElBaradei; Abdel Moneim Aboul Fotouh, a moderate Islamist and former Muslim Brotherhood leader; and the popular left-leaning politician Hamdeen Sabahi.        
Mayy el Sheikh and Liam Stack contributed reporting.
