
The Russian government agreed on Friday to offer Belarus loans and a discounted price on natural gas worth more than $14 billion, tying Belarus, Russia&rsquo;s small, authoritarian neighbor, into an even tighter union with Moscow.        

The loans and discounts represent an economic lifeline to Belarus&rsquo;s president, Aleksandr G. Lukashenko, helping his government to subsidize basic food items and imported goods to offset inflation and tamp down social unrest. In exchange, Belarus sold full control of its natural gas pipeline to Europe to Gazprom, the Russian energy giant.        

The agreement, like so many Russia has struck with its neighbors, hinged on energy pricing policies, long a tool of choice in Moscow&rsquo;s foreign policy with other former Soviet states.        

Gazprom already owned a 50 percent stake in the pipeline, called Yamal-Europe, which carries about 20 percent of Russia&rsquo;s gas to Western markets. Most of the rest travels through pipelines crossing Ukraine, which remain outside Gazprom&rsquo;s control.        

Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, Gazprom has worked to regain control of the web of pipelines that are integral to its business and Russia&rsquo;s geopolitical positioning in Eastern Europe. Gazprom&rsquo;s control of Yamal-Europe from Siberia to the Polish border will &ldquo;ease our relations with Belarus for years to come,&rdquo; Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin said in comments reported by the Interfax news agency.        

Full ownership will &ldquo;allow us to provide secure transit through Belarus for our energy to customers in Western Europe,&rdquo; Mr. Putin said.        

Gazprom, the world&rsquo;s largest natural gas company, offered a steep discount on fuel in exchange. The company said in a statement that it would sell natural gas to Belarus for $165 per 1,000 cubic meters starting in 2012, less than half of what the company charges customers in Western Europe and Ukraine.        

Mr. Putin has called such sweetheart deals with countries willing to ally with Russia politically &ldquo;integration discounts.&rdquo; At a cabinet meeting earlier on Friday, he said Gazprom&rsquo;s average sale price in Europe was now $400 for the same volume.        

Mr. Putin has deftly exploited such pricing differences to entice former Soviet states to reintegrate with Russia under a variety of customs and economic union treaties.        

After Belarus arrested presidential candidates last winter, few countries besides Russia have been willing to help Mr. Lukashenko&rsquo;s government resolve its balance of payments crisis. Inflation and a steep devaluation of the Belarussian ruble have led to a spiral of protests and police crackdowns.        

In an example of the country&rsquo;s economic predicament, when the Belarussian government last spring resorted to subsidizing staples like cheese and butter, residents took to smuggling them abroad for resale.        
