
ARSENYEVO, Russia &mdash; It was a grim-faced crowd that gathered last week at the Palace of Culture in this village, making its way past decrepit housing blocks, broken streetlights and a statue of Lenin.        

The governor had driven in from the regional capital, and detachments of pretty girls in blue smocks were handing out flags for United Russia, the party that serves as an extension of the Kremlin&rsquo;s power.        

But the villagers were not in a holiday mood. They wanted to complain &mdash; about unresponsive local officials, corruption, alcoholism, decaying housing and the hopelessness that is sending young people away. &ldquo;You know what we need?&rdquo; said one woman as she waited in line for sausage. &ldquo;A monument to dead factories.&rdquo;        

United Russia can no longer count on voters in places like Tula, an industrial region about 120 miles south of Moscow where many residents say that their quality of life has stopped rising. This lagging support is an unsettling prospect for the government &mdash; even though United Russia will almost certainly dominate parliamentary elections on Dec. 4. With competition all but eliminated, Russia&rsquo;s political system depends heavily on its leaders&rsquo; popularity to provide legitimacy. As winter settles in, that no longer feels assured.        

With elections a week away, pollsters were predicting that United Russia would lose as many as 60 of its 315 seats in Parliament, and officials in Tula were making a last push to win back voters&rsquo; confidence.        

An array of pay raises and public projects have been announced in recent weeks. Vladimir S. Gruzdev, a rising political star who was installed as governor in August, holds marathon town hall meetings reminiscent of reality television, dressing down local apparatchiks like a populist Donald Trump. Arsenyevo has only 4,900 residents, but they got three and a half hours with Mr. Gruzdev this month. They then scattered into the dark, some impressed, some skeptical.        

&ldquo;This is an election campaign,&rdquo; said Antonina Dyrova, a 60-year-old bookkeeper, as she bundled up against the cold. &ldquo;I can&rsquo;t tell whether anything will actually change.&rdquo;        

Tula is not the place you would expect the Kremlin&rsquo;s troubles to come from.        

United Russia polls badly in Moscow and St. Petersburg, but those are places populated by wealthy liberals, whose complaints have never had much impact. Tula, by contrast, is average. Its weapons factories have endured waves of layoffs since the 1990s, leaving tens of thousands of families in decaying housing. Young people depart for Moscow as if drawn by a giant magnet.        

Tula voted 60 percent for United Russia in 2007, but polls this fall showed support slipping to around 40 percent. In interviews, voters complained of stagnant wages, rising prices and increases in utility payments.        

&ldquo;We were hoping for something better,&rdquo; said Yekaterina Demidova, 25, a shop assistant in Arsenyevo. &ldquo;Ten years ago, we felt that things were moving. Now they&rsquo;ve stopped.&rdquo;        

Numerous voters said they did not plan to cast ballots at all. Larisa Kharich, a seamstress, said that she would support United Russia because it represented &ldquo;young, energetic&rdquo; Russians, but that the party&rsquo;s political monopoly was beginning to grate on her nonetheless.        

&ldquo;What I don&rsquo;t like is the sense that everything has been decided already,&rdquo; said Ms. Kharich, 43. &ldquo;There is no competition. There are no competitors and no competition. There are lots of shows. But people are not stupid.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gruzdev&rsquo;s visit to Arsenyevo offered a glimpse into the depth of citizens&rsquo; grievances and the government&rsquo;s efforts to address it.        

The new governor, 44, worked in the Soviet foreign intelligence service and then founded a chain of grocery stores, accumulating a fortune Forbes estimates at $950 million. He was appointed in the midst of a scandal; his predecessor, a party member who was appointed by President Vladimir V. Putin in 2005 and then reappointed by President Dmitri A. Medvedev in 2010, was charged with taking a $1.3 million bribe.        

The case alienated United Russia voters like Gennady A. Fedin, who said he would never vote for the party again.        

&ldquo;The fish rots from the head,&rdquo; said Mr. Fedin, 72, a retired factory foreman. &ldquo;Where did this corruption come from? It can only come from the top.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
Mr. Gruzdev has responded with a kind of populist shock therapy that voters seem to love. His town hall meetings are jokingly referred to as &ldquo;execution visits&rdquo; because he calls on local officials to respond to citizens&rsquo; complaints on the spot. Occasionally he tells them on the spot to tender their resignations. In October, after a roomful of citizens vented their complaints against a regional administrator, he recommended that the official shoot himself.        

&ldquo;Let&rsquo;s take care of this right now,&rdquo; Mr. Gruzdev said briskly here in Arsenyevo, after listening to an excruciatingly detailed complaint about fees for electricity in apartment stairwells, which results in additional costs of several dollars a month. When an official meekly said he had scheduled a round table on the issue, the governor shot back, &ldquo;Round tables are all very well, but our citizens are getting bills today.&rdquo; He was rewarded with warm applause.        

In an interview afterward, Mr. Gruzdev said these were routine outings by a new governor, and unrelated to the elections. He acknowledged, however, that his popularity was helping the party.        

&ldquo;United Russia&rsquo;s approval rating is linked, above all, with the people who embody United Russia,&rdquo; he said.        

Vladimir Kosteyev, an election consultant who has been working for United Russia in Tula since April, said the mood seemed particularly dark in the industrial cities that are close enough to Moscow to compare their relative wealth; poorer cities in the hinterlands are more forgiving. He added that there was nothing very surprising about the erosion of support for United Russia.        

&ldquo;It is just a normal trend of exhaustion with a political brand,&rdquo; Mr. Kosteyev said. &ldquo;In the United States, the oldest brands have been repositioned dozens of times.&rdquo; If voters are becoming tired of the party, or of Mr. Putin, he added, &ldquo;we need to do a rebranding.&rdquo;        

Branding may not be enough in a region like Tula, where voters&rsquo; grievances are economic and &ldquo;people right now do not believe in words,&rdquo; said Alexei V. Makarkin, an analyst with the Center for Political Technologies in Moscow.        

In any case, he says, the authorities have little to fear from the parliamentary elections.        

The real hazard will come months from now, when all the posters have been taken down and an already bitter electorate faces stark economic realities, Mr. Makarkin said. The campaign season has uncovered &ldquo;something happening in our society, a very important process,&rdquo; he argued, as Russians &mdash; people accustomed to 7 percent growth rates &mdash; reassess Mr. Putin and United Russia through an increasingly critical lens.        

&ldquo;People have the expectation that at least things won&rsquo;t be worse,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And it will probably be worse.&rdquo;        
