
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; North Korea&rsquo;s harvests this fall were expected to increase by 8.5 percent compared with a year ago, but the most vulnerable segments of the population, especially young children, still urgently need international aid, two United Nations agencies said Friday.        

The country will need to import 739,000 tons of grain, the World Food Program and the Food and Agriculture Organization said in a report after an on-site assessment of the North&rsquo;s food situation. But North Korea, constrained by high global food prices, is planning to import only 325,000 tons.        

&ldquo;The situation remains precarious,&rdquo; Arif Husain of the World Food Program said in a statement.        

The report was the latest in a series of appeals from international relief agencies for food aid for North Korean children.        

South Korea and the United States officially deny linking humanitarian aid to political issues. But North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear weapons program, military tension with South Korea and fears that the North might divert food aid to its military have helped curtail contributions from potential donors.        

On Friday, South Korea said that one of its officials was invited to enter North Korea this week to help monitor the distribution of flour donated by a civic group in another sign that North Korea was acquiescing to relief agencies&rsquo; demands for more transparency.        

Last week, the South Korean unification minister, Yu Woo-ik, told lawmakers in Seoul that while the government was allowing limited aid shipments, the situation in the North was &ldquo;not seriously urgent.&rdquo; On Monday, he said in Beijing that South Korea would not provide a large shipment of rice until North Korea apologized for shelling a South Korean island last November, the Yonhap news agency reported.        

The joint United Nations team stayed in North Korea for 10 days, visiting 29 counties across the country, the report said.        

Many North Koreans are coping with shortages by foraging for food in the countryside, tapping into supplies from relatives living in rural areas and using informal markets, it said. The state ration system reportedly could provide only seven ounces of grain per person per day, about one-third of the minimum daily energy requirement.        

&ldquo;Some pediatric wards indicated that cases admitted for malnutrition since April had doubled compared to the same period in 2010,&rdquo; it said. &ldquo;A lack of protein, fats and vital vitamins and minerals continues to compromise proper physical and intellectual development into adulthood.&rdquo;        
