
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Syria on Friday ignored an Arab League deadline to accept observers to oversee a peace deal to end more than eight months of bloodshed, with activists saying that several protesters and soldiers were killed during clashes across the country.        

Arab League officials said Thursday that if the government of President Bashar al-Assad failed to agree by Friday to sign a protocol detailing the mission of the observers, Arab finance ministers would meet Saturday in Cairo to discuss imposing sanctions that could include halting flights to Syria, curbing trade and stopping transactions with the country&rsquo;s central bank.        

The new sanctions would deal a severe blow to an economy already suffering under sanctions from the European Union and the United States. Syria&rsquo;s two most vital sectors, oil and tourism, which account for more than a third of the government&rsquo;s revenues, have all but come to a halt.        

Turkey announced Friday that its foreign minister would hold talks with foreign ministers from Arab nations in Cairo on Sunday to discuss Syria&rsquo;s failure to admit several hundred military and civilian observers. The monitors&rsquo; mission was to examine the humanitarian situation in Syria and the execution of an Arab League peace proposal that Damascus agreed to on Nov. 2.        

The Anatolia news agency quoted the Turkish foreign minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, as saying that Turkey already had some measures in hand against Damascus. &ldquo;We are going to harmonize them with those prepared by the Arab League,&rdquo; Mr. Davutoglu was quoted as saying.        

Earlier on Friday, Mr. Davutoglu said that Syria&rsquo;s silence as the deadline passed indicated that it was trying to conceal a worrisome humanitarian situation. &ldquo;Syria was expected to say yes to the observers,&rdquo; Mr. Davutoglu was quoted as saying. &ldquo;Unless there is a reality it hides about the situation.&rdquo;        

Mr. Davutoglu&rsquo;s comments came as the United Nations voiced concerns on Friday about reports of executions and torture of civilians, including children.        

The United Nations Committee against Torture described &ldquo;rife or systematic attacks&rdquo; against civilians, &ldquo;including the killing of peaceful demonstrators,&rdquo; adding that it was particularly concerned about reports of children being tortured and mutilated during detention. It described Syria&rsquo;s actions as &ldquo;gross and pervasive&rdquo; human rights violations.        

The statement came ahead of a highly anticipated report to be released Monday by an independent commission of inquiry, sponsored by the United Nations, investigating accusations that Syrian armed forces committed crimes against humanity.        

The United Nations says that at least 3,500 people have been killed since mid-March in the government&rsquo;s crackdown.        

On Friday, at least 16 more people were killed across the country when security forces opened fire at demonstrations, activists said. A majority were in Homs, a city in central Syria that has witnessed some of the largest protests against Mr. Assad.        

&ldquo;We will not give up,&rdquo; said Abu Kinan, a shop owner and protester from the Midan neighborhood in Damascus. &ldquo;When the Arab League imposes its sanctions, the Syrian economy will collapse, and then the business class and the middle class will join the protests to change the regime.&rdquo;        

The business class and the elite have so far remained largely on the sidelines of the uprising.        

The Syrian military also said that 10 of its personnel were killed on Thursday, including six pilots, in an attack on their air force base southwest of Homs.        

A military spokesman said, &ldquo;This confirms the involvement of foreign elements and their support of these terrorist operations in an effort to weaken the fighting capabilities of our forces.&rdquo;        
Hwaida Saad and an employee of The New York Times contributed reporting.
