
GENEVA &mdash; Despite last-minute attempts to broker a compromise, American-led efforts to conclude an international treaty restricting use of cluster munitions collapsed on Friday in the face of opposition from countries that said it did not address their humanitarian concerns and would undermine existing international law.        

Diplomats from 114 countries spent two weeks in Geneva trying to conclude a treaty that would have banned older, less sophisticated cluster munitions &mdash; bombs and rockets that scatter a large number of smaller bomblets over a wide area. Some bomblets fail to explode upon hitting the ground and can remain a deadly hazard long after the fighting is over.        

The draft treaty was vigorously promoted by the United States and had the backing of other major users and producers, including China, India, Israel and Russia. It reflected the increasing stigmatization of a weapon recognized as causing unacceptable harm to civilians and seen as having lasting effects on development for decades after conflicts have ended.        

The effort was rejected by a group of 50 countries from Africa, Asia, Europe and Latin America, including many nations that had signed on to the 2008 Oslo Convention. The Oslo agreement imposed a comprehensive ban on the use, production, stockpiling and sale of cluster munitions.        

The United States argued that the draft treaty, which would have banned the use of cluster munitions produced before 1980, presented an opportunity to regulate the major users and producers of the weapons that hold an estimated 85 percent of global stockpiles but had not joined the Oslo Convention, including the United States.        

Under the draft treaty, the United States said it alone would have to give up the use of 2 million cluster bombs and about 100 million submunitions or smaller bomblets, many more than those given up by all 111 countries that have signed the Oslo Convention combined.        

But countries and disarmament groups opposing the draft treaty said the humanitarian impact of the proposed protocol would be minimal and would legitimize continued use of other cluster munitions that are recognized to cause unacceptable harm.        

These countries, together with the International Committee of the Red Cross and United Nations agencies dealing with development and human rights, also argued that the adoption of a legal instrument that was weaker than the Oslo agreement would set a dangerous precedent.        

The United States, in a statement released by its mission in Geneva, said it was &ldquo;deeply disappointed&rdquo; by the failure to reach an agreement, but would continue with its own plans to prohibit by 2018 the use of cluster munitions that have a rate of more than 1 percent in unexploded ordnance. &ldquo;We encourage other countries to take similar steps,&rdquo; it added.        

Phillip Spector, who led the American delegation, said amendments he proposed in the dying minutes of the conference would have made the draft treaty &ldquo;walk in lock step&rdquo; with the Oslo agreement. But diplomats from the group of 50 opposing countries said the amendments did not alter the substance of a draft that had been drawn up to reflect the interests of a small group of major users and producers of cluster munitions.        

&ldquo;There were fundamental differences over how the issue of cluster munitions should be addressed,&rdquo; said Alexander Kmentt, director of disarmament in Austria&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry. &ldquo;Unfortunately it was always one position that was adopted, and the voices of many countries were never taken into account.&rdquo;        

Diplomats also concluded that the failure to reach an agreement in Geneva after four years of negotiations and a decade of discussions in the United Nations Convention on Conventional Weapons may have exhausted interest in pursuing negotiations on a cluster-munitions treaty for the immediate future and had dealt a blow to the credibility of the United Nations&rsquo; body as a forum for developing international law on disarmament issues.        
