
BAGHDAD &mdash; Bombs exploding in and around Baghdad on Saturday shattered the stillness of a crystalline autumn day in the desert as violence continued during the American military withdrawal from Iraq.        

By early evening, the death toll had risen to at least 11 from explosions on a highway to the west and in a market for secondhand clothes in the city&rsquo;s center, witnesses and government officials said.        

Separately, would-be assassins clearly trying to kill the mayor of a small town north of Baghdad by shooting into his house wounded him and killed a bodyguard.        

And the toll from a triple bombing in a market on Thursday in the southern city of Basra, initially reported as 19, had reached 25 by Saturday as some gravely wounded victims died. On Friday, the government fired three local police commanders over lax security in the market.        

The first bomb on Saturday blew into a minibus carrying laborers along a highway in Abu Ghraib, the town made infamous by the prison torture scandal. Seven workers died, and eight people, including bystanders, were wounded.        

The workers, from a nearby village, had gathered moments before in the clear, cold dawn to wait for work opportunities in a city square.        

&ldquo;I was heading to the square where construction workers assemble and, suddenly, a big explosion occurred, targeting our friends,&rdquo; said Jabbar Talib, a 21-year-old laborer. &ldquo;We will witness more of them during the withdrawal.&rdquo; Dec. 31 is the deadline for American troops to leave under an agreement negotiated with the Iraqi government.        

A farmer, Rafi Ahmed, who heard the blast, described it as a &ldquo;big explosion that claimed the lives of Iraqi innocents.&rdquo;        

Many Iraqis, regardless of the circumstances, blame the United States for attacks like these, but interpreting the motives for seemingly senseless bombings in Iraq is an imprecise exercise; groups do not often claim responsibility.        

In the case of the minibus bombing, Abu Ghraib is a hot spot of Sunni militant activity, suggesting a possible link to Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, a homegrown insurgent group that is believed to have some foreign leaders. The bombing killed local Sunnis, but it may have been an attempt to impugn the authority of the Shiite-dominated police who patrol the highway.        

Alternatively, at least three Shiite militias also remain active in Iraq as the United States military pulls out, the most prominent being the Promised Day Brigade, which is under the control of Moktada al-Sadr, an anti-American Shiite cleric.        

A prominent Sunni leader in Anbar Province, Sheik Ahmed Abu Risha, the leader of the Awakening movement, said in an interview last week that he and other Sunni officials were recently the intended targets of improvised explosive devices on the same road in Abu Ghraib, and he suggested that the Shiite-led police force was complicit.        

In any case, the United States military has expressed concern generally that attacks will escalate from all sides after the withdrawal as militants test the defenses of the Iraqi government.        

Later Saturday, a bomb detonated in the Bab al-Sharji clothing market near Tahrir Square in central Baghdad, killing four civilians and wounding 25, according to the Interior Ministry.        

Attacks have generally tapered off from their peak in 2007 when militants bombed, took shots at or fired rockets at American or Iraqi soldiers 145 times a day on average, according to United States military statistics.        

In the first eight months of this year, attacks were down to 14 per day, according to statistics. But the mortality rate from violence remains high by any standard; the Iraqi government has reported that 258 people were killed in insurgent-related violence in October, or about eight people a day.        
Omar al-Jawoshy contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an Iraqi employee of The New York Times from Falluja.
