
RABAT, Morocco &mdash; A moderate Islamist party appeared Saturday to have won parliamentary elections in Morocco, the second time in weeks that voters in the region have chosen Islamists in elections brought on by the Arab Spring.        

The Justice and Development Party won a plurality of the vote, the first under the country&rsquo;s new Constitution, according to partial election returns announced by the government on Saturday. If those results hold up, the king will be required to choose a prime minister from the party and the party will have the right to lead a coalition government.        

The Constitution, drafted by King Mohammed VI in response to pro-democracy protests last spring, still reserves important powers for the king, including over military and religious matters, and remains a far cry from the constitutional monarchy demanded by the protesters. But the government will be Morocco&rsquo;s first popularly elected one, with the power to appoint ministers and dissolve Parliament.        

In Tunisia last month, voters also elected a moderate Islamist party, Ennahda, in that country&rsquo;s first free election.        

According to preliminary figures released by Morocco&rsquo;s Interior Ministry on Saturday, Justice and Development won 80 seats of the 288 seats in which winners were announced. Of the remaining seats in the 395-seat body, 17 were still being counted while 90 will be distributed proportionally, assuring that Justice and Development will retain its plurality.        

The party of the incumbent prime minister, Istiqlal, the historic party of the monarchy, came in second with 45 seats of those announced. The center-right National Rally of Independents, led by the incumbent finance minister, came in third, with 38 seats.        

The final official results of the Friday vote are expected to be issued Sunday.        

Despite the historic shift, Justice and Development was not expected to make any radical changes in policy, and is expected to include Istiqlal in its coalition. Founded in 1998, Justice and Development has always been loyal to the king and has long been the largest so-called opposition party in Morocco.        

Its leader, Abdelillah Benkirane, claimed victory, saying the party would focus on democracy and governance. &ldquo;Today what I can promise Moroccans is that I am going to try, I and the team which will work with me, to be more serious and more rational,&rdquo; he told the French television station France 24 on Saturday.        

The party has appealed to Morocco&rsquo;s poor by focusing on economic and social issues, modeling itself on Turkey&rsquo;s governing Justice and Development Party, which has fused religion and modern politics.        

&ldquo;Like Ennahda in Tunisia, they are new, haven&rsquo;t cheated people, and have expressed a real need for change," said Mounir Ferram, a political analyst. The party&rsquo;s victory, he said, was a rejection of widespread corruption and reflected voters&rsquo; deep disenchantment with the governing party.        

The new government, he said, would be a &ldquo;political electroshock&rdquo; for the country.        

The party, while vague on policy prescriptions, has condemned corruption and promised to address the yawning gap between rich and poor.        

&ldquo;We have a progressive approach to Islam,&rdquo; Mustafa Ramid, a party leader, said in an interview. &ldquo;The Islamicization of Morocco will be achieved only by re-establishing justice, and religious freedom.&rdquo;        

Moroccans did not break with their ruler the way Tunisians did. King Mohammed VI, who has been in power since 1999, remains popular, and Moroccans approved his amended Constitution in a landslide in a July referendum.        

The turnout on Friday was also stronger than expected, despite a call for a boycott by the leaders of the pro-democracy protest movement, suggesting continued support for the king&rsquo;s reforms. The Interior Ministry said 45 percent of eligible voters cast ballots, up from 37 percent from the last parliamentary election in 2007, according to a provisional count.        

While safeguarding critical royal powers, the Constitution tilts the balance slightly toward popular government. The new prime minister will have the power to appoint government officials and ministers, and to dissolve Parliament. The judiciary will also become an independent branch, with judges no longer required to be approved by the king.        

The group that led the protests last spring, the February 20 Movement for Change, has denounced the reforms as inadequate, saying they actually reinforce royal prerogatives.        

Justice and Development &ldquo;will not be able to pass any laws without the king&rsquo;s consent,&rdquo; Fouad Abdelmoumni, a movement leader, said Saturday. Democracy will begin, he said, only when &ldquo;the king will withdraw from the space of political decision.&rdquo;        

The movement &mdash; a coalition of students, independents, leftist activists and Islamists &mdash; has held regular demonstrations and played a central role in pushing reforms and orchestrating protests against political corruption. It favors a constitutional monarchy, in which the king reigns but does not rule.        
Souad Mekhennet reported from Rabat, and Maïa de la Baume from Paris.
