
SANA, Yemen &mdash; President Ali Abdullah Saleh returned to Yemen on Saturday night, days after he signed an agreement in Saudi Arabia yielding his powers to his deputy and amid increasingly confusing signals about the structure of the country&rsquo;s leadership.        

Since he officially handed power to his vice president, Abed Rabbo Mansour al-Hadi, on Wednesday, Mr. Saleh has hardly faded from the scene. On Thursday he condemned the killings of five protesters, thought to be perpetrated by government loyalists, and called for a government investigation.        

On Friday, he sent a congratulatory message on the occasion of the Islamic New Year to the armed forces and security services in which he explained his reasons for signing the agreement, including to avoid war, &ldquo;destruction, bloodshed and the slide into chaos,&rdquo; according to the state news agency.        

Many in Yemen, especially activists in the protest movement who spent months calling on him to resign, suspect that Mr. Saleh will not easily give up power. They point to his recent statements, and the fact that his son and three nephews still hold powerful posts in the security services. Making things murkier, Mr. Saleh retains his title as president until an election can be held, though the post&rsquo;s responsibilities &mdash; and privileges &mdash; are unclear.        

Yassin Saeed Noman, the leader of the Yemen&rsquo;s opposition coalition, said he had no problem with Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s return, but said that the string of statements by the leader was &ldquo;wrong.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;It causes confusion,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They need to stop making these declarations.&rdquo;        

By the thousands, Yemenis have continued their demonstrations since the agreement was signed, complaining about a provision that would grant Mr. Saleh and members of his government immunity for the killings of protesters. Yemeni lawmakers are supposed to pass a law giving the government officials immunity, but human rights lawyers said on Saturday that they were exploring ways to nullify the provision, possibly by asking the courts to strike down any such law.        

Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s return to Sana snarled traffic in the capital and ended speculation that he planned to remain overseas for a time, possibly in New York, to receive treatment for injuries he received during a bomb attack on the presidential palace in June.        

On Saturday, Yemenis heard from Mr. Hadi, the country&rsquo;s putative leader, who issued a statement setting a date of Feb. 21 for the election of an interim president (the state news agency noted that it was a &ldquo;presidential decree&rdquo;). It would be the first presidential election since 2006, and leaders of the opposition and the ruling parties said they had already agreed that Mr. Hadi was their consensus candidate; indeed, the only candidate.        

But like many aspects of Yemeni politics these days, even that was unsettled. Asked if someone else could run for president, Mr. Noman said: &ldquo;Maybe.&rdquo;        
