
SAROBI, Afghanistan &mdash; Afghan forces will assume control of their own security in 18 new areas, some of them still troubled by insurgents, bringing half of the country&rsquo;s population under the government&rsquo;s nominal authority, Afghan officials said Sunday.        

Unlike the first stage of transition, which included places that were already peaceful and for the most part already under government control, this one includes many areas where Taliban insurgents remain active. Among the troubled areas being handed off by the NATO-led coalition are central Helmand Province, several districts in Wardak Province and Sarobi District, here in the rugged mountains in eastern Kabul Province.        

Although the district center remains firmly in government hands and has been quiet for two years, the Taliban have continued to carry out attacks on the highway, and insurgents remain active in many remote villages, according to the district governor, Mohammad Haqbeen. As recently as three weeks ago, insurgents ambushed a NATO fuel convoy on the highway, setting one tanker ablaze, he said.        

Still, Mr. Haqbeen said, the district is ready for the swap.        

&ldquo;We want that responsibility, and we are ready for that responsibility,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There are still some problems in some areas, but we can handle them.&rdquo;        

French troops are believed on the verge of pulling out of the area, which was particularly dangerous when they arrived three years ago. An ambush here in 2008 killed 10 French soldiers, their military&rsquo;s worst loss of life since Lebanon in the 1980s.        

The transition allows the handover to be gradual, and the district police chief, Col. Ahmadullah Oria, said he was still counting on continued foreign help.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re not alone,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We also have the Afghan National Army. We may still need our international partners alongside us for training, for mentoring and for support when necessary.&rdquo;        

The transition, which began six months ago, is intended to transfer primary responsibility for the country&rsquo;s security to Afghan authorities by 2014, when American combat troops, and most other NATO forces, are expected to have departed.        

In the first stage, only two full provinces were handed over, Bamian and Panjshir in central and north Afghanistan, both of which had virtually no insurgent activity.        

Five provinces and 13 districts or cities are being handed over this time.        

Aimal Faizi, the spokesman for President Hamid Karzai, said the provinces were Samangan, Balkh, Daykondi, Takhar and Nimruz; all have some areas where insurgents remain active. In addition, large areas in the provinces of Herat, Parwan, Badakhshan and Nangarhar are included.        

The areas to be handed over were approved Sunday in a meeting of the president&rsquo;s National Security Council, Mr. Faizi said.        

When the switch is complete, Afghan authorities will have taken charge of security in four of the five largest cities: Kabul, Mazar-i-Sharif, Herat and Jalalabad. The exception is Kandahar.        

Mr. Faizi said Mr. Karzai had decided against including Kandahar at this stage, despite requests from community leaders to do so. NATO officials were reluctant to turn over the city, the traditional base of the Taliban, now.        

In recent months, the president&rsquo;s brother Ahmed Wali Karzai and the mayor, Ghulam Haider Hamidi, were assassinated there.        

The districts to be transferred in Helmand Province will give the government control of the central part of the province, the site of more coalition casualties than any other province during the 10-year war. Although under coalition control, those districts remain troubled by roadside bombs, and arrests of Taliban suspects and discoveries of hidden arms caches occur regularly.        

The district that carries the most symbolic weight is Marja, a Taliban stronghold where the surge of new American forces began with an offensive in 2010. It took months longer to subdue than the Marines had expected.        

Afghan leaders there welcomed news of the transition, but a tribal elder, Haji Abdul Rahman Sabir, said it was not a vindication of the Marine invasion. &ldquo;When they empowered the local people, that really worked, and we have seen big improvements in security,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Already the people are securing Marja, not foreign troops.&rdquo;        

The transfer of Sarobi District will bring Kabul Province, which includes the capital, completely under government control.        

On Sunday, Sarobi town, where bazaars line the main highway linking Kabul and Pakistan, was teeming with policemen.        

The police chief, Colonel Oria, said that the steep mountain terrain made it impossible to eliminate attacks by insurgents, but that they no longer had the ability to cut off the highway or attack population centers.        

&ldquo;There are insecure districts all around us, but in my assessment security has improved 80 percent since last year,&rdquo; he said.        
Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar.
