
CAIRO &mdash; Over the past week, just as his campaign to capture a Parliament seat for Egypt&rsquo;s strongest liberal party should have reached its zenith, Zyad Elelaimy stopped giving speeches and migrated back to the place where he made his mark 10 months ago: Tahrir Square.        

This time Mr. Elelaimy, a young lawyer, rallied demonstrators on the front lines of battles with the police, helped organize security at the gates and generally exulted that &ldquo;al-midan&rdquo;&mdash; the square, in Arabic &mdash; again throbbed with raucous demands for change. Once, in a rare moment away, he was rushed to a hospital to be treated for inhaling tear gas that seeped under his mask.        

&ldquo;The street will be much more effective in achieving the demands of the revolution than these elections!&rdquo; he said, dressed in a sweatshirt and jeans. Yet Mr. Elelaimy admitted to a certain quandary to sitting them out entirely, lest the Muslim Brotherhood and the remnants of the old governing party capture an even larger majority than anticipated. &ldquo;Elections are happening, it is a reality; we have to try to be a part of them,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Elelaimy, 31, first emerged in January as a main voice of the youthful revolutionaries who improbably harnessed public protest to topple President Hosni Mubarak. He is one of just six among the 17 members of the core group, the Revolution Youth Coalition, running for Parliament.        

He was already waging an uphill fight to convince constituents that a pluralistic, secular government is the change Egypt needs. Now he faces the added challenge of placating fuming protesters who consider any participation treachery.        

&ldquo;How are you giving these elections legitimacy by running?&rdquo; demanded one man among those constantly accosting him in the square.        

Caught between placating that mood and fearing who might win, Mr. Elelaimy urges people to vote, but to return immediately to Tahrir. Once the multistage elections are complete next year, if Parliament fails to effect change, to truly put in place civilian rule, within six months, the people can always occupy the square again, he said.        

The family genes are steeped in protest movements. His only sibling, a younger brother, took a pellet in the back during the latest skirmishes. A grandfather and two uncles were jailed for being communists, while his mother, Ikram Youssef, a journalist, was tried under President Anwar el-Sadat. At age 5, Zyad awoke to find his mother gone, arrested overnight because Mr. Sadat had failed to sign a blanket pardon years earlier. His father took him along to a lawyer, who assured the boy that his mother would be freed within days. That moment inspired Zyad to become a lawyer himself. (His father, a veterinarian, died soon afterward, and his mother later married a fellow journalist.)        

Because his mother worked, Zyad was a latchkey child, and one day a horrified neighbor who fed him after school told his mother that Zyad did not understand what it meant to be a Muslim. Mrs. Youssef recalled, laughing, &ldquo;He had told her that Muslims and Christians are all the same.&rdquo;        

He joined a secret communist youth movement at age 16 and was soon arrested, the first of four short jailings &mdash; the last being for three days during the Tahrir uprising. The police often seemed to single him out for beatings because he stood in the front row, his 6-foot height and burly frame making him seem older than his years.        

Mr. Elelaimy defied even his mother&rsquo;s authority by marrying his college sweetheart before graduating in 2002. The couple are now divorced, but he lives down the street from his ex-wife and young son, Nadim, named after a 19th-century anticolonialist.        

In 2003, security forces beat him badly, breaking his arm after arresting him at a march against the American invasion of Iraq. After opening his own law office, he dedicated his practice partly to human rights cases.        

Mr. Elelaimy&rsquo;s activism, which would culminate in Tahrir, gathered steam in 2010. Like many young leftists, he was inspired by Mohamed ElBaradei, the former chief United Nations weapons inspector who challenged the idea that political change needed to await Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s death. Mr. Elelaimy ended up as a representative of Mr. ElBaradei&rsquo;s campaign on the Revolution Youth Coalition, giving one of the first speeches exhorting people to join the Tahrir protests when they started Jan. 25.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;We decided to come here today to tell the Egyptian government that we will not be silent anymore!&rdquo; he roared into a portable loudspeaker, the video available on YouTube. &ldquo;Today we either stand side by side and take our rights together, or we lose the chance. It&rsquo;s a now-or-never moment!&rdquo;        

After Mr. Mubarak fell, Mr. Elelaimy attended just one meeting with the ruling military council, realizing that it wanted to placate the youth rather than share power. &ldquo;We lost control,&rdquo; he conceded. &ldquo;We are still in yesterday; we are still in the opposition.&rdquo;        

Mr. Elelaimy has maintained a lower profile than most other revolutionary youths, sensing that many Egyptians are tired of hearing the organizers gloat about the Mubarak overthrow while daily life remains a struggle. He describes himself as a reluctant politician pursuing &ldquo;gradual radical change&rdquo; so the public will accept it.        

After Mr. Mubarak fell, Mr. Elelaimy helped found the Egyptian Social Democratic Party. It has a reputation as the party of Westernized intellectuals, with its call for a secular government &mdash; although it uses the term &ldquo;civilian,&rdquo; because religious factions have basically turned &ldquo;secular&rdquo; into a synonym for &ldquo;foreign orgy.&rdquo;        

Mr. Elelaimy argues that Islamist groups, including the Muslim Brotherhood, are the ones polluting Egyptian traditions with something foreign by adopting an intolerant world view from Saudi Arabia. &ldquo;Egyptian society was built on diversity,&rdquo; he said.        

He hammered on that theme before abandoning the campaign trail.        

&ldquo;When we examine the candidates, there are those who have corrupted our country for 30 years and those who want to take our country back 30 centuries,&rdquo; he roared in one speech.        

Being a populist helped elicit a warm response; he adopted positions difficult to fulfill, like saying Egyptians should have the legal right to eat meat daily.        

Mr. Elelaimy needs to stand out in a race that resembles a cattle stampede, with 130 candidates running in his south Cairo district alone in the first round of parliamentary voting, scheduled to begin Monday.        

Some people, but certainly not all, recognized him from his first Tahrir days, and questions after one rally tended toward how he would fix bad sewers rather than an imperfect democracy.        

&ldquo;He was one of the Facebook youth,&rdquo; said Samah Ouieda, wearing the full facial veil of a devout Muslim. But Muslim political parties make her nervous. She emphasized: &ldquo;When he speaks about equal rights for all, I believe him. When the Islamist parties say it, I don&rsquo;t.&rdquo;        
