
Iran enacted legislation on Monday to downgrade relations with Britain, in retaliation for intensified sanctions imposed by Western nations last week to punish the Iranians for their suspect nuclear development program. Britain promised to respond &ldquo;robustly.&rdquo;        

The Guardian Council, an Iranian clerical body that has oversight on bills passed by Parliament, unanimously endorsed a bill approved on Sunday to expel Britain&rsquo;s ambassador and reduce diplomatic contacts, Iranian news agencies reported.        

The council determined that the legislation was &ldquo;not in violation of Islamic principles or articles of the Iranian Constitution,&rdquo; the Fars News Agency quoted a council spokesman as saying.        

The United States and the European Union imposed harsher sanctions on Iran on Nov. 21 after the United Nations&rsquo; nuclear monitoring agency released a report on Nov. 8 that said Iran might be working on a nuclear weapon and missile delivery system.        

Iran has denied those accusations and insists that its nuclear program is peaceful. It has called the United Nations report a false and shameful propaganda display done at the behest of the United States and its allies.        

The sanctions imposed by Britain required that all contacts with the Iranian Central Bank be severed, a step that the United States has already taken.        

Iranian lawmakers had signaled last week that they would move quickly to downgrade diplomatic ties with Britain. The Foreign Office in London responded to the passage of the bill on Sunday by calling the action &ldquo;regrettable.&rdquo;        

On Monday, William Hague, Britain&rsquo;s foreign secretary, told British lawmakers that &ldquo;if the Iranian government confirms its intention to act on this, we shall respond robustly in consultation with our international partners,&rdquo; news agencies reported from London.        

The Guardian Council&rsquo;s speedy approval of the measure cleared the way for it to have the force of law and reflected Iran&rsquo;s deepening anger over the sanctions.        

Under the terms, Britain&rsquo;s ambassador, Dominick John Chilcott, must leave Tehran within two weeks, according to a report on the legislation by Press TV, a state-run English-language news site in Iran.        

Iranian anger at the West was also evident in news reports on Monday that Iran&rsquo;s foreign minister, Ali Akbar Salehi, had been forced to cancel a trip to The Hague because Hungary had refused permission for his aircraft to cross its airspace.        

It was not immediately clear why Hungary had taken such a step. Mr. Salehi is not on a list of Iranian officials who are banned from travel to the European Union under the current sanctions. Iran state television said the Hungarian ambassador had been asked for an explanation. Mr. Salehi had planned to attend a United Nations conference on the prohibition of chemical weapons.        

Concern that Iran may be close to producing a nuclear weapon has grown since the release of the United Nations report, particularly in Israel, which considers Iran its most dangerous enemy. Iranian warnings to Israel against attempting a pre-emptive military strike on Iran&rsquo;s nuclear installations have also escalated in recent weeks.        

The heightened sensitivities to the possibility of such a strike were apparent on Monday when a few Iranian news agencies reported on a suspected explosion near the central city of Isfahan, where the Iranians process uranium. The accounts of a blast being heard in the city were skimpy and contradictory, but that did not stop the Israeli news media from leading their evening broadcasts with the news. It was also the top item on the Web site of Haaretz, a major Israeli newspaper, with the headline &ldquo;Report: Explosion rocks Iran city of Isfahan, home to key nuclear facility.&rdquo;        
Artin Afkhami contributed reporting from Boston.
