
Her three successive names were signposts on a twisted, bewildering road that took her from Stalin&rsquo;s Kremlin, where she was the &ldquo;little princess,&rdquo; to the West in a celebrated defection, then back to the Soviet Union in a puzzling homecoming, and finally to decades of obscurity, wandering and poverty.        

At her birth, on Feb. 28, 1926, she was named Svetlana Stalina, the only daughter and last surviving child of the brutal Soviet tyrant Josef Stalin. After he died in 1953, she took her mother&rsquo;s last name, Alliluyeva. In 1970, after her defection and an American marriage, she became and remained Lana Peters.        

Ms. Peters died of colon cancer on Nov. 22 in Richland County, Wis., the county&rsquo;s corporation counsel, Benjamin Southwick, said on Monday. She was 85.        

Her death, like the last years of her life, occurred away from public view. There were hints of it online and in Richland Center, the Wisconsin town in which she lived, though a local funeral home said to be handling the burial would not confirm the death. A county official in Wisconsin thought she might have died several months ago. Phone calls seeking information from a surviving daughter, Olga Peters, who now goes by the name Chrese Evans, were rebuffed, as were efforts to speak to her in person in Portland, Ore., where she lives and works.        

Ms. Peters&rsquo;s initial prominence came only from being Stalin&rsquo;s daughter, a distinction that fed public curiosity about her life across three continents and many decades. She said she hated her past and felt like a slave to extraordinary circumstances. Yet she drew on that past, and the infamous Stalin name, in writing two best-selling autobiographies.        

Long after fleeing her homeland, she seemed to be still searching for something &mdash; sampling religions, from Hinduism to Christian Science, falling in love and constantly moving. Her defection took her from India, through Europe, to the United States. After moving back to Moscow in 1984, and from there to Soviet Georgia, friends told of her going again to America, then to England, then to France, then back to America, then to England again, and on and on. All the while she faded from the public eye.        

Ms. Peters was said to have lived in a cabin with no electricity in northern Wisconsin; another time, in a Roman Catholic convent in Switzerland. In 1992, she was reported to be living in a shabby part of West London in a home for elderly people with emotional problems.        

&ldquo;You can&rsquo;t regret your fate,&rdquo; Ms. Peters once said, &ldquo;although I do regret my mother didn&rsquo;t marry a carpenter.&rdquo;        

 &lsquo;Little Sparrow&rsquo;        

Her life was worthy of a Russian novel. It began with a loving relationship with Stalin, who had taken the name, meaning &ldquo;man of steel,&rdquo; as a young man. (He was born Ioseb Besarionis dze Jughashvili.) Millions died under his brutally repressive rule, but at home he called his daughter &ldquo;little sparrow,&rdquo; cuddled and kissed her, showered her with presents, and entertained her with American movies.        

She became a celebrity in her country, compared to Shirley Temple in the United States. Thousands of babies were named Svetlana. So was a perfume.        

At 18, she was setting the table in a Kremlin dining room when Churchill happened upon her. They had a spirited conversation.        

But all was not perfect even then. The darkest moment of her childhood came when her mother, Nadezhda Alliluyeva, Stalin&rsquo;s second wife, committed suicide in 1932. Svetlana, who was 6, was told that her mother had died of appendicitis. She did not learn the truth for a decade.        

In her teenage years, her father was consumed by the war with Germany and grew distant and sometimes abusive. One of her brothers, Yakov, was captured by the Nazis, who offered to exchange him for a German general. Stalin refused, and Yakov was killed.        

In her memoirs she told of how Stalin had sent her first love, a Jewish filmmaker, to Siberia for 10 years. She wanted to study literature at Moscow University, but Stalin demanded that she study history. She did. After graduation, again following her father&rsquo;s wishes, she became a teacher, teaching Soviet literature and the English language. She then worked as a literary translator.        
Elizabeth A. Harris and Lee van der Voo contributed reporting.
