
BAGHDAD &mdash; A yellow taxi loaded with explosives blew up at the crowded front gates of a prison north of Baghdad on Monday morning, killing at least 13 people, many of them security guards or civilians waiting to visit jailed family members.        

It was the third attack in less than a week and the latest in a deadly streak that has killed about 50 Iraqis and further highlighted fears of increased insurgent attacks as the United States continues its military withdrawal from Iraq by the end of next month.        

Later in the day, inside the fortified heart of Iraq&rsquo;s governing complex, another explosion apparently aimed at assassinating the speaker of Parliament wounded a lawmaker and several security guards.        

No group claimed responsibility for the attack at the prison, but the tactics used and the target involved &mdash; a suicide bombing in a crowd at a large government compound &mdash; suggested the work of the Qaeda affiliate in Iraq.        

The American ambassador, James F. Jeffrey, told reporters on Sunday that there was a &ldquo;good possibility&rdquo; that the affiliate, Al Qaeda in Iraq, had been responsible for a bombing in the southern city of Basra on Thursday and for deadly explosions in Baghdad on Saturday. Military defeats inflicted by Iraqi and American forces have hobbled the Sunni insurgent group, but it still carries out about 30 attacks across the country every week, military officials have said.        

&ldquo;The Al Qaeda in Iraq organization is still active, particularly in the north, but they strike throughout the country,&rdquo; Mr. Jeffrey said, although he added that security had improved in Iraq over all.        

The taxi involved in the attack on Monday pulled up to a security post at the entrance to the al-Hout prison in Taji, about 10 miles north of the capital, around 8 a.m. The entrance was crowded with visitors and security guards heading to work.        

&ldquo;Everything was on fire,&rdquo; said Kadim Mohammed, a security guard who was wounded in the blast. &ldquo;I saw two dead children.&rdquo;        

Security officials said four civilians, four prison employees and five people who had not been identified were killed. At least 28 people were wounded, including several religious pilgrims whose bus, bound for the shrine of Samarra, had been stuck in traffic near the prison entrance.        

Separately, two civilians were killed by a bomb attached to their car in the western Baghdad neighborhood of Mansour.        

The attack at Parliament appeared aimed at killing the speaker, Osama al Nujaifi, said Iden Helmi, a spokesman for the speaker.        

Early reports attributed the blast to a mortar shell fired from afar that had randomly landed in the parking lot outside Parliament. But Mr. Helmi and Iraqi news reports said the explosion occurred after a man in a sport utility vehicle tried to join the security convoy that was waiting to escort Mr. Nujaifi, a Sunni Muslim, home from Parliament. When guards demanded identification from the driver, he backed up, rammed into another car and began arguing with its driver. A bomb then exploded inside the assailant&rsquo;s car, Mr. Helmi said.        

&ldquo;He was intending to assassinate the speaker,&rdquo; Mr. Helmi said. He said the bomber had been driving a car nearly identical to the vehicles in Mr. Nujaifi&rsquo;s convoy and seemed to know when he would leave Parliament.        

Security officials would not confirm any of the details provided by Mr. Helmi, but Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki ordered an investigation into the blast, the state-run Iraqiya television network reported.        

An attempted bombing steps outside Parliament would represent a serious security breach inside one of the capital&rsquo;s most heavily guarded sectors, raising questions about the competence &mdash; or complicity &mdash; of security forces. Parliament sits inside the Green Zone, the locked-down expanse along the Tigris River that houses many Iraqi government buildings and the American Embassy.        
Yasir Ghazi, Andrew E. Kramer and Zaid Thaker contributed reporting.
