
MOGADISHU, Somalia &mdash; The Shabab militant group, which has already blocked many aid agencies from reaching starving people in Somalia&rsquo;s famine zones, ordered 16 more aid agencies to shut down on Monday. Heavily armed Shabab fighters then raided the offices of several aid groups, looted equipment and accused the aid workers of being spies.        

A Shabab spokesman said his group, which has pledged allegiance to Al Qaeda, had conducted a &ldquo;meticulous yearlong review&rdquo; that detailed &ldquo;the illicit activities and misconducts of some of the organizations.&rdquo;        

Many of the aid organizations were helping to deliver lifesaving assistance to millions of Somalis suffering from food shortages brought on by drought. Though heavy rains and a surge of aid supplies have eased the situation somewhat in the past month, tens of thousands have died and 250,000 face imminent starvation.        

One of the few United Nations aid agencies that the Shabab had tolerated in the territory it controls was Unicef. But on Monday, fighters stormed into the Unicef office in Baidoa, a large town in southern Somalia, and kicked out the workers, though no one was hurt. The Shabab also banned several other United Nations agencies, including ones that help monitor the famine, as well as aid agencies based in Germany, Norway, Somalia and Sweden.        

It was not clear what prompted the Shabab to take action against the aid agencies. The group, which has imposed a draconian version of Islamic law in the areas it controls, is under military assault from several directions, facing troops from Ethiopia, Kenya and the African Union.        

In a separate incident, a bomb exploded on Sunday night in Banadir Hospital in Mogadishu, the capital, killing one woman and wounding several people, including children who are patients. Officials of the Somali interim government, which holds little sway beyond the capital, said they suspected that Shabab militants had planted the bomb.        
Mohammed Ibrahim reported from Mogadishu, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Kinshasa, Congo.
