
DAMASCUS, Syria &mdash; The Arab League declared &ldquo;economic war&rdquo; on Syria when it leveled broad trade sanctions against it, Syria&rsquo;s foreign minister, Walid al-Moallem, said on Monday, warning that the country could use its strategic location to retaliate.        

&ldquo;Syria cannot be treated like this,&rdquo; Mr. Moallem said at a news conference broadcast live around the region. He was by turns indignant and incredulous that the Arab League had turned the tool of sanctions, which it had long reviled, on one of its own.        

&ldquo;Sanctions can cut both ways,&rdquo; he said. And while he contended that he did not want to threaten anyone, he said, &ldquo;We should study well Syria&rsquo;s geographic location as a transit point for commercial traffic.&rdquo;        

Many airlines cross Syrian airspace, Mr. Moallem noted. In addition, Syria is part of the main route for heavy trucks heading from Europe and Turkey to the Persian Gulf, where Qatar and Saudi Arabia are among Syria&rsquo;s harshest critics.        

His remarks were the first official reaction to measures imposed by the Arab League on Sunday after weeks of wrangling over a peace plan that stipulates that the government of President Bashar al-Assad end all violence, withdraw its armed forces from civilian areas and allow Arab or other monitors to circulate freely within Syria.        

With Syria showing no signs of acceding to the demands of the Arab League, including that it stop using violence to suppress antigovernment protests, the regional confrontation deepened.        

Although everyday life in downtown Damascus appeared normal on Monday, Syria&rsquo;s economy had already been sputtering because of sanctions previously imposed by the European Union and the United States.        

It was difficult to assess how the new measures might affect the country, because the Arab League has not released details and because important neighboring states like Iraq and Lebanon said they would not participate. But they raised the prospect that should the latest sanctions bite deeply, some of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s key constituencies, including Sunni business leaders, might turn on him. While Mr. Moallem chastised the Arab League at great length for what he called a hasty, one-sided decision, dissidents here either applauded the organization&rsquo;s decision or criticized the league for not acting more quickly to stanch the bloodshed.        

&ldquo;The government blocked the road to any interior solution through violence, killing, arrests and storming private houses,&rdquo; said Hassem Abdel Azim, a lawyer who leads a coalition of about 16 opposition groups.        

But Louay Hussein, the leader of a nascent opposition party, said the Arab League should have pressed ahead with an initial group of about 40 monitors once Syria said on Nov. 2 that it accepted the peace plan.        

The sanctions include a travel ban against scores of senior Syrian officials, a freeze on government assets in Arab countries, a ban on transactions with Syria&rsquo;s central bank and an end to all commercial exchanges with the Syrian government.        

Mr. Moallem sidestepped a question about why the Assad government had not presented the results of a promised investigation into the jailing and torture of children in the southern town of Dara&rsquo;a, the event that ignited the uprising nationwide.        

In Geneva, however, an independent commission organized by the United Nations Human Rights Council released a long-awaited report on rights abuses by Syria&rsquo;s security forces. Based on interviews with 223 victims and witnesses, the report documented what it described as &ldquo;patterns of summary execution, arbitrary arrest, enforced disappearance, torture, including sexual violence, as well as violations of children&rsquo;s rights.&rdquo;        

The commission expressed concerns that &ldquo;crimes against humanity have been committed.&rdquo;        

Mr. Moallem said Syria rejected any assertions that its military was responsible for civilian bloodshed, saying both the West and the Arab world refused to accept the Assad government&rsquo;s view, which is that the country has been the target of armed gangs financed from abroad.        

He presented a gruesome, 10-minute video that showed what he said were photos of murdered security personnel, some of them hacked to death. As in most such video recordings presented by both sides, the contents were impossible to confirm independently.        

Syria rarely grants visas to Western reporters, and a sudden invitation into the country seemed intended both to highlight the news conference and to address demands from the Arab League that more international correspondents be given entry. Such visits are heavily supervised, however, starting at the border.        

The only demonstrators visible on the streets of Damascus on Monday were government supporters, adolescents wearing face paint of the black, white and red Syrian flag and screaming out of taxi windows as they headed to a downtown rally.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.
