
CREIL, the Netherlands &mdash; Modest farms, 90 acres or less, dot the region here, most of them raising grains and vegetables, some the occasional sheep or cow.        

In the midst of this idyllic scene a few years back there appeared what residents now call &ldquo;the pink invasion,&rdquo; three huge hog barns each with 10,000 or more pigs in the fields that skirt the dike that protects the region from the Ijsselmeer, once known as the Zuiderzee.        

&ldquo;Some people don&rsquo;t like the idea,&rdquo; said Dick van Leeuwen, 65, who walks his dog Thor along the roads leading to the largest of the barns. Local people feared that the pig farms would stink, while bringing an unwanted increase in truck traffic, he said, delivering feed for the thousands of pigs or hauling away manure or grown hogs for slaughter. But their complaints fell mostly on deaf ears.        

The Netherlands, a country of almost 17 million people, is home to a pig population of 14 million. Despite its status as one of the smaller countries in the European Union &mdash; about half the size of the state of Maine &mdash; the Netherlands has long been Europe&rsquo;s leading exporter of pork and pork products, though that ranking has been contested in recent years by wurst-loving Germany.        

Like pork producers everywhere, Dutch farmers are fighting rising costs by resorting to ever bigger herds and barns, a trend that is reinforced by the petite size of the Netherlands. In recent years, an architectural firm in Rotterdam even proposed skyscrapers for pigs, high-rise barns capable of taking in thousands of animals in very small space. They would even come with balconies so that the hogs could occasionally enjoy fresh air, unlike the pigs in most Dutch barns, which spend their lives indoors.        

&ldquo;There was a lot of interest,&rdquo; said Isabel Pagel, of the Rotterdam architectural firm, MVRDV, though she added, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s never been realized.&rdquo;        

Still, some farmers seem to have been inspired by the idea. In Creil, a farmer named Adriaan Straathof has built a two-story barn, with meat pigs on the ground floor and sows and suckling pigs one floor above, and he is not the only one. As the big barns become more common, the government has begun to respond to public complaints about industrial farming and cruelty to animals. Officials are now discussing ways to curb the size of barns like those in tiny Creil, with its 1,600 people in trim brick homes, much to the chagrin of the new generation of farmers who see industrial-scale husbandry as their only means to compete.        

The huge new barns horrify people like Klaas Breunissen, 62, a retired anthropologist who works for a group called Defense of the Environment, which is pressing the government for new laws to restrict industrial-scale farms. Of pig farmers like Mr. Straathof, he says bluntly: &ldquo;That&rsquo;s not a farmer, that&rsquo;s an entrepreneur. He is not representative.&rdquo;        

Critics of the pork industry argue that enormous pig barns damage the environment because of the immense amounts of manure they produce, threaten people&rsquo;s heath because of the antibiotics used liberally to avoid sickness among the animals and disregard the welfare of the animals by confining them to barns.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m not a vegetarian,&rdquo; he said, noting that in surveys only about 4 percent of the Dutch claim to be. &ldquo;But that is not the way to go.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;You will lose if you compete on price,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Brazil is cheaper.&rdquo;        

Now, the organization is putting up posters around the country with pro-pig slogans like &ldquo;Mega-barns or Mudbaths?&rdquo; and pictures of contented hogs wallowing in muck.        

The arrival of the big barns in Creil was difficult, said Mr. van Leeuwen, a retired waterworks employee who now runs an extermination company. The owner of the biggest barn, Mr. Straathof, a clever farmer-turned-entrepreneur, became entangled with the local authorities when he went ahead and built without the proper permits, though he later obtained them.        

&ldquo;He went into the town, wanted to win people over,&rdquo; said Mr. van Leeuwen, and he held town-hall-style meetings to explain his pig-raising aims.        

But public resistance remains high. &ldquo;Most of the time people think I&rsquo;m crazy,&rdquo; says Cor Vowinkel, 47, who manages one of the barns on the edge of Creil, with about 10,000 meat hogs. &ldquo;The neighborhood is negative.&rdquo;        

To counter these attitudes, he has begun opening the barn to visitors, and has produced a video for YouTube to explain the work of a modern pig farmer. Schoolchildren occasionally visit to learn about modern methods of raising pigs.        

Pig farmers like Mr. Vowinkel insist that they can compete only if they keep costs and the price of their pork down. &ldquo;Some disappear, others get bigger, to lower production prices,&rdquo; he said. A fellow farmer, Sietse van der Meer, agreed. &ldquo;You grow bigger, or you stop,&rdquo; he said.        

Politicians feel the pressure of the environmentalists and animal rights groups. In December, Parliament will begin discussing a possible restriction on the size of farms and a ban on antibiotics, two steps the farming region of Noord-Brabant, in the south, has already taken on its own.        

Wyno Zwanenburg grew up on his father&rsquo;s farm near Eindhoven, in the east, where hogs were raised along with cows and chickens. Today, he raises only hogs and is president of the Dutch Pig Farmers Union.        

Farmers have no choice but to expand, he says, noting that since 1990, the number of Dutch pig farmers has steadily declined from about 28,000 and is expected to reach about 2,000 in the next few years.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re facing a global challenge,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;And in this emotional discussion, there is some criticism that bigger is always worse than smaller.&rdquo;        

Yet, he added, shaking his head, &ldquo;The consumer is not willing to pay more.&rdquo;        
