
PARIS &mdash; The former president of Ivory Coast, who took his country to the brink of civil war after losing an election last year, was unexpectedly handed over into international custody and flown overnight to the Netherlands. In a statement on Wednesday after he arrived in the Hague, the International Criminal Court said Laurent Gbagbo &ldquo;allegedly bears individual criminal responsibility&rdquo; for four crimes against humanity: murder, rape, persecution and inhuman acts.        

Mr. Gbagbo was served with an arrest warrant on Tuesday in the small northern town of Korogho, where he had been under house arrest for seven months.        

The warrant accused Mr. Gbagbo, 66, of being responsible for the violence in which more than 3,000 people were killed and uncounted numbers were raped and mistreated from November 2010 to April in Ivory Coast&rsquo;s principal city, Abidjan, and in other parts of the country. The violence flared after Mr. Gbagbo refused to leave office after losing the presidential election. To hold on to power, he used his security forces, as well as militia and mercenary fighters that he armed and paid, the prosecutor has said.        

Emmanuel Altit, a lawyer for Mr. Gbagbo who is based in Paris, said that the international court&rsquo;s warrant was dated Nov. 23, but that it had been kept under seal until Tuesday &ldquo;to trick his lawyers and to short-circuit any legal action.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;What they did was illegal,&rdquo; Mr. Altit said. &ldquo;They ignored the consent needed&rdquo; to take action against a former head of state.        

&ldquo;This was a political operation, not a legal one, and we will challenge the court,&rdquo; Mr. Altit added.        

After diplomacy and international sanctions failed to dislodge Mr. Gbagbo, he was defeated in April by fighters supporting Alassane Ouattara, who had been declared the winner of the election. French and United Nations military forces provided crucial assistance to the Ouattara loyalists.        

Mr. Gbagbo is the second deposed African head of state to appear before an international court. Charles Taylor, the former president of Liberia, has already stood trial and is awaiting a verdict before a different tribunal in The Hague, the Special Court for Sierra Leone. The International Criminal Court has also issued an arrest warrant for Sudan&rsquo;s president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir; he has ignored the warrant, although it has seriously complicated his travels abroad.        

Mr. Gbagbo arrived before dawn on Wednesday at a high-security prison on the outskirts of The Hague. He will join other well-known prisoners in the complex, including Jean-Paul Bemba, once a leading politician in Congo; the former Bosnian leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic; and Mr. Taylor. Although they are all in the international section, the men may not necessarily meet.        

Additional arrest warrants are expected in connection with the post-election violence in Ivory Coast. The international prosecutor has opened investigations into the actions of other members of the Gbagbo government, as well as figures from Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s government. Forces supporting Mr. Ouattara also committed atrocities, according to prosecution evidence and reports from human rights groups.        

But the criminal investigations and the evidence sent to the international court&rsquo;s judges, who are required to sign any arrest warrant, have not been made public. Lawyers familiar with the inquiry said the prosecution wanted to avoid naming other suspects for fear that they would go into hiding. Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s government and international observers in the deeply divided country also worry that protracted public investigations could set off new rounds of violence.        

Mr. Gbagbo, a former history professor, received 46 percent of the vote in the election last Nov. 28. He came to power in a flawed election in 2000, and when his five-year term expired, he held on, rescheduling elections until they were finally held in 2010.        

Among the conditions that he accepted for the presidential election was that the United Nations would be required to certify the results, to prevent his government from rigging the outcome. But as soon as Mr. Ouattara was declared the winner, the violence began, with pro-Gbagbo forces killing political opponents and peaceful protesters and shelling neighborhoods.        
