
NAYPYIDAW, Myanmar &mdash; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton arrived here on Wednesday to measure the depth of the political and economic opening that the country&rsquo;s autocratic, military-dominated government has unexpectedly begun.        

After years of abysmal relations, the Obama administration has promised to respond to progress &mdash; Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s trip being the most significant reward so far &mdash; even as it presses for more significant steps to end the country&rsquo;s repressive rule and international isolation.        

Those steps include freeing hundreds more political prisoners, ending the often violent repression of democracy advocates and ethnic groups, and clarifying the country&rsquo;s illicit cooperation with North Korea on developing ballistic missiles and, possibly, nuclear technologies.        

Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s reception at the airport in this remote, newly built capital was relatively muted. A small delegation led by a deputy foreign minister, U Myo Myint, greeted her without ceremony as she got off her plane.        

By contrast, an enormous red billboard had been set up to welcome Prime Minister Mikhail V. Myasnikovich of Belarus, another autocratic nation at odds with the United States, who is scheduled to arrive here on Thursday.        

A spokesman for the Myanmar government, U Ye Htut, welcomed Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s visit, calling it &ldquo;a great chance to normalize relations between the two countries.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;What we are trying to do is prove we are trying to make improvements in the democratic process,&rdquo; Mr.&nbsp;Ye Htut said in a telephone interview. &ldquo;We want the United States to understand the situation in our country.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Clinton met with the country&rsquo;s new president, Thein Sein, on Thursday morning. Before the meeting, her aides said she and Mr. Thein Sein would discuss steps each country could take to ease decades of hostility.        

In greeting Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Thein Sein called her visit &ldquo;a historic milestone&rdquo; and said he hoped it would open a &ldquo;new chapter in relations.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Clinton responded by saying, &ldquo;I am here today because President Obama and myself are encouraged by the steps that you and your government have taken to provide for your people.&rdquo;        

The New Light of Myanmar, the government&rsquo;s newspaper mouthpiece, played down Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s visit in its Thursday issue. The paper reprinted the &ldquo;curriculum vitae&rdquo; of the prime minister of Belarus on the front page. News about Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s arrival was carried in a two-paragraph article on the newspaper&rsquo;s second page.        

Mrs. Clinton flew here in the afternoon from South Korea. Before her flight, she said the United States hoped that what Mr. Obama recently called &ldquo;flickers of progress&rdquo; in Myanmar would &ldquo;be ignited into a movement for change that will benefit the people of the country.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m looking to determine for myself and on behalf of our government what is the intention of the current government with respect to continuing reforms, both political and economic,&rdquo; she said.        

Myanmar, known before 1989 as Burma and still called that by the United States as a matter of policy, had been visited by a secretary of state only once before, in 1955, when John Foster Dulles tried to woo the country into a regional alliance against China.        

An improved relationship with Myanmar could reshape American diplomacy in the region when the Obama administration is trying to shift its geopolitical focus toward Asia and the Pacific, in part to once again manage the dominance of China.        

What additional steps, if any, the administration is willing to consider remain to be seen. Lifting the broad range of American sanctions on trade with Myanmar is not yet on the agenda; that would require Congressional approval, which would be hard to obtain without far more sweeping moves toward democracy and freedom here.        

Mrs. Clinton could announce smaller steps, like returning an ambassador or putting American support behind international financial aid to help the tentative economic reforms here take root. But officials said no decision would be made until after her meetings with Myanmar officials.        
(Page 2 of 2)
The Obama administration remains wary. A senior administration official noted that initial efforts to engage Myanmar&rsquo;s leaders after Mr. Obama took office in 2009 were &ldquo;abysmal failures.&rdquo;        

The administration is disappointed, for example, that the Myanmar government has not freed more of its 1,600 political prisoners; Mr. Thein Sein recently denied their existence.        

Another concern is Myanmar&rsquo;s cooperation with North Korea on nuclear matters. The United States has pressed Myanmar to agree to more vigorous inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency, and officials said the administration originally hoped Myanmar would do so before a meeting of Southeast Asian nations in Indonesia last month, when Mr. Obama announced Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s visit.        

Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, said that resolving any questions about illicit nuclear activity was fundamental to improved relations. &ldquo;An early goal of the tentative U.S. re-engagement with Burma should be full disclosure of the extent and intent of the developing Burmese nuclear program,&rdquo; Mr. Lugar said in a statement.        

Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s aides said her visit&rsquo;s schedule was dictated partly by logistical issues. For example, the capital&rsquo;s airport is not equipped for night landings. The government imposed no restrictions on her activities, they said, and has been accommodating toward her delegation, which includes dozens of officials, security guards and journalists.        

The previous military government began moving the capital in 2005 to Naypyidaw (pronounced nay-pee-DAW), which it had quietly built on a remote patch of farmland 200 miles north of the country&rsquo;s main city, Yangon. Six years later the city retains the feel of a provincial outpost, and is dominated by government buildings and hotels, many still under construction.        

After meeting with government leaders and members of Parliament here on Thursday morning, Mrs. Clinton will travel to Yangon and meet the Nobel Peace Prize-winning opposition leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, at the house where she spent years under arrest as a symbol of quiet but determined resistance to military dictatorship. Mrs. Clinton also plans to meet with representatives of Myanmar&rsquo;s long-repressed ethnic minority groups and leaders of nongovernmental organizations.        

Some members of Congress have been critical of the decision to send her to Myanmar. Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen of Florida, the Republican chairwoman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said Tuesday that Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s trip sent &ldquo;the wrong signal&rdquo; and was &ldquo;a monumental overture to an outlaw regime whose DNA remains fundamentally brutal.&rdquo;        

Administration officials acknowledge that they do not fully understand how the Myanmar government makes decisions and whether the changes seen so far are cosmetic or the beginnings of a genuine opening similar to Mikhail S. Gorbachev&rsquo;s perestroika in the Soviet Union. The steps Mr. Thein Sein has taken over the past eight months include relaxing restrictions on the news media, politics and business, but he has not relinquished any of the military&rsquo;s ultimate authority.        

The senior Obama administration official said that Mr. Thein Sein, a former general and prime minister, appeared far more open and well traveled than Senior Gen. Than Shwe, the dictator who preceded him.        

&ldquo;He spent an enormous amount of time traveling outside the country in meetings, interacting with others,&rdquo; the official said. &ldquo;And so it&rsquo;s entirely possible that he had a chance to get a much better sense of what was going on in Southeast Asia, how far behind his country was falling and what was necessary to take steps to at least address some of the challenges.&rdquo;        
