
HTAN PIN, Myanmar &mdash; Farmers in this hamlet outside Myanmar&rsquo;s commercial capital, Yangon, have never heard of Hillary Rodham Clinton, and they shrug when asked about democracy, a word they do not recognize.        

Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s arrival in Myanmar on Wednesday captured the imagination of this nation&rsquo;s city dwellers and put a spotlight on the new government&rsquo;s ambitious agenda to ease years of military rule and economic mismanagement.        

But in the countryside, farmers describe a feeling of stagnancy.        

&ldquo;Things are not so different,&rdquo; said U Tin Win Hlaing, 41, a rice farmer. &ldquo;There has been a little bit of change.&rdquo;        

Sitting in a thatch-roofed house surrounded by rice paddies not long before Mrs. Clinton arrived in Myanmar, Mr. Tin Win Hlaing and his neighbors said they saw no relief in sight for their subsistence living, debilitating debts and recurring bouts of hunger when rice supplies run low.        

Most of President Thein Sein&rsquo;s liberalization moves &mdash; the release of some political prisoners, the easing of restrictions on buying cars, the revamping of the banking system, among others &mdash; have been winning over skeptics among the country&rsquo;s urban class and intelligentsia.        

Those changes feel very distant here, less than an hour&rsquo;s drive from Yangon.        

&ldquo;We have no time to think about politics,&rdquo; said U Toe Naing, 44, a farmer who, like many of his neighbors, is dealing with a mountain of debt accumulated during the bad harvests of recent years, including the devastation of Cyclone Nargis in 2008, which virtually wiped out a year&rsquo;s worth of crops.        

Seventy percent of Myanmar&rsquo;s 55 million people work in agriculture, a sector that has been severely stunted in recent decades by a lack of credit, poor machinery and unreliable access to international markets. Farmers take out loans on the black market at rates of more than 200 percent a year.        

&ldquo;We have to borrow and pay back, borrow more and pay back,&rdquo; Mr. Tin Win Hlaing said.        

Because they live near Yangon, the residents of this hamlet are better off than many farmers in Myanmar&rsquo;s vast hinterland. Even so, Mr. Tin Win Hlaing and his neighbors have no electricity or plumbing. The closest road is 20 minutes away, and no one owns a cellphone. Babies are born at home &mdash; if the labor is trouble-free.        

&ldquo;Sometimes the mothers die on the way to the hospital,&rdquo; Mr. Toe Naing said.        

In the fields, farmers use land tillers imported from China, which tend to break down often. Others use oxen.        

The government has said that helping the agricultural sector is a priority, but the task is monumental. Myanmar is slowly emerging from decades during which the military tried to directly manage the economy.        

Farmers are barred from owning the land they till, complicating future efforts to use property as collateral for loans.        

One major difference between the current government and the military junta that preceded it is Mr. Thein Sein&rsquo;s apparent concern about poverty in the country, especially in rural areas.        

The junta, which was in power for more than two decades, rejected the notion that there was poverty in the country and expelled a top United Nations official who initiated an antipoverty campaign.        

On Wednesday, the government sought to highlight its focus on agriculture. The entire front page of its newspaper mouthpiece, The New Light of Myanmar, was dedicated to efforts to increase the welfare of farmers by developing higher-yielding strains of rice. (The topic was covered much more prominently than articles in the same issue about the arrival in Beijing of the commander in chief of Myanmar&rsquo;s armed forces.)        

The article on farming urged a switch from traditional farming techniques &mdash; an apparent reference to oxen pulling plows &mdash; to a &ldquo;mechanized farming system.&rdquo; It also urged better education for farmers, saying that 80 percent of them were &ldquo;ordinary in terms of education.&rdquo; The article did not define &ldquo;ordinary.&rdquo;        

Farmers say they have felt the changes in Myanmar in two significant ways. First, they are less fearful of approaching government officials, like with a recent plea to build a drainage ditch to relieve flooding.        

Under the old government, Mr. Tin Win Hlaing said, &ldquo;We weren&rsquo;t allowed to complain; we were afraid they would seize our land.&rdquo;        

Secondly, the government has increased the size of low-interest loans available to farmers, though this will not ease a farmer&rsquo;s outstanding debt. Mr. Tin Win Hlaing, for example, owes the equivalent of $5,000.        

Most mornings, he gets up at 4:30 a.m. Asked what he thinks about when he wakes, Mr. Tin Win Hlaing did not hesitate.        

&ldquo;My debts,&rdquo; he said.        
