
BAGHDAD &mdash; Iraq&rsquo;s prime minister signaled Wednesday that he was open to the eventual return of American troops as trainers, underscoring the reality that the United States is likely to be involved in this country&rsquo;s security even after the last soldiers depart in the coming weeks.        

&ldquo;No doubt, the U.S. forces have a role in providing training of Iraqi forces,&rdquo; Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki said after meeting Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., who is here to mark the withdrawal and to inaugurate a new phase in relations between the United States and Iraq.        

Mr. Maliki insisted that Iraq could provide for its internal security. And he made much of Iraq&rsquo;s desire to build a relationship with the United States as a sovereign country, dealing with Washington on the basis of national interest and &ldquo;mutual respect.&rdquo;        

But his comments suggested that for all the solemn pageantry of a war&rsquo;s ending, there is likely to be considerable continuity in the security relationship between the United States and Iraq, as it struggles to contain terrorist attacks by insurgent groups.        

The inability of the United States and Iraq to agree on legal immunity for American troops led to President Obama&rsquo;s announcement in October that the last soldiers would leave the country by the end of the year.        

But administration officials have suggested that once the withdrawal is complete &mdash; a politically significant milestone in both the United States and Iraq &mdash; the two sides could negotiate the return of American troops to the country for training purposes.        

Mr. Biden on Wednesday reaffirmed that the two countries would maintain a &ldquo;robust security relationship,&rdquo; adding that it was up to the Iraqis to decide &ldquo;what you think that relationship should be.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We will continue our discussions with your government over the substance of our security arrangements, including areas of training, intelligence and counterterrorism,&rdquo; he said.        

One area of lingering concern is the role of Iran in fomenting attacks on Americans. Mr. Biden told Mr. Maliki that he did not want &ldquo;Iran to use our presence in Iraq as a target,&rdquo; said a senior administration official, who took part in the discussions.        

There are now only 13,000 soldiers left in Iraq, and their ranks are dwindling by 500 a day, though the United States will leave a vestigial force as liaison officers and to guard the embassy in Baghdad.        

Mr. Biden cited the withdrawal as proof that the United States keeps its promises. And the administration was eager to keep the focus on departures rather than on potential future missions.        

A senior administration official on Wednesday emphasized that there were currently no discussions with Iraq about future deployments of American troops.        

With both countries eager to turn the page, much of the meeting time on Wednesday was devoted to other concerns like trade, energy and agriculture investment, and educational exchanges. Mr. Biden spoke of American companies investing in Iraq and Iraqis going to American universities.        

&ldquo;We are embarking on a new path together, a new phase in this relationship,&rdquo; he said, as he sat next to Mr. Maliki beneath twinkling chandeliers at the governmental palace.        

To underscore the emphasis on nonmilitary engagement, Mr. Biden noted that his 15-member delegation included Jeffrey D. Feltman, an assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs, and Dan Poneman, deputy secretary of energy.        

Mr. Maliki, who was flanked by members of his cabinet and other officials, said he hoped that American companies would pour into Iraq with the same vigor as American troops once did.        

But in a telling aside that appeared to speak to the magnitude of Iraq&rsquo;s challenges, Mr. Maliki and Mr. Biden seemed to speak past each other at one point.        

Mr. Maliki said, &ldquo;We are looking forward to the future of Iraq, which is going to be built on the outcome of this meeting.&rdquo; Mr. Biden, standing next to him, gently demurred, saying, &ldquo;To suggest that the future of Iraq rests on our personal relationship, I think gives us too much credit.&rdquo;        

Mr. Biden said the &ldquo;success of Iraq will rest upon the vision of you and the civilian leadership.&rdquo;        
