
WASHINGTON &mdash; The White House has decided that President Obama will not offer formal condolences &mdash; at least for now &mdash; to Pakistan for the deaths of two dozen soldiers in NATO airstrikes last week, overruling State Department officials who argued for such a show of remorse to help salvage America&rsquo;s relationship with Pakistan, administration officials said.        

On Monday, Cameron Munter, the United States ambassador to Pakistan, told a group of White House officials that a formal video statement from Mr. Obama was needed to help prevent the rapidly deteriorating relations between Islamabad and Washington from cratering, administration officials said. The ambassador, speaking by videoconference from Islamabad, said that anger in Pakistan had reached a fever pitch, and that the United States needed to move to defuse it as quickly as possible, the officials recounted.        

Defense Department officials balked. While they did not deny some American culpability in the episode, they said expressions of remorse offered by senior department officials and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton were enough, at least until the completion of a United States military investigation establishing what went wrong.        

Some administration aides also worried that if Mr. Obama were to overrule the military and apologize to Pakistan, such a step could become fodder for his Republican opponents in the presidential campaign, according to several officials who declined to be named because they were not authorized to speak publicly.        

On Wednesday, White House officials said Mr. Obama was unlikely to say anything further on the matter in the coming days.        

&ldquo;The U.S. government has offered its deepest condolences for the loss of life, from the White House and from Secretary Clinton and Secretary Panetta,&rdquo; said Tommy Vietor, spokesman for the National Security Council, referring to Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta, &ldquo;and we are conducting an investigation into the incident. We cannot offer additional comment on the circumstances of the incident until we have the results.&rdquo;        

The American and Pakistani accounts of the NATO strikes vary widely. A former senior American official briefed on the exchange said Wednesday that the airstrikes came in the last 15 to 20 minutes of a running three-hour skirmish, presumably with Taliban fighters on one or both sides of the border. That is at odds with the Pakistani account that its troops were in a two-hour firefight with the Americans.        

Pakistan, rejecting the American account, has blocked all NATO logistical supplies that cross the border into Afghanistan, given the Central Intelligence Agency 15 days to vacate the Shamsi air base from which it has run drone strikes into Pakistani tribal areas and announced that it will boycott an international conference on Afghanistan&rsquo;s security and development next week in Bonn, Germany.        

With everything at stake in the relationship with Pakistan, which the United States sees as vital as it plans to exit from Afghanistan, some former Obama administration officials said the president should make public remarks on the border episode, including a formal apology.        

&ldquo;Without some effective measures of defusing this issue, Pakistan will cooperate less rather than more with us, and we won&rsquo;t be able to achieve our goals in Afghanistan,&rdquo; said Vali Nasr, a former State Department official who specialized in Pakistan.        

But David Rothkopf, a former Clinton administration official and the author of &ldquo;Running the World: The Inside Story of the National Security Council and the Architects of American Power,&rdquo; said Pakistani officials need to understand that in the next year, the Obama administration will be less accommodating to Pakistani sensibilities.        

&ldquo;I do think that it&rsquo;s important for them to recognize that political dynamics in the United States will lead to a hardening of U.S. positions, and the president will have less and less flexibility to accept the kind of behavior that he has in the past,&rdquo; Mr. Rothkopf said. &ldquo;The prognosis for U.S.-Pakistani relations is bleak.&rdquo;        

America&rsquo;s strained ties with Pakistan have been buffeted by crises this year, from the killing of two Pakistanis by a C.I.A. contractor to the raid inside Pakistan that killed Osama bin Laden.        

The headaches of the relationship have meant that Pakistan has few friends inside the administration. As one former senior United States official who has been briefed on the administration&rsquo;s recent deliberations put it, &ldquo;Right now there are no Pakistan friendlies&rdquo; at the White House.        

But the administration desperately needs Pakistan&rsquo;s cooperation in the American plan to withdraw militarily from Afghanistan by 2014. Several senior American officials have said Pakistani help is essential to persuade the Taliban to negotiate for peace.        

Twice recently, the administration has solicited help from Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, to deliver messages to Islamabad to help defuse crises in the relationship.        

On Wednesday, Mr. Kerry was guarded in his comments about the border episode. &ldquo;We all appreciate how deeply this tragedy has affected the Pakistani people, and we have conveyed our heartfelt condolences through multiple channels,&rdquo; Mr. Kerry said in an e-mail. &ldquo;Ultimately, the only way to move the ball forward is to focus on areas where our interests align and where we can really make progress. Our two countries need each other.&rdquo;        
Eric Schmitt and Thom Shanker contributed reporting.
