
NEW DELHI &mdash; Every three months, India&rsquo;s prime minister, Manmohan Singh, meets with a special panel assigned the ambitious task of figuring out how to produce 500 million skilled workers over the next two decades.        

The panel is a cross section of India&rsquo;s power elite, including many of the usual figures like the education minister, the finance minister and the former chief executive of the country&rsquo;s biggest software outsourcing company. Then there is a more curious choice: Manish Sabharwal.        

Mr. Sabharwal runs TeamLease, a Bangalore-based agency that has created thousands of jobs by fielding temporary workers for companies in India that want to expand their work force while skirting India&rsquo;s stringent labor laws, which businesses say discourage the hiring of permanent employees. Many labor leaders and left-leaning politicians accuse him of running the nation&rsquo;s largest illegal business.        

He does not completely disagree.        

&ldquo;We should not exist,&rdquo; Mr. Sabharwal, a 40-year-old graduate of the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, said about his company, which has 60,000 employees. &ldquo;The genius of India is to allow us to exist.&rdquo;        

What Mr. Sabharwal calls &ldquo;genius&rdquo; others would call dysfunction, or at the very least, an elaborate workaround, or temporary fix.        

India is known the world over as a prime innovator of outsourcing for foreign companies, which take advantage of its cheap, English-speaking labor force. Less well known is the extent to which Indian companies outsource their own jobs within their own country.        

Walk into any of India&rsquo;s shining new shopping malls that sell expensive brands, like Gucci and Satya Paul, and many of the store clerks, janitors and security guards will be on the payrolls of outsourcing companies, not those of the owners of the mall or stores in it, executives say.        

The practice highlights a fundamental tension between India&rsquo;s socialist past and a new freewheeling, private sector that is increasingly powering the economy while chafing at what many companies say are laws so protective of workers that they blunt hiring and stifle growth.        

Mr. Sabharwal provides a backdoor way around the old system in a manner that is not without controversy. He fills thousands of jobs at a cost that allows many companies to continue to function, and even helps retrain India&rsquo;s large population of young job seekers &mdash; half of Indians are 25 or younger &mdash; who are undereducated and ill prepared to enter the labor force.        

In that highly competitive environment for jobs, Mr. Sabharwal supplies workers who are paid as little as half of what permanent employees earn and who usually receive few benefits. Though technically temporary, many of them keep their status at the same companies for years. In India&rsquo;s nascent industrial hubs near New Delhi, autoworkers are increasingly protesting the use and treatment of the kind of contract workers Mr. Sabharwal supplies, who lack job security.        

But the reason Mr. Sabharwal has thrived, he and others say, is because India needs him. The nation&rsquo;s complex web of federal and state labor laws intended to protect permanent workers are so onerous that few employers want to hire them, they say.        

Those laws cover virtually every aspect of employment &mdash; how workers are hired, what they are paid, how many hours they can work and whether they can be fired. Factories employing 100 or more workers are not allowed to lay off employees without the government&rsquo;s permission.        

The laws are unevenly enforced, but many businesses still consider them so cumbersome that they find it worthwhile to have somebody else manage the &ldquo;compliance issues,&rdquo; which is why TeamLease also employs about 60 people in its regulatory division who do so.        

&ldquo;India, compared to even European countries, has more restrictive labor laws,&rdquo; said Sean Dougherty, a senior adviser at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development who has studied India&rsquo;s labor market.        
Sruthi Gottipati contributed reporting from Manesar, India, and Neha Thirani from Mumbai, India.
