
JERUSALEM &mdash; Israel agreed on Wednesday to transfer to the Palestinian Authority about $100 million in tax and customs payments that it has withheld for four weeks in protest over the Palestinians&rsquo; membership efforts at the United Nations and pursuit of power-sharing with Hamas.        

The decision to release the money was made at a meeting of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu&rsquo;s senior cabinet ministers &ldquo;after the Palestinian Authority stopped taking unilateral moves,&rdquo; according to a message from Mr. Netanyahu&rsquo;s office sent to journalists. &ldquo;If the Palestinians return to taking unilateral steps, we will weigh again the transfer of funds.&rdquo;        

The Palestinian Authority depends on tax and customs revenue collected by Israel for a large part of its operating budget. Prime Minister Salam Fayyad has been warning that without the withheld money, the authority cannot pay November salaries to about 150,000 employees and is nearing the brink of financial collapse.        

The authority has other financial woes as well: some foreign donors have failed to make good on pledges, and the authority has exhausted its credit limit with some local banks.        

The Israeli government came under strong American and international pressure to yield the money. Within the Israeli defense establishment there is also a desire to see the Palestinian Authority function properly.        

Israel itself has long urged the Palestinians to develop a reliable and modern set of institutions, especially security forces, that could lead to stable relations and create the conditions for a two-state solution. Critics of Israel&rsquo;s decision to withhold the tax and customs receipts have argued that such a policy only serves to undermine its own goals for the Palestinian Authority.        

Aides to Mr. Netanyahu had made clear for at least a week that the transfer was likely to occur if the Palestinians held off vigorous pursuit of membership in United Nations agencies and if a meeting last Thursday between Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority and Khaled Meshal of Hamas yielded few concrete results. They said this week that both conditions had been met.        

Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman opposed the decision to release the receipts but said he would not threaten the government&rsquo;s stability over the issue by withdrawing his Yisrael Beiteinu Party from the coalition.        

The transfer of about $100 million a month to the Palestinian Authority is required under the 1994 portion of the Oslo agreement that formalized relations between Israel and the Palestinians.        

The money is made up of equal parts customs duties that Israel collects for Palestinians on foreign goods that arrive through Israeli ports, value-added taxes on major Palestinian purchases of Israeli goods and excise taxes on Israeli fuel bought by the Palestinians. A far smaller transfer is made monthly in the other direction as well, on goods bought by Israeli businesses in the West Bank.        

Israel has argued that Palestinian pursuit of statehood membership in the United Nations and its joining forces with Hamas, which has not renounced violence or recognized Israel, amount to abrogation of the Oslo accords, freeing Israel to react accordingly.        
