
WASHINGTON &mdash; After maintaining a low profile in protests led largely by secular young Egyptians, the Muslim Brotherhood, the country&rsquo;s largest opposition force, appeared to be taking a more assertive role on Thursday, issuing a statement asking for President Hosni Mubarak to step aside for a transitional government.        

&ldquo;We demand that this regime is overthrown, and we demand the formation of a national unity government for all the factions,&rdquo; the Brotherhood said in a statement broadcast by Al Jazeera.        

The Obama administration has spoken cautiously about the future role of the Brotherhood, which has long been banned by Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s government, saying only that all parties must renounce violence and accept democracy. But one of the few near certainties of a post-Mubarak Egypt is that the Muslim Brotherhood will emerge as a powerful political force.        

The unanswered question, according to experts on the region, is whether that will prove a manageable challenge for the United States and Israel or a catastrophe for American interests in the Middle East.        

The Brotherhood, founded in Egypt in 1928, is the oldest and largest Islamist movement in the world, with affiliates in most Muslim countries and adherents in Europe and the United States.        

Its size and diversity, and the legal ban that has kept it from genuine political power in Egypt for decades, make it hard to characterize simply. As the Roman Catholic Church includes both those who practice leftist liberation theology and conservative anti-abortion advocates, so the Brotherhood includes both practical reformers and firebrand ideologues.        

Which of those tendencies might rise to dominance in a new Egypt is under intense discussion inside the Obama administration, where officials say they may be willing to consult with the Brotherhood during a political transition.        

Bruce Riedel, a veteran observer of the Muslim world at the Brookings Institution, said the United States had no choice but to accept the group&rsquo;s role.        

&ldquo;If we really want democracy in Egypt, the Muslim Brotherhood is going to be a big part of the picture,&rdquo; said Mr. Riedel, who was the Egypt desk officer at the Central Intelligence Agency when Mr. Mubarak came to power in 1981. &ldquo;Rather than demonizing them, we ought to start engaging them now.&rdquo;        

American politicians and pundits have used the Brotherhood as a sort of boogeyman, tagging it as a radical menace and the grandfather of Al Qaeda. That lineage is accurate in a literal sense: some Qaeda leaders, notably the terrorist network&rsquo;s Egyptian second-in-command, Ayman al-Zawahri, have roots in the organization. But Qaeda leaders despise the Brotherhood because it has renounced violence and chosen to compete in elections.        

&ldquo;The Brotherhood hates Al Qaeda, and Al Qaeda hates the Brotherhood,&rdquo; said Shadi Hamid, director of research at the Brookings Doha Center in Qatar. &ldquo;So if we&rsquo;re talking about counterterrorism, engaging with the Brotherhood will advance our interests in the region.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hamid said the Muslim Brotherhood&rsquo;s deep hostility to Israel &mdash; which reflects majority public opinion in Egypt &mdash; would pose difficulties for American policy. Its conservative views on the rights of women and intolerance of religious minorities are offensive by Western standards. But he said that the group was far from monolithic and that it was divided between those who would never accept Israel&rsquo;s right to exist and those who accepted a two-state solution in which Israel and Palestine exist side by side.        

&ldquo;Yes, in their heart of hearts, they hate Israel,&rdquo; Mr. Hamid said. &ldquo;But they know they have to live in this world and respect the geopolitical scene.&rdquo;        

The Muslim Brotherhood was founded by an Egyptian schoolteacher and imam, Hassan al-Banna, as a grass-roots association whose goal was to promote the reform of Muslim society by a greater adherence to Islam, through preaching, outreach and the provision of social services.        

&ldquo;It was a bottom-up, gradual process, beginning with the individual and ultimately reaching all of society,&rdquo; said Carrie Rosefsky Wickham, a political scientist at Emory University and the author of &ldquo;Mobilizing Islam,&rdquo; a 2002 book on Egypt and the Muslim Brotherhood. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s roughly analogous to the evangelical Christian goal of sharing the gospel. Politics were secondary.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Banna did speak of jihad, too, as a struggle against colonialism and Zionism, Ms. Wickham said. Quotations from the Brotherhood&rsquo;s founder have been highlighted in recent years by Western critics who portray the movement as a militant threat.        

In the 1970s, after years of brutal repression by the state, the Egyptian president at the time, Anwar el-Sadat, permitted the Brotherhood to operate quietly and to open a Cairo office, and the Brotherhood formally renounced violence as a means of achieving power in Egypt. The group did not, however, reject violence in other circumstances, and its leaders have endorsed acts of terrorism against Israel and against American troops in Iraq.        

A prominent Brotherhood thinker, Sayyid Qutb, who was imprisoned by the Egyptian government and executed in 1966, was an important theorist of violent jihad and a spiritual progenitor of Osama bin Laden, the founder of Al Qaeda, and Anwar al-Awlaki, the American-born radical preacher now hiding in Yemen. But the Brotherhood took a different direction after Mr. Qutb&rsquo;s death, and Qaeda leaders came to hold the organization in contempt.        

A milestone in the Brotherhood&rsquo;s evolution in Egypt came in 1984, when its leaders decided to compete in parliamentary elections. Since then, it has been alternately tolerated and repressed in Egyptian politics, where most estimates of its actual support begin at 20 percent of the electorate.        

&ldquo;The paradox has been that the better the Brotherhood performs, the more repression it has attracted,&rdquo; Ms. Wickham said. After it won 88 seats in Parliament in the 2005 elections, Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s government responded with a new crackdown.        

In an interview just before the current wave of protests began in Egypt, Essam el-Erian, a leading figure in the Brotherhood, said the group did not seek to monopolize power. &ldquo;We want an atmosphere for fair competition now that can allow us to compete for power in the future,&rdquo; Mr. Erian said. &ldquo;And we want stability and freedom for people, not chaos.&rdquo;        

The Brotherhood, whose leaders are mostly much older than the protest organizers, joined the demonstrations only after they were under way. The hesitancy may reflect in part the grim history of the state&rsquo;s ruthlessness, said Abdel Halim Qandil, the general coordinator of Kifaya, a secular opposition movement.        
David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from Cairo, and Michael Slackman from Berlin.
