
WASHINGTON &mdash; The leader of Al Qaeda said Thursday that the terrorist group was holding a veteran American aid worker kidnapped in Pakistan in August and demanded the end of airstrikes on militants and the release of prisoners held in the West in return for his freedom.        

The video message from the leader, Ayman al-Zawahri, was the group&rsquo;s first claim to be holding the hostage, Warren Weinstein.        

Mr. Weinstein, 70, who has lived in Pakistan for seven years, was taken at gunpoint from his home in the eastern city of Lahore on Aug. 13. The police said at the time that it was unclear whether he had been kidnapped by militants or by criminals seeking a ransom.        

Mr. Zawahri, who took over the leadership of Al Qaeda after the killing in May of Osama bin Laden, mentioned Mr. Weinstein in a half-hour video released to militant forums on the Web, the eighth in a series of talks responding to events in Mr. Zawahri&rsquo;s native Egypt. He drew an analogy with Israel&rsquo;s release of more than 1,000 Palestinian prisoners in return for the release by Hamas of a captured Israel soldier, Gilad Shalit.        

Addressing imprisoned Qaeda and Taliban members, Mr. Zawahri said: &ldquo;In order to release you, Allah the great and almighty guided us to capture the American Jew Warren Weinstein,&rdquo; whom he called &ldquo;neck-deep in American aid to Pakistan since the 1970s,&rdquo; according to a translation by the Site Intelligence Group, which monitors jihadist messages.        

In return for Mr. Weinstein&rsquo;s release, he demanded free movement of people and goods between Egypt and Gaza; the end of bombing by the United States and its allies in Pakistan, Afghanistan, Yemen, Somalia and Gaza; the emptying of the prison at Guant&aacute;namo Bay, Cuba; and the release of a half-dozen prominent Qaeda prisoners held in the West.        

American officials said the Qaeda assertion that it was holding Mr. Weinstein was plausible. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s entirely possible that Al Qaeda or one of its militant allies may be holding Mr. Weinstein and the statement by Zawahri supports this conclusion,&rdquo; said an American official who was permitted to discuss the case only on condition of anonymity. He added: &ldquo;The U.S. government is following every lead to help find Mr. Weinstein.&rdquo;        

Documents captured from Bin Laden&rsquo;s house by the Navy Seal team that killed him showed Qaeda leaders were discussing kidnapping &ldquo;as a means of striking from their weakened state,&rdquo; the official said. Years of missile strikes from drone aircraft have killed most of Al Qaeda&rsquo;s commanders, including Atiyah Abd al-Rahman, a Libyan considered the group&rsquo;s top operational planner, who Mr. Zawahri confirmed was killed with his son in a strike on Aug. 23 in North Waziristan in Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal area.        

After his disappearance, Mr. Weinstein&rsquo;s family issued an appeal to his captors to make sure he got medication for asthma and a heart condition. In a statement, the family asked whoever was holding him to contact them, saying they were &ldquo;devastated by his disappearance&rdquo; and &ldquo;don&rsquo;t understand why anyone would take him.&rdquo;        
