
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; The United States needs more time to decide on possible aid for North Korea because it is not sure humanitarian assistance would reach the people in need, the top American aid official said on Thursday.        

Rajiv Shah, the head of the United States Agency for International Development, made the comment amid growing appeals from American and United Nations relief agencies, which have recently called for urgent aid for the most vulnerable of the North Korean population, especially its children.        

&ldquo;Our goal is to identify and complete an assessment of whether food aid assistance can effectively be provided in a manner that is transparent and targeted and reaches intended beneficiaries and avoids the risk of graft and misappropriation,&rdquo; Mr. Shah said in an interview.        

In recent weeks, Mercy Corps and four other American relief organizations operating in North Korea have charged that by delaying a decision on aid, Washington was playing politics with humanitarian aid for children.        

After a trip to North Korea in October, Valerie Amos, the United Nations&rsquo;s top relief coordinator, called for urgent relief for children suffering from widespread malnutrition. After an assessment trip to the North last month, the World Food Program and the Food and Agriculture Organization made a similar appeal.        

Mr. Shah blamed the North Korean government.        

&ldquo;We are all frustrated with what is the immense personal suffering that takes place when countries don&rsquo;t create the conditions for effective humanitarian assistance and support,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s why we are working hard to establish those conditions as a significant prerequisite for engaging in food aid in North Korea this time.&rdquo;        

Both Washington and the government in Seoul deny linking aid to political issues. But North Korea&rsquo;s continued nuclear weapons program and its military provocations against South Korea have helped curtail donor contributions. Potential donors also feared that the regime may be diverting aid for its military, although relief agencies have recently reported improvements in monitoring.        

Washington is dealing with food crises worse than the one in North Korea. In those crises too, Mr. Shah said, his agency was striving for unimpeded access to the people in need. He cited southern Somalia, where the Shabab, an Islamic militant group, has restricted the activities of international aid groups.        

&ldquo;Throughout the Horn of Africa, 13.3 million people go to bed hungry,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There have been more than 30,000 children under the age of 5 that have died already in Somalia.&rdquo;        

Mr. Shah was in South Korea to attend an international forum on aid effectiveness in Busan, a port city in southern South Korea where American aid used to arrive. On Thursday, he gave a lecture at the Korea Development Institute, a top government economic research group in Seoul that was started in 1971 with the help of American aid.        

He called South Korea an exemplary success story illustrating the effectiveness of American aid. An estimated $18.7 billion in aid was sent to South Korea from 1952 to 1980 and helped the country&rsquo;s transformation from one of the world&rsquo;s poorest nations to a global export powerhouse. Its gross domestic product per capita rose to $27,000 in 2009 from $1,420 in 1960.        
