
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; The Supreme Court in Pakistan barred Husain Haqqani, the former ambassador to the United States, on Thursday from leaving the country as the court initiated an investigation into a controversial memo that led to the envoy&rsquo;s resignation and has caused a political storm in the country.        

Mr. Haqqani was forced to resign on Nov. 22 in the wake of accusations that he had used the memo to seek American help to rein in the powerful Pakistani military.        

Mansoor Ijaz, a United States businessman of Pakistani origin who has publicized the existence of the memo, said Mr. Haqqani asked him to have it delivered to Adm. Mike Mullen, then the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in May.        

According to Mr. Ijaz, the memo asked for United States help in heading off a possible military-led coup and promised concessions in return. Mr. Haqqani denies involvement with the memo.        

The Supreme Court on Thursday announced that an investigatory commission, to be led by a former senior investigator, would complete its probe in three weeks.        

The court also called for several high-ranking officials, including Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, the army chief, and Lt. Gen. Ahmad Shuja Pasha, the country&rsquo;s spy chief, to submit written testimony within 15 days.        

General Pasha, the head of the Directorate of Inter-Services Intelligence, or ISI, flew to London in October to interview Mr. Ijaz on the matter, according to Mr. Ijaz, who added that he turned over e-mail exchanges and other communication with Mr. Haqqani.        

In forming the commission, the court was responding to a raft of petitions filed by oppositions politicians, including former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, who allege that the memo was likely to have had the knowledge and approval of President Asif Ali Zardari.        

A spokesman for Mr. Zardari has denied any knowledge of the memo.        

Opposition politicians say that if the memo is proven authentic, it could lead to treason charges against those found to be behind it.        

In a statement released to the news media on Thursday, Mr. Haqqani said he had no intentions of leaving the country, even before being barred from doing so.        

&ldquo;I resigned to pave the way for a transparent investigation and intend to stay in my country for as long as necessary,&rdquo; he said in the statement.        

&ldquo;I will also answer all questions raised before the court by and at the behest of opposition politicians but will not become part of any effort to cause further deterioration in U.S.-Pakistan relations or in maligning Pakistan&rsquo;s institutions of state whose reform and role are so critical in the security of the country and in fighting extremists and terrorists,&rdquo; the statement read.        

Mr. Haqqani is considered supportive of strong U.S.-Pakistani relations, which has made him unpopular among some in Pakistan, and he also was known as a critic of the Pakistani military before he became ambassador.        
