
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; President Jacob Zuma &mdash; at odds with the judiciary and critics who accuse him of improperly appointing loyalists to public posts &mdash; suffered a blow on Thursday when an appeals court ruled that he had violated the Constitution two years ago with his highly contentious pick for the country&rsquo;s top prosecutor.        

Mr. Zuma appointed Menzi Simelane to direct public prosecutions for the National Prosecuting Authority despite loud objections from opposition parties and the public, in large part because of questions surrounding Mr. Simelane&rsquo;s integrity and qualifications.        

South Africa&rsquo;s top opposition party, the Democratic Alliance, challenged Mr. Simelane&rsquo;s appointment in court, arguing that Mr. Zuma, himself having been the subject of corruption allegations shortly before making the appointment, was simply trying to shield himself by appointing an ally.        

In a unanimous decision, the five-judge panel of the Supreme Court of Appeal ruled Thursday that Mr. Zuma failed to properly vet Mr. Simelane. The decision means that the prosecutor will lose his job absent a reversal by the nation&rsquo;s highest court.        

&ldquo;It is clear that the president did not undertake a proper inquiry&rdquo; as to whether Mr. Simelane met the legal requirements for the position, Judge Mohammed Navsa wrote. &ldquo;On the available evidence, the president could not have reached a conclusion favorable to Mr. Simelane, as there were too many questions concerning his integrity and experience.&rdquo;        

A spokesman for the Justice Ministry said it was still deciding whether to appeal to the Constitutional Court, the country&rsquo;s highest judicial authority. Mr. Simelane would keep his position pending the outcome of an appeal.        

The court&rsquo;s decision may embolden critics who have accused Mr. Zuma of recently appointing close allies to critical public positions in an effort to protect his fragile grip on power ahead of his party&rsquo;s election convention next year.        

On Wednesday, Mr. Zuma drew criticism when he appointed Willem Heath, a former judge who defended Mr. Zuma when he faced corruption allegations, to lead a government unit that investigates corruption.        

The rejection of Mr. Simelane is also expected to deepen the division between the courts and Mr. Zuma and his supporters, who have in recent weeks suggested that the judiciary was impinging on functions of the executive branch.        

The ruling &ldquo;shows that our constitutional democracy can work to prevent the interference of politicians in our state institutions designed to protect people against power abuse,&rdquo; Helen Zille, the leader of the Democratic Alliance, said in a statement.        

Before becoming the director of prosecutions, Mr. Simelane served as the director general of the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development. While in that position, Mr. Simelane was criticized for interfering with the director of prosecutions at the time, Vusi Pikoli.        

A 2008 inquiry revealed that Mr. Simelane had asked Mr. Pikoli to stop the prosecution of Jackie Selebi, the former national police commissioner, who was eventually convicted and sentenced to 15 years in jail for taking bribes to turn a blind eye to drug trafficking.        

Many South Africans question how Mr. Zuma, who is also the president of the African National Congress, could appoint someone whose integrity had been called into question.        

&ldquo;It just struck many citizens as the sort of thing that the A.N.C. could do only because it had a stable and large majority &mdash; that it could just override the misgivings of society,&rdquo; said Daryl Glaser, an associate professor of politics at the University of the Witwatersrand.        

If the appeals court&rsquo;s ruling is upheld, it would be a political setback for Mr. Zuma. There has been a perception &ldquo;that he&rsquo;s been surrounding himself with allies,&rdquo; Mr. Glaser said. &ldquo;After appearing indecisive for a long time, he&rsquo;s been starting to make serious moves.&rdquo;        

Because the appeals court said that Mr. Simelane&rsquo;s appointment was invalid, that means the cases he has prosecuted since he took over the office also technically would be invalid, said Pierre de Vos, a professor of constitutional law at the University of Cape Town.        

But the Constitutional Court would be likely to alleviate that problem by drafting a special order allowing the cases to stand, Mr. de Vos said.        

Mr. Zuma&rsquo;s patience for court decisions that overrule executive decisions appears to be wearing thin. The president recently announced that he intended to have a commission assess the impact of the judiciary.        

&ldquo;We must not get a sense that there are those who wish to co-govern the country through the courts, when they have not won the popular vote during elections,&rdquo; Mr. Zuma said at a recent farewell for the country&rsquo;s departing chief justice.        
