
CAIRO &mdash; The Egyptian government on Thursday broadened its crackdown on a 10-day uprising that has shaken its rule, arresting journalists and human rights advocates across an edgy city, while offering more concessions in a bid to win support from a population growing frustrated with a devastated economy and scenes of chaos in the streets.        

The campaign was a startling blend of the oldest tactics of an authoritarian government &mdash; stoking fears of foreigners &mdash; with the air of sincerity of a repentant order. Trying to seize the initiative from a revolt that has marked one of the most decisive moments in modern Egyptian history, the government promised that neither President Hosni Mubarak nor his son Gamal, long seen as a contender for power, would run for president and offered dialogue with the banned Muslim Brotherhood, gestures almost unthinkable  weeks ago.        

As protesters battled crowds rallied by the government for a second day, organizers sought to rally even bigger demonstrations for Friday &mdash; dubbed the &ldquo;Friday of departure&rdquo; &mdash; in hopes of keeping the momentum behind a popular uprising that has demanded that Mr. Mubarak step down after three decades in power.        

Voiced often in the tumultuous scenes of defiance and determination in Tahrir Square was a fear that if they lost, the protesters and their organizers would bear the brunt of a withering crackdown.        

&ldquo;If we can&rsquo;t bring this to an end, we&rsquo;re going to all be in the slammer by June,&rdquo; said Murad Mohsen, a doctor treating the wounded at a makeshift clinic near barricades, where thousands fought off droves of government supporters with rocks and firebombs.        

Dr. Mohsen&rsquo;s comments illustrated the changing dynamic of an uprising that has captivated the Arab world, reverberating through Jordan, Sudan and Yemen, where there were peaceful protests on Thursday. New calls for protests went out in Algeria, Bahrain and Libya.        

From festive scenes of just days ago, the revolt has become more martial, as exhausted men defend what they describe as the perimeter of a free Egypt around Tahrir Square. Their demands have grown more forceful and the uprising more radical. After pitched clashes of two days that left at least seven dead and hundreds wounded, banners in Tahrir Square declared Mr. Mubarak &ldquo;a war criminal,&rdquo; and several in the crowd said that the president should be executed. Major television networks were largely unable to broadcast from the square on Thursday.        

The United States joined a chorus of criticism, with Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton saying, &ldquo;We condemn in the strongest terms attacks on peaceful demonstrators, human rights activists, foreigners and diplomats.&rdquo;        

The government&rsquo;s strategy seems motivated at turning broader opinion in the country against the protests and perhaps wearing down the demonstrators themselves, some of whom seemed exhausted by the clashes. Vice President Omar Suleiman, appointed Saturday to a position that Mr. Mubarak had until then refused to fill, appealed to Egypt&rsquo;s sense of decency in allowing Mr. Mubarak to serve out his term, and he chronicled the mounting losses that, he said, the uprising had inflicted on a crippled Egyptian economy.        

&ldquo;End your sit-in,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Your demands have been answered.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mubarak said in an interview with ABC that he was eager to step down but if he did, &ldquo;Egypt would sink into chaos.&rdquo;        

In interviews and statements, the government has increasingly spread an image that foreigners were inciting the uprising, a refrain echoed in the streets. The suggestions are part of a days-long Egyptian media campaign that has portrayed the protesters as troublemakers and ignored the scope of an uprising with diffuse goals and leadership.        

&ldquo;Millions turn out to support Mubarak,&rdquo; read the banner headline on Thursday on the front page of Al Ahram, the leading government newspaper.        

The propaganda has been so pronounced that an announcer on Nile Television, Shahira Amin, quit. &ldquo;I cleared my conscience and walked out,&rdquo; she said.        

The Committee to Protect Journalists said it had 100 reports of attacks on journalists. Al Jazeera, the influential Arabic channel, said government supporters stormed the Hilton Hotel in Cairo, searching for journalists, and two of its reporters were attacked. A Greek journalist was stabbed with a screwdriver and others were beaten and harassed.        

Police also raided the Hisham Mubarak Law Center, a headquarters for many of the international human rights organizations working in Egypt. The human rights workers were told to lie on the floor and the chips were removed from the telephones, someone present in the building said, speaking on condition of anonymity for fear of retribution.        

As the day wore on, tension descended across parts of the city, which is still guarded by popular committees that banded together after the police withdrew Saturday. Government supporters roamed parts of the downtown, itching for a fight, and looters set fire to a shopping mall along the Nile that was already looted and burned Friday.        
 David D. Kirkpatrick, Kareem Fahim, and Mona El-Naggar contributed reporting from Cairo.
David D. Kirkpatrick, Kareem Fahim, and Mona El-Naggar contributed reporting from Cairo.
