
Galvanized by the pillaging of Britain&rsquo;s Embassy in Tehran, Western nations moved Thursday to significantly tighten sanctions against Iran over its suspect nuclear program, with the European Union expanding an Iranian blacklist and the United States Senate passing a measure that could severely disrupt Iran&rsquo;s oil income.        

The European Union added 180 names to a roster of Iranian officials and companies whose assets have been frozen and are banned from travel to member states. While that action fell short of demands by Britain and France for an embargo on oil purchases from Iran, one of the world&rsquo;s leading producers, ministers meeting in Brussels said they would consider such a restriction in coming weeks.        

The possibility of a more onerous measure confronted Iran in Washington, where senators voted, 100 to 0, to penalize any foreign bank that does business with Iran&rsquo;s Central Bank, the conduit for Iran&rsquo;s receipts from oil sales.        

The provision, an amendment to a defense authorization bill, is designed to dissuade foreign customers of Iran&rsquo;s oil for fear of losing access to the United States market.        

Whether the provision becomes part of the final bill depends on whether it survives a House-Senate conference that will be needed to reconcile their different versions of the overall defense bill.        

The support for the amendment came despite pleas for restraint by Obama administration officials, who said the recently strengthened regimen of sanctions against Iran was working. They also said any step that disrupted oil sales could alienate American allies and have the unintended consequence of sharply raising world oil prices, aggravating the economic struggles in the United States and Europe.        

David S. Cohen, the under secretary for terrorism and financial intelligence, told lawmakers in Washington that any new sanctions that affected the Iranian Central Bank must be done in concert with other countries &ldquo;to ensure that we deliver strong and well-targeted pressure on Iran.&rdquo;        

He also said the accumulated effects of sanctions had disrupted Iranian banks and their access to international financing, &ldquo;impeding their ability to facilitate Iran&rsquo;s illicit activities and creating unprecedented financial and commercial isolation for Iran.&rdquo;        

Meanwhile, new details emerged regarding the scale of destruction at the British Embassy and a British diplomatic residence in Tehran on Tuesday by Iranian protesters, apparently aligned with the government-controlled Basij militia, angry over the West&rsquo;s economic sanctions.        

Reuters reported from Tehran that Western diplomats who had toured the British outposts 24 hours after the assault reported &ldquo;devastating&rdquo; damage and said the ambassador&rsquo;s residence had been &ldquo;systematically destroyed.&rdquo;        

Britain&rsquo;s government withdrew its diplomats from Iran on Wednesday, ordered Iran to close its embassy in London and gave Iranian diplomats a 48-hour deadline to leave Britain, officially downgrading relations with Iran to the lowest possible, short of a formal break.        

British leaders also accused Iran&rsquo;s Islamic hierarchy of approving the assault, which evoked images of the Iranian takeover of the American Embassy there more than 30 years ago. At least four other European countries have closed their Tehran embassies since Tuesday as a precaution.        

According to a statement released by the Council of the European Union, the foreign ministers meeting in Brussels said the tightened sanctions &ldquo;target entities and individuals directly involved in Iran&rsquo;s nuclear activities, which are in violation of U.N. Security Council resolutions.&rdquo;        

The statement also said the ministers would look at additional ways in coming weeks to broaden sanctions aimed at Iran&rsquo;s financial system, transportation and energy sectors and the Revolutionary Guard, a segment of the Iran armed forces that Western nations suspect oversees a clandestine nuclear weapons program.        

The group of foreign ministers also condemned the attack on the British Embassy and residence in Tehran, saying that the council &ldquo;considers these actions taken against the U.K. as actions against the European Union as a whole. The E.U. is taking appropriate measures in response.&rdquo;        

Iran has insisted its nuclear energy program is peaceful and has denounced a report issued last month by the International Atomic Energy Agency that said Iran might be working on a nuclear weapon and missile delivery system. It says the report is a pretext for a pre-emptive military strike on its nuclear facilities by the United States or Israel.        

The report by the atomic energy agency, a monitoring arm of the United Nations, became the basis for a new round of sanctions against Iran announced Nov. 21 by Britain, the United States, Canada and a few days later by the European Union.        

Israel has sent mixed signals about its intentions regarding Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program. Speaking to Israel Radio on Thursday, Defense Minister Ehud Barak said: &ldquo;We have no intention, at the moment, of taking action, but the state of Israel is far from being paralyzed by fear. It must act calmly and quietly &mdash; we don&rsquo;t need big wars.&rdquo;        

In Germany, law enforcement officials said Thursday that they were investigating possible plans for Iranian attacks on American military installations in the event of an attack against Iran.        

&ldquo;We have begun investigative proceedings and are taking operational measures,&rdquo; Harald Range, the federal prosecutor general, said in Karlsruhe, according to the DPA news service.        

In Iran, where leaders have portrayed the embassy attackers as justifiably motivated by British arrogance, the semiofficial Fars news agency said 11 students detained for storming the buildings had been released.        

The official Islamic Republic News Agency quoted the Iranian judiciary chief, Ayatollah Sadeq Larijani, as saying the West&rsquo;s imposition of sanctions reflected &ldquo;their policy of intimidation.&rdquo;        
Alan Cowell contributed reporting from London, Stephen Castle from Brussels and Artin Afkhami from Boston.
