
BAGHDAD &mdash; On Monday, a spokesman for the speaker of Parliament said that an explosion in the heavily fortified Green Zone here had been aimed at the speaker, Osama al-Najafi.        

But late Friday, security officials who report to the prime minister offered a new interpretation of who had been the car bomber&rsquo;s intended target: they said it had been aimed at Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki.        

Although it was not clear why the senior officials&rsquo; aides were disagreeing over who had been the target of the attack, the different claims reflected the political tension between Sunnis and Shiites as the United States withdraws all of its troops by the end of the month.        

The spokesman for the Baghdad Operation Command, which oversees security in Baghdad, said in a news conference Friday that terrorists from Anbar Province, a predominantly Sunni area, and Baghdad had been trying to harm Mr. Maliki, who is a Shiite.        

&ldquo;The intelligence information we have is that the car was trying to go inside the gate at the Parliament to wait for the prime minister, who as the media has said intends to go the Parliament soon to talk about the readiness of the Iraqi security forces,&rdquo; said the spokesman, Qassim Atta.        

Mr. Atta provided few details about how security officials had determined that the prime minister, and not the speaker, was the target. The blast occurred close to a car in Mr. Najafi&rsquo;s convoy.        

After the news conference, a spokesman for Mr. Najafi&rsquo;s party said that security officials had scant evidence for their assertion and were maligning the people of Anbar. &ldquo;They say that they were targeting the prime minister, but he was at his palace,&rdquo; said the spokesman, Haider al-Mulla.        

And a spokesman for Mr. Najafi said that Mr. Maliki had no plans to attend Parliament this month.        

In recent weeks, tensions have increased between Sunnis and Shiites, with each accusing the other of using violence to undermine the country&rsquo;s security. Some analysts are concerned that sectarian violence will be reignited after the American troops withdraw.        

The explosion on Monday worried Iraqis, because the bomber was able to penetrate the heavy security inside the Green Zone, where there have been few attacks in recent years.        

In a separate episode on Friday, two explosions in Kirkuk killed one person and wounded 15, including seven police officers, security officials said. The first blast appeared to be aimed at a bus. When the police arrived on the scene, a improvised explosive device was detonated.        
