
YANGON, Myanmar &mdash; The heroine of Myanmar&rsquo;s democratic opposition, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, endorsed the new American engagement with the country&rsquo;s autocratic government on Friday and called on other countries, including China, to support Myanmar&rsquo;s nascent efforts to build a freer, more open society and economy.        

&ldquo;If we go forward together, I am confident that there will be no turning back from the road towards democracy,&rdquo; she said, appearing with Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton on the porch of the lakeside house where she spent much of the last two decades under house arrest. &ldquo;We are not on that road yet, but we hope to get there as soon as possible with the help and understanding of our friends.&rdquo;        

The meeting Friday was the second in two days for Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi and Mrs. Clinton &mdash; two iconic women in world affairs. The first, a private dinner the night before, was described as intimate by Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s aides. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s as if they&rsquo;d known each other a long time,&rdquo; one said.        

Mrs. Clinton on Friday called Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi an inspiration.        

That they met at all, and appeared together before international and local journalists, was itself a measure of the changes that have swept Myanmar since the new president, U Thein Sein, took office in March, establishing a military-backed civilian government after years of military dictatorship. Those changes, including the freeing of some political prisoners and lifting the heavy censorship of the Internet, were enough to persuade President Obama to send Mrs. Clinton to explore ways to expand relations that have been badly strained for nearly a quarter century.        

In their remarks at the house, a two-story villa surrounded by a flower-filled garden but also a wall topped by barbed wire, both women emphasized that Mr. Thein Sein&rsquo;s reforms were only a beginning.        

The women called for the release of more political prisoners, the establishment of rule of law and an end to the internal conflicts that have led to accusations of war crimes.        

&ldquo;We need all those who are still in prison to be released, and we need to ensure that no more are arrested in the future for their beliefs,&rdquo; Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi said.        

On Friday Mrs. Clinton announced $1.2 million worth of new education, health and humanitarian projects. Earlier in the trip, she announced the easing of American restrictions on international financial assistance from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.        

The administration&rsquo;s relatively small steps so far reflected the caution toward a new opening with Myanmar, also known as Burma, at a time when some in Congress have suggested that attempts at reconciliation are premature.        

In their appearance together, neither woman discussed the pervasive sanctions against almost all trade with Myanmar. When asked by a Burmese journalist about the possibility of lifting them, Mrs. Clinton indicated it would be too early.        

&ldquo;We are prepared to go further if the reforms maintain momentum, but history teaches us to be cautious,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said later at the American Embassy. &ldquo;We know there have been serious setbacks and grave disappointments over the last decades. We want to see a sustainable reform effort.&rdquo;        

The embassy here has been without an ambassador since shortly after the 1990 election that Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi&rsquo;s party won, leading the military government to ignore the results and the United States to downgrade relations.        

Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi pressed the administration to move ahead with an appointment, but Mrs. Clinton announced only that the two countries would now discuss the possibility in the future.        

Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi also sought to reassure China, one of the military government&rsquo;s most important allies during its years of isolation. The American outreach to Myanmar has been widely viewed as part of an effort to manage that country&rsquo;s rising economic and military prominence in Asia.        

She said Myanmar hoped to maintain &ldquo;good friendly relations with China, our very close neighbor, and not just with China but the rest of the world.&rdquo;        
