
ROME &mdash; Prime Minister Mario Monti enjoys broad popular support as he takes on the daunting mandate of turning around the moribund Italian economy. But the honeymoon may end as soon as Monday, when he is scheduled to announce austerity measures aimed at saving up to $25 billion to balance the budget by 2013.        

While the details are not yet known, he is expected to ask for higher taxes on the super-rich and luxury items like yachts, an increase in the retirement age and the reintroduction of property taxes &mdash; political third rails that are expected to meet fierce opposition with the public and Parliament.        

Mr. Monti, an economist who is also acting as finance minister, has told Italians that such changes are essential for Italy to boost its anemic growth, stave off a recession and pay down its staggering public debt, which is $2.5 trillion, or 120 percent of gross domestic product, in order to stabilize the Italian economy and protect the euro.        

It is a tricky balancing act, and already labor unions are objecting to pension reforms, to say nothing of changes to Italy&rsquo;s labor market, which Mr. Monti has also said are on his agenda, though not immediately.        

&ldquo;The road will be very rocky, very bumpy,&rdquo; said Roberto D&rsquo;Alimonte, a political science professor at Luiss Guido Carli University in Rome. &ldquo;This is a government that doesn&rsquo;t have friends in Parliament,&rdquo; he added. Members of Parliament &ldquo;aren&rsquo;t convinced of the gravity of the crisis, because it&rsquo;s a mediocre political class, not to say anything worse,&rdquo; Mr. D&rsquo;Alimonte said.        

It will also be a test for Italy&rsquo;s technocracy: the cabinet of specialists widely seen as towering figures in their fields but lacking grass-roots political support.        

The welfare minister, Elsa Fornero, ran a highly regarded pension research institute. The defense minister, Adm. Giampaolo di Paola, was chairman of NATO&rsquo;s military committee.        

Corrado Passera, who holds the economic development and infrastructure portfolios, is a former chief executive of Intesa Sanpaolo, a leading Italian bank &mdash; an appointment that prompted widespread criticism about conflict of interest, both from left-wing critics and from right-wing supporters of former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, skeptical of what they see as a government of bankers.        

A former European commissioner, Mr. Monti has a sterling reputation abroad that will not necessarily help him navigate the difficult political waters at home. His government won a confidence vote in Parliament last month by a wide margin with the support of the center-left Democratic Party and Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s center-right People of Liberty party. But it lacks a political base of its own.        

Angelino Alfano, People of Liberty&rsquo;s leader, whom Mr. Berlusconi has often called his dauphin, said on Friday that the party would give Mr. Monti&rsquo;s government a chance. &ldquo;We think it&rsquo;s right at this moment that the new prime minister have all the opening possible to propose the measures most useful for Italy and most balanced in terms of their contents,&rdquo; he said in televised remarks on Friday.        

Mr. Berlusconi removed property taxes on first homes in 2008, making good on a campaign pledge, and his party has said it would oppose their return. The People of Liberty also counts in its ranks many professionals who are largely opposed to Mr. Monti&rsquo;s plans to liberalize Italy&rsquo;s professional guilds, such as those of lawyers, notaries and pharmacists, which they see as a threat to their power and incomes.        

Mr. Monti faces an equally serious challenge from the Democratic Party, the cornerstone of his parliamentary support. Made up of former Communists with close ties to labor unions and neo-liberals pushing for more reforms, the party is badly divided over economic issues.        

Mr. Monti&rsquo;s government is expected to fast-track changes that would base pensions entirely on the number of years of contributions, rather than on salary at the time of retirement, as was once the case. It is also expected to raise the number of years required to qualify for a pension, which can now be collected after 40 years of contributions.        

A majority of Italians who retired after 2004 qualified to do so at an average age of 58 &mdash; in a country where life expectancy is 82 &mdash; and raising that bar could save Italy billions a year. After initially dismissing calls to meet with labor unions, which have been vehemently opposed to any pension changes, Mr. Monti said he would meet with them on Sunday. Susanna Camusso, the leader of Italy&rsquo;s largest union, C.G.I.L., said that the 40-year mark was &ldquo;untouchable.&rdquo;        

In the end, many believe that Mr. Monti will prevail for a simple reason. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s no choice,&rdquo; Mr. D&rsquo;Alimonte said. &ldquo;In the end, even this mediocre political class knows that there&rsquo;s no choice and they need in some way to adapt.&rdquo;        
Gaia Pianigiani contributed reporting.
