
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The United Nations high commissioner for human rights on Friday called for international intervention to protect Syrian civilians from the government&rsquo;s crackdown, amid warnings that the country is headed toward civil war.        

The commissioner, Navi Pillay, estimated that more than 4,000 people, including 307 children, have been killed in the nearly nine months since the uprising erupted against the government of President Bashar al-Assad. Ms. Pillay, who has emerged as a forceful voice on Syria, estimated that at least 14,000 people have been detained.        

&ldquo;The Syrian authorities&rsquo; continual ruthless repression, if not stopped now, can drive the country into a full-fledged civil war,&rdquo; Ms. Pillay told an emergency session of the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva.        

&ldquo;All acts of murder, torture and other forms of violence must be immediately stopped,&rdquo; she said.        

Ms. Pillay also warned of the danger posed by increasingly bold attacks by army defectors against security forces loyal to the government. In the latest such attack, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, an opposition group in exile, said Friday that a group of defectors known as the Free Syrian Army killed at least eight people in a strike on an intelligence forces building in the northwestern province of Idlib, near Turkey.        

The emergency session of the Human Rights Council, the third on Syria held since April, was called by the European Union, with support from the United States and Arab countries. In August, Ms. Pillay called for the United Nations Security Council to refer Syria to the International Criminal Court for committing crimes against humanity.        

The European Union imposed sanctions on Thursday against Syrian officials and companies.        

Syria&rsquo;s ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, Faysal Khabbaz Hamoui, reacted angrily to Ms. Pillay&rsquo;s comments.        

&ldquo;The Syrian problem is one that can be resolved only by Syrians,&rdquo; Mr. Hamoui said during the session. &ldquo;The solution cannot come from the corridors of the international community. It is only resolutions trying to put more oil on the fire.&rdquo;        

Protesters across Syria took to the streets after Friday Prayer in demonstrations labeled &ldquo;a buffer zone is our demand.&rdquo; There have been growing calls from the opposition inside Syria and abroad for international intervention against Mr. Assad&rsquo;s leadership.        

The Local Coordination Committees said that at least seven people were killed across the country when security forces fired at their demonstrations.        
