
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The Afghan government has been talking about ending the American military&rsquo;s controversial campaign of night raids for years, but now they see an opportunity to actually do something about it.        

In continuing negotiations for a long-term strategic agreement between the two countries, the Afghans have made a no-compromise stand on abolishing or greatly limiting night raids, in which commandos go after people suspected of being insurgents in private homes rather than in the field.        

Both sides very much want the strategic agreement. It would give bases to the American military in Afghanistan and give the Afghans assurances of continued training and financing for their rapidly growing and ever more costly security forces.        

Western diplomats say that all such big issues are already settled, but night raids remain the thorn in the talks.        

&ldquo;It is one of the central points &mdash; yes, we hope it will not be a deal breaker,&rdquo; Aimal Faizi, the spokesman for President Hamid Karzai, said in an interview. &ldquo;It is one of our primary conditions.&rdquo;        

There are other sticking points as well, according to Western diplomats &mdash; how to handle detentions, and how legally binding the agreement will be &mdash; but those have not attracted the same level of public interest, or put the Americans on the defensive with their Afghan allies to such a degree.        

The American military sees night raids as an essential and effective part of its counterinsurgency effort, with a very high reward-to-risk ratio. But Mr. Karzai and much of his government see the raids as politically disastrous, as they enrage the populace and often set entire communities against the American military presence.        

Over the past year, American commanders have greatly increased the frequency of the raids, with as many as 40 around the country being carried out on some nights, and an average of 10 a night, the military says. Even that is estimated to be twice the rate of 2010. Thousands of Taliban insurgents, hundreds of them midlevel commanders, have been captured or killed in the raids, officials have said.        

Delegates at the recent loya jirga meetings convened by Mr. Karzai overwhelmingly asked the president to make an end to night raids a condition of signing a strategic agreement. Mr. Karzai has repeatedly demanded in speeches that night raids by foreign forces should end.        

Most night raids are carried out by various kinds of Special Operations troops, and now the vast majority are &ldquo;partnered&rdquo; &mdash; conducted with Afghan troops along, the military says. A smaller number are considered &ldquo;black ops,&rdquo; covert missions conducted solely by specialized American units like the Army&rsquo;s Delta Force, Navy Seal commandos or the C.I.A.        

NATO officials say they have modified how night raids are conducted in response to the Afghan government&rsquo;s concerns.        

&ldquo;Ninety-five percent of all night operations at this stage are already partnered,&rdquo; said Brig. Gen. Carsten Jacobson, the NATO spokesman in Afghanistan. &ldquo;So basically the recommendation of the traditional loya jirga is already put into action.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;It is in our combined interest that as soon as possible, Afghanization is accomplished,&rdquo; he added, referring to an Afghan takeover of security responsibility.        

Mr. Faizi was unimpressed by that argument. &ldquo;According to reports from our officials in different provinces, the Afghan security forces are leaving with the American forces to go conduct night operations without being informed directly where they are going, which house they are searching and who is the target,&rdquo; he said.        

While General Jacobson said night raids averaged 10 a night now, a recent study of night raids by the Open Society Foundations, financed by George Soros, estimated that 19 a night were taking place during the first three months of 2011.        

The American military is so enamored of the tactic that some generals have said that without night raids, the United States may as well go home.        

General Jacobson said that 85 percent of night raids took place without a single shot fired, and that over all such operations accounted for less than one percent of all civilian casualties.        

Afghans, however, complain that because night raids involve soldiers going into private homes and often seeing the women who live there, they deeply offend Afghan cultural sensitivities and have an alienating effect out of proportion to either their military value or their casualty rate.        

&ldquo;This has become a very sensitive issue for the Afghan people,&rdquo; said Mr. Faizi, who made it clear that he was relating Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s views on the subject. &ldquo;In general, they are not against night raids if they are led by Afghan people.&rdquo;        

Mr. Faizi said the raids were the biggest complaints that Mr. Karzai heard when visitors from the provinces met with him.        

&ldquo;If one of the messages of the United States is to win the hearts and minds of the Afghan people, then these night raids are totally against this,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;People are becoming more and more against the international presence in Afghanistan.&rdquo;        
Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar, Afghanistan, and Alissa J. Rubin from Kabul.
