
MOSCOW &mdash; United Russia, the governing party of Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin, suffered surprisingly steep losses in parliamentary elections on Sunday and was barely clinging to a 50 percent majority, with 95 percent of the votes counted.        

The three minority parties that now hold seats in Parliament &mdash; the Communist Party, the nationalist Liberal Democratic Party and Just Russia, a social democratic party &mdash; all made strong gains, meaning that United Russia would have little choice but to forge a working relationship with at least some segment of the newly empowered opposition.        

Critics of the government have said for weeks that they expected widespread campaign abuses, and reports of electoral violations streamed into online social networks during the early morning hours, as the ruling party&rsquo;s vote tally edged upward.        

The elections had shaped up not just as a referendum on United Russia but also on Mr. Putin, and his plans to remain as Russia&rsquo;s paramount political leader. And while the final tally was not complete, the results conveyed a clear rebuke from voters weary of a leadership that has been in place for more than a decade. The signal is all the more pointed on the heels of Mr. Putin&rsquo;s decision to run for the presidency, serving for one six-year term, or possibly even two terms.        

President Dmitri A. Medvedev, who called to congratulate the leaders of the three parties that won seats, acknowledged that the results would require a &ldquo;more complex configuration&rdquo; in Parliament and the formation of &ldquo;coalition bloc agreements&rdquo; &mdash; a major shift from the more than two-thirds supermajority that now gives United Russia the ability to change the Constitution without impediment.        

&ldquo;Democracy is in action,&rdquo; Mr. Medvedev said, standing with Mr. Putin at United Russia&rsquo;s campaign headquarters, where both appeared a bit shaken. &ldquo;The party performed worthily; it essentially represents 50 percent of our population &mdash; the final number will be determined &mdash; and the result is real democracy.&rdquo;        

With 95 percent of the votes processed, United Russia led with a shade under 50 percent, trailed by the Communists with 19 percent, Just Russia with 13 percent and the Liberal Democrats with nearly 12 percent, according to the Central Election Commission. In 2007, United Russia won more than 64 percent of the vote, while the Communist Party was a distant second with 11.5 percent.        

In brief remarks, Mr. Putin, who is still expected to win a presidential election in March, said voters had reaffirmed United Russia as &ldquo;the nation&rsquo;s leading political force&rdquo; despite the challenges of recent years. &ldquo;Relying on this result, we can ensure stable development of our state,&rdquo; he said.        

Jubilant opposition leaders said the vote heralded a new era of shared government.        

&ldquo;The country is interested in thinking about the future, and the future will now look completely different,&rdquo; said Gennadi A. Zyuganov, the leader of the Communist Party. &ldquo;I suggest that our leaders sit down and discuss all the details,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;Otherwise, the situation will deteriorate, against the background of the enormous distrust of citizens to the course they have set.&rdquo;        

Many discontented voters said their main goal was to send a message of opposition in one of three ways: by voting for any party but United Russia; spoiling the ballot by marking every box and scrawling political messages; or by boycotting the election.        

&ldquo;Today, I am not voting for someone but against someone, because there is no one appealing to vote for,&rdquo; said Sergei Tarakanov, 62, who wore a leather coat and porkpie hat, in the light snow outside a school in central Moscow where he cast his ballot. &ldquo;So, I am a protest voter. Today, I am voting against the party of thieves and swindlers.&rdquo;        

The election also seemed to mark a portentous new chapter in Russian cyberpolitics. Throughout the election voters used cellphones to record video of heavy-handed politicking, including attempts at bribery, campaign law violations and other manipulation, which they quickly distributed on the Web. There were also several attacks on political Web sites on Sunday.        
Reporting was contributed by Andrew Kramer, Michael Schwirtz, Olga Slobodchikova, Glenn Kates, Sophia Kishkovsky, Nikolay Khalip and Viktor Klimenko.
