
BAGHDAD &mdash; The American Embassy in Baghdad has placed sharp new restrictions on how government workers can travel inside the walled-off International Zone, citing serious threats of kidnapping and terrorist attacks across Iraq and near the embassy&rsquo;s own doorstep.        

In a statement posted to its Web site on Saturday, the embassy said it had &ldquo;severely restricted&rdquo; movement through the International Zone, also known as the Green Zone, and had increased security. To go to a nearby shop, restaurant or government office in the area, embassy employees must now be accompanied by security guards.        

American and Iraqi officials have been bracing for insurgent violence as the last American troops turn over their few remaining bases and leave Iraq. A vestigial presence will remain to guard the embassy, supplemented by thousands of security contractors here and at diplomatic outposts.        

American officials did not provide other details on the threats.        

The embassy in Baghdad regularly warns American travelers and citizens of kidnapping threats, and the risk of terrorist attacks on trade fairs or at public demonstrations, a constant shadow over life in a place where about 200 Iraqi civilians are killed every month.        

But the announcement of tightened security measures is more unusual, coming less than a week after a suicide bomber managed to bring explosives into the International Zone and set off a bomb just outside the gates of Parliament. Iraqi officials called the blast a botched assassination attempt against either the speaker of Parliament or Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki.        

Few places in Baghdad are as heavily guarded as the International Zone, whose boundaries are marked by the Tigris River and miles of gray concrete barriers. Each of the embassies and government compounds inside are like Russian nesting dolls, set at the center of concentric rings of steel doors and blast walls.        

Until recently, one of the greatest threats in the zone has come from inaccurate but potentially deadly rockets and mortars fired by Shiite militia members hoping to hit the American Embassy or Iraqi government offices.        

On Sunday, an improvised bomb exploded near an Iraqi Army patrol in the town of Abu Ghraib, just west of Baghdad, killing one soldier and wounding three others. In northern Iraq, a colonel in Iraq&rsquo;s security forces was assassinated by insurgents near Mosul as he returned to his unit from vacation, security officials said.        
An Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Mosul.
