
PARIS &mdash; Seven months after artillery fire from United Nations and French troops drove him from his fortified compound, Laurent Gbagbo, the former president of Ivory Coast, appeared in public for the first time on Monday, as he faced courtroom cameras and a panel of international judges in The Hague.        

Dressed in dark clothes, bought hastily over the weekend by his lawyers, Mr. Gbagbo sounded subdued and waived his right to hear the prosecutor&rsquo;s accusations read out to him.        

Mr. Gbagbo, who pushed his country into civil war after refusing to accept his defeat in a election last year, was brought to the International Criminal Court six days ago to face charges of crimes against humanity.        

More than 3,000 people died, Human Rights Watch has said, as a result of Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s efforts to stay in power, many killed by the former president&rsquo;s security forces, and others in massacres perpetrated by forces that backed Alassane Ouattara, the widely recognized winner of the election.        

On Monday, the former strongman, who had held on to power in Ivory Coast for a decade, was still exhausted and somewhat dazed, according to his lawyers.        

During the short hearing, Mr. Gbagbo, 66, complained of several ailments and said that his captors had lied to him when he was unexpectedly whisked off to the airport in Korhogo, a small town in northern Ivory Coast where he had been under house arrest for seven months. He had been taken to a local court in Korhogo, ostensibly for a hearing on a charge of embezzlement, but proceedings were interrupted suddenly when an international arrest warrant for Mr. Gbagbo was served.        

&ldquo;They did not have the courage to inform him what was happening, because they were violating the rules,&rdquo; said Emmanuel Altit, one of his lawyers.        

Mr. Altit said that Mr. Gbagbo had told him he was amazed to suddenly find himself on his way to The Hague, in The Netherlands, on the same official plane he had used when he was president. &ldquo;That was a very strange sensation,&rdquo; Mr. Altit said Mr. Gbagbo had told him.        

Mr. Gbagbo was weak and had difficulty walking, Mr. Altit said, because he had been strictly confined to a small space in Korhogo, without a chance to move around and without daylight or medical care.        

Mr. Gbagbo is expected to spend months in a jail cell on the outskirts of The Hague, where detainees from several other African nations await criminal proceedings. If the charges against him are approved by the international judges, his trial could begin in about a year.        

The ruse surrounding Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s departure, reports said, were disturbing for his supporters &mdash; he received 46 percent of the vote in the election last year &mdash; but for Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s loyalists, the sight of the former dictator in the dock, was justified.        

Ivory Coast has moved forward without Mr. Gbagbo, international analysts say. Mr. Ouattara has been sworn in as president and the economy of what was once West Africa&rsquo;s star performer is &ldquo;recovering quickly,&rdquo; according to the International Monetary Fund. Ivory Coast is the world&rsquo;s largest exporter of cocoa, the raw material of chocolate. Changes intended to assist small producers in the battered cocoa sector are under way.        

In addition, a South Africa-style truth commission has been established to explore the country&rsquo;s decade of unrest. Abidjan, the economic capital, has been cleared of the mounds of trash under which it was buried in Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s final months in power.        

Yet echoes of its disturbed recent past suggest that the progress has been uneven. Three opposition journalists were recently arrested for publishing a report criticizing the Ouattara government for lavish spending on ministers. Human Rights Watch criticized the government last week for its failure to prosecute pro-Ouattara commanders accused of committed atrocities during the post-election fighting, and, in fact, for promoting them to higher ranks in some cases.        

Mr. Ouattara has promised that crimes committed on all sides would be pursued, but so far nobody on his side has been prosecuted, the rights organization noted. The militia leaders who helped force Mr. Gbagbo out and bring Mr. Ouattara to power still wield considerable muscle themselves. And reconciliation is still a long way off: his former political party is boycotting national legislative elections next week.        
Marlise Simons reported from Paris and Adam Nossiter from Kinshasa, Congo.
