
JOHANNESBURG &mdash; An advocacy organization that helped to establish an international certification program to prevent the sale of so-called blood diamonds withdrew from the coalition on Monday, saying the effort was no longer effective.        

The organization, Global Witness, is the first advocacy group to leave the program, known as the Kimberley Process, which was set up in 2003 because conflicts in Angola and Sierra Leone were being fueled by diamond sales. Global Witness had expressed concerns about how the Kimberley Process was operating for some time; it said the final straw was the decision last month to allow Zimbabwe to export diamonds from the Marange fields, where there have been reports of widespread human rights abuses by government security forces.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s the most egregious situation that we&rsquo;ve seen since the Kimberley Process was launched, where diamonds have been fueling violence and human rights violations,&rdquo; said Annie Dunnebacke, the senior campaigner for Global Witness, &ldquo;and the Kimberley has really failed to deal with that effectively.&rdquo;        

More than 70 countries, including the United States, have signed the Kimberley Process agreement to adhere to United Nations-backed safeguards on trade in rough diamonds.        

Under the agreement, all rough diamonds that cross the member nations&rsquo; borders must have certificates of legitimate origin and must be bound to or from another member nation.        

While the ultimate decision-making of the Kimberley Process is in the hands of the countries, diamond industry groups and advocacy groups serve as observers; they take part in compliance missions to mining sites, participate in official meetings and contribute to reports and decisions.        

The advocacy groups have complained for years that member countries lacked the political will to prevent one another from breaking the rules, and that the diamond industry was using the process as an excuse for turning a blind eye.        

Many traders and dealers are &ldquo;hiding behind the Kimberley Process,&rdquo; Ms. Dunnebacke said, and do not check on the actual sources of the diamonds they handle.        

&ldquo;The industry taking responsibility and acting on cleaning up the diamond supply chain is really essential here,&rdquo; she added. &ldquo;They&rsquo;ve just been saying, &lsquo;We have the Kimberley Process for diamonds, so that&rsquo;s that &mdash; we&rsquo;ve solved the problem of blood diamonds.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

Some within the Kimberley Process say it needs an overhaul. Currently, diamonds are only classified as &ldquo;conflict diamonds&rdquo; when the violence surrounding them is fueled by rebel groups, not when governments are responsible, as many human rights activists argue is the case in Zimbabwe.        

Farai Maguwu, the director of the Center for Research and Development, based in Zimbabwe, which is also a member of the Kimberley Process, said that while he believed Global Witness&rsquo;s withdrawal would not bring down the whole system, it was &ldquo;a very big blow.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The Kimberley Process will never be the same,&rdquo; Mr. Maguwu said. &ldquo;A very influential member of the Kimberley Process has cast a vote of no confidence.&rdquo;        

He said he did not foresee a wider exodus, though his group and others share many of Global Witness&rsquo;s concerns.        

&ldquo;We are simply trying to redefine our relationship with the Kimberley Process and see what is possible to be delivered by the Kimberley Process and what is not possible,&rdquo; Mr. Maguwu said. &ldquo;We feel that our presence within the Kimberley Process is still making some impact, though we are not getting everything that we want.&rdquo;        

The rotating chairmanship of the Kimberley Process is held by Congo. A man who answered one phone number for Congo&rsquo;s representatives to the process said he could not comment; calls to the delegation&rsquo;s other numbers were not answered on Monday. The chairmanship will pass to the United States on Jan. 1.        

Michael Mann, a spokesman for Catherine Ashton, the European Union&rsquo;s high representative for foreign affairs and security policy, wrote in an e-mail on Monday that the Kimberley Process &ldquo;may not be a perfect instrument, but it is the best we have, and therefore all parties, including civil society, should work to make it effective.&rdquo;        

Mr. Mann added, &ldquo;Abandoning it doesn&rsquo;t help achieve that common goal.&rdquo;        
