
Alarmed by the possibility of new Western penalties that could abruptly reduce or even halt its oil exports, Iran issued a warning on Monday that crude oil prices could more than double to $250 a barrel if such sanctions were given serious consideration.        

The warning, issued by the Foreign Ministry, appeared to be part of an attempt by Iran to intimidate its adversaries as tensions grow. Western nations stepped up their efforts to isolate Iran diplomatically after mobs stormed and vandalized Britain&rsquo;s diplomatic facilities in Tehran less than a week ago, evoking stark images of the United States Embassy takeover after the 1979 Islamic Revolution. The assault was widely criticized, even by some of Iran&rsquo;s friends.        

Despite the Iranian warning, oil prices were little changed by the end of the day Monday.        

Iranian leaders are increasingly concerned that oil sales, Iran&rsquo;s main source of income, are now at risk in ways that they were able to avoid in earlier rounds of Western sanctions. Those sanctions were imposed to press Iran, so far unsuccessfully, to halt its suspect nuclear program.        

Iran is the third-largest exporter of oil, after Saudi Arabia and Russia. Its biggest customers &mdash;China, the European Union, India, Japan, and South Korea &mdash; together account for more than three-quarters of total Iranian oil exports, according to an analysis published by the Energy Information Administration in the United States. Reduced orders from just one of those customers could be disruptive for Iran, where the economy is already suffering from the accumulated effects of other sanctions.        

After the assault on the British Embassy, European Union ministers said they would give serious consideration to an oil embargo at a meeting in January, and the United States Senate voted 100 to 0 for legislation that would penalize any foreign bank that does business with Iran&rsquo;s central bank.        

The Senate measure, meant to use access to the United States market as leverage in isolating Iran, is not yet law and could be modified. But analysts said that such a measure, if enforced, could wreak havoc on Iran&rsquo;s oil industry, because the central bank is the main conduit for receipts from oil sales.        

&ldquo;At some point, sanctions become an act of war,&rdquo; said Vali Nasr, a professor at Tufts University and an expert on Iranian affairs. &ldquo;If you cut Iran out of the oil market, this is no longer economic pressure.&rdquo;        

The situation has been heating up since the International Atomic Energy Agency, the monitoring arm of the United Nations, issued a report on Nov. 8 that said Iran may be actively developing a nuclear weapon and a missile delivery system. Iran, which has always asserted that its nuclear program is strictly for peaceful purposes, denounced the report as a fabrication created under pressure from its Western enemies.        

The United States, Canada and their European allies imposed new sanctions on Iran a few weeks after the United Nations report. But those measures were meant to limit Iran&rsquo;s access to the international financial system and to penalize its petrochemical and oil products industries, not to affect exports of crude oil.        

Iran&rsquo;s warning about blocking its oil exports was issued by Ramin Mehmanparast, a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry, in an interview with Sharq, a Persian-language daily, and was transmitted by the semiofficial Fars News Agency.        

&ldquo;As soon as such an issue is raised seriously, the oil price would soar to above $250 a barrel,&rdquo; Mr. Mehmanparast was quoted as saying. &ldquo;I do not think the situation in the world and especially in the West today is adequately prepared to raise such discussions.&rdquo;        

Oil prices rose on the news but ended the day barely changed. The price of the benchmark grade of American crude oil closed at $100.99 on the New York Mercantile Exchange, up from $100.96 on Friday.        

In a separate dispatch from the World Petroleum Congress meeting under way in Doha, Qatar, Fars News quoted the oil minister of India, S. Jaipal Reddy, as reassuring Iran that India would remain a faithful buyer of Iranian oil. The dispatch apparently was intended to give the impression that India, at least, would not be dissuaded by new Western sanctions. Other news reports from Doha, however, quoted Mr. Reddy as saying India was also looking for new sources of supply.        

Another prospective threat to Iran&rsquo;s customers came from Seoul, South Korea, where a senior American diplomat, Robert J. Einhorn, urged the government to suspend imports of Iranian petrochemicals. The Foreign Ministry said it was reviewing the request.        

Mr. Einhorn, who is the State Department&rsquo;s special adviser for nonproliferation and arms control, said at a news conference that &ldquo;the situation in Iran has become more and more worrisome over recent months.&rdquo;        

Without a diplomatic solution in the standoff, Mr. Einhorn said, &ldquo;pressures will grow for a much stronger kind of action.&rdquo;        

Abbas Milani, the director of Iranian studies at Stanford University, said he thought Iran&rsquo;s Islamic hierarchy may have miscalculated the strong global reaction to the British Embassy assault, which most Iran experts have said was done with the explicit approval of Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, the supreme leader. Now, Mr. Milani said, the momentum for sanctions aimed at oil, Iran&rsquo;s critical export, presents a new threat.        

&ldquo;They thought they could get away with it, by firing a shot across the bow,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It turned out to be much more costly.&rdquo;        
Artin Afkhami contributed reporting from Boston, and Choe Sang-Hun from Seoul, South Korea.
