
MOSCOW &mdash; Vladimir V. Putin was not the subject of Sunday&rsquo;s bruising vote in Russia, but you would not have known it from watching him when the early results came in. He looked like someone who has just received very bad news, and stumbled his way through a speech to his supporters, barely forcing a smile before stepping off the podium.        

United Russia&rsquo;s loss of 77 parliamentary seats has confirmed, for anyone who doubted it, that some Russian voters are cooling toward Mr. Putin&rsquo;s government. It comes as Mr. Putin begins his own three-month campaign to return to the presidency &mdash; a decision he revealed in September, with the expectation that voters would be reassured, easing the path to re-election for both United Russia and himself.        

That expectation was wrong, and on the heels of United Russia&rsquo;s poor showing, some analysts were entertaining a question that would have sounded bizarre two years ago: Will Mr. Putin win in the first round, or be forced into a runoff?        

&ldquo;I think that yesterday, there was a line drawn between the Putin of the past, with his great successes, and the Putin in the future,&rdquo; said Nikolai Petrov, a political analyst at the Carnegie Moscow Center. &ldquo;No longer is Putin capable of winning in the presidential election just by saying general words about justice and reminding people of his achievements when he was president. He should explain why exactly he is coming back to office and what his plans are.&rdquo;        

On Monday night, several thousand people gathered in a light rain on a Moscow boulevard, chanting &ldquo;Russia Without Putin&rdquo; and brandishing signs that read, &ldquo;These elections are a farce!&rdquo; In interviews, many participants said it was the first time they had taken part in a protest. Tatyana Sergina, 27, a bank employee who was wrapped in a down jacket, said her goal was to keep Mr. Putin from winning in the March election, forcing him into a runoff with &ldquo;a strong opponent.&rdquo;        

The presidential campaign may be easier than the parliamentary one was. Voters have come to identify United Russia with unresponsive, corrupt apparatchiks they encounter in their daily lives &mdash; but they tend not to blame Mr. Putin for the failures of other officials.        

Mr. Putin&rsquo;s approval ratings have been declining, but they remain high by international standards, at above 60 percent, according to the independent Levada Center. He has a particularly ardent following among female voters over 40, said Gleb O. Pavlovsky, a political consultant who, until recently, worked closely with the Kremlin.        

Mr. Putin is also not likely to face a significant challenge, since candidates cannot be registered without the assent of Kremlin gatekeepers. His opponents may be familiar foils from his previous races in 2000 and 2004 &mdash; the ultranationalist Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the Communist Gennadi A. Zyuganov and Sergei M. Mironov, who openly endorsed Mr. Putin when the two men last ran against each other. Independent candidates can enter the race, but only if the Central Election Commission certifies the signatures of two million voters.        

Mr. Putin&rsquo;s supporters say he will be able to disassociate himself from the damage United Russia has suffered.        

&ldquo;Putin is a consolidating figure, and I know many people who don&rsquo;t like United Russia and like Putin,&rdquo; said Robert Shlegel, a United Russia deputy. &ldquo;He is a significant figure in Russia, and above politics. Russia is united around its leader. This is a tradition.&rdquo;        

Still, Sunday&rsquo;s gains had left opposition leaders emboldened to criticize Mr. Putin. Late on Sunday night, during an ebullient appearance on a federal television channel, Mr. Zyuganov complained that &ldquo;our people have been ruled for 10 years by the same cooperative, the one from St. Petersburg,&rdquo; the prime minister&rsquo;s hometown. At a news conference on Monday, another Communist continued in the same vein.        

&ldquo;Citizens have lost confidence in the social and economic course conducted in this country,&rdquo; said Ivan I. Melnikov, first deputy secretary of the party&rsquo;s central committee. &ldquo;Mr. Putin is one of the men who guided us on this path. For this reason alone, he will have colossal problems in the coming election campaign.&rdquo;        
Michael Schwirtz and Andrew E. Kramer contributed reporting.
