
BAGHDAD &mdash; Bomb blasts ripped into throngs of religious pilgrims on Monday as they streamed through Iraq&rsquo;s streets to honor one of the most sacred holidays of Shiite Islam, in what has become almost an annual spilling of blood and stirring of sectarian anger.        

At least 20 people &mdash; many of them women and children &mdash; were killed in three bomb blasts about 50 miles south of Baghdad, security officials and hospital officials said. Dozens more were injured.        

In the capital, another three explosions in heavily Shiite neighborhoods left three people dead and nearly 20 wounded, police officials said.        

The attacks came as hundreds of thousands of worshipers flocked to the holy city of Karbala to celebrate Ashura, which commemorates the death of a foundational figure in Shiite Islam more than 1,000 years ago.        

The holiday, which was suppressed under Saddam Hussein, has become a touchstone of sectarian identity for Iraq&rsquo;s Shiite majority since the American invasion.        

Although attacks on worshipers are not new, the blasts on Monday came at an especially sensitive time for Iraq, less than a month before the last United States forces are to leave the country. Only a few military bases remain in American hands, and convoys carrying some of the remaining 10,000 troops head to the Kuwaiti border every day.        

On Monday night, a militant group with ties to Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s ousted regime threatened in an Internet video to strike at American officials who stay in Iraq after the Dec. 31 troop withdrawal deadline. In Iraqi military uniforms, their faces covered by scarves, three men from the Naqshbandia Order militant group called the continuing American civilian presence &ldquo;nothing but a new form of occupation.&rdquo;        

The United States is increasing the size of its embassy in Iraq and is opening consulates in the north and south.        

The rate of violence in Iraq has fallen significantly, but militants still frequently kill government officials, police officers and soldiers, and try to inflame sectarian divisions by attacking religious targets like pilgrims and clerics.        

Around 4:30 p.m. Monday, a car bomb in Babil Province exploded near a mosque that is closely associated with Iraq&rsquo;s leading Shiite cleric, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani. The blast killed 17 people, spraying pieces of automobile across the road and folding metal into unrecognizable bits of origami. The provincial governor quickly blamed remnants of the Baath Party and Al Qaeda in Iraq. No group claimed responsibility, but the Web site for Al Qaeda in Iraq cheered news of the attacks.        

Thirty minutes after the car bombing, two explosions in central Hilla, the provincial capital of Babil, killed an additional three people.        

After the car bombing, a 45-year-old pilgrim who gave his name as Abu Ali was looking for a boy who gave him candy moments before the blast. He said he had seen maimed children and scattered body parts, but the boy was nowhere to be found.        

&ldquo;I have cried blood, not tears,&rdquo; he said.        
An Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Hilla, Iraq.
