
TAIZ, Yemen &mdash; The cease-fire lasted a day.        

On Monday morning, barely 24 hours after officials here said they had brokered an agreement to stop clashes between the military and armed tribesman allied with antigovernment protesters, fresh fighting left at least two people dead, including a 20-year-old woman who friends said was shot by a pro-government sniper.        

Witnesses said the violence started after a government soldier fired into a knot of peaceful demonstrators.        

The fighting reignited clashes that shook this southwestern Yemeni city for three days last week, leaving at least 18 people dead. As night fell, tracer rounds lit the sky and buildings on the edge of the city burned.        

The violence also threatened to derail progress on a recent agreement by the president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, who has ruled Yemen for 33 years, to hand over power to his deputy.        

Yemeni officials are supposed to announce a new unity government this week, possibly as soon as Tuesday, consisting of cabinet ministers evenly divided between the political opposition and Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s governing party.        

In Taiz, antigovernment activists wondered whether the new violence represented an attempt by Mr. Saleh, facing the surest sign that his power was fading, to undermine the agreement.        

The government has responded with force to months of protests in Taiz, a stronghold of antigovernment sentiment. After government troops razed a protester encampment in May and attacked a hospital, killing at least 12 people, armed tribesmen joined the fight, attacking government buildings and military forces.        

It was unclear whether the shooting that set off the violence on Monday was planned.        

Protesters said during one of their regular marches on Monday morning that they were stopped by uniformed government troops at the edge of Al Haseb, a neighborhood that was the scene of pitched battles last week. Under the cease-fire agreement, many of the armed tribesmen in the area had withdrawn on Sunday, according to the governor of Taiz Province.        

None of the marchers were armed, protesters said.        

Seemingly without provocation, at least one of the soldiers fired on the crowd, according to a Yemeni journalist who attended the protest and said that armed tribesmen later joined the fight. Gunmen in buildings above also opened fire, several protesters said, killing the 20-year-old student, Ruwaya al-Shaybani, who friends said had been a regular at the protests here, and injuring at least seven others.        

A doctor who examined her body said Ms. Shaybani had been shot through the chest.        

&ldquo;Cease-fire?&rdquo; yelled one protester amid the chaos at Al Rawdah hospital. &ldquo;What cease-fire?&rdquo;        

At the hospital, men with fresh bullet wounds were placed on beds next to other protesters wounded in violence last month. Ms. Shaybani&rsquo;s body was laid on the floor in the basement, next to industrial kitchen freezers that functioned as a makeshift morgue.        

The afternoon was quiet, but by about 9 p.m., the sounds of shelling and machine gun fire could be heard in several neighborhoods. Local medical officials said at least one more person was killed when a bus came under fire.        
