
KINSHASA, Congo &mdash; Sacks of newly arrived ballots lay piled in the mud at decrepit fairgrounds at the edge of town on Monday, a day before officials here were supposed to declare a winner in this country&rsquo;s presidential election &mdash; and nearly a week after the vote.        

Around the bags were plastic boxes and more sacks stuffed to overflowing with more ballots. Standing in the mud around the mass of ballots, Congolese electoral observers argued angrily with election officials, insisting that plans to toss out the new ballots were undemocratic.        

Congo&rsquo;s protracted electoral aftermath is settling into a volatile mix of accusation and counteraccusation, warnings, tension and outright panic. Elections mean violence in this volatile Central African behemoth of a nation; already at least 18 people have been killed. At the inner-city port on Monday, well-off families packed the caged waiting area for water taxis to ferry them west across the broad river to peaceful Brazzaville in neighboring Congo Republic. Sunday night the police used tear gas and live ammunition to chase down opposition supporters in Kinshasa, a city of 10 million, and similar episodes were reported in the interior. Much worse is feared once the winner is announced.        

Already, large-scale fraud is the election verdict of at least one observer from an international organization; others are tiptoeing gently around the word. Meanwhile, Tuesday&rsquo;s long-scheduled announcement may be postponed, officials warned. Vehicles packed with heavily-outfitted riot police patrolled the broad boulevards on Monday, even as the city&rsquo;s frenetic commercial bustle seemed only slightly abated by the prospect of trouble.        

The temperature is rising here in Congo, a former Belgian colony nearly four times the size of France, tormented by warring militias and mass rapes in the east and drearily accustomed to long spasms of political violence; elections in 2006 produced days of armed confrontation. And the stakes are high as the levers of power mean control over one of the planet&rsquo;s greatest concentrations of mineral wealth.        

The leading opposition candidate told his supporters over the weekend to &ldquo;stay vigilant&rdquo;; the fear is that he will call them to the streets to contest results he has already denounced &mdash; a possibility &ldquo;if necessary,&rdquo; the candidate, &Eacute;tienne Tshisekedi, warned Saturday, without elaborating.        

The electoral commission, dominated by supporters of the incumbent, Joseph Kabila, has been making regular preliminary vote-count pronouncements showing him in the lead. But so far neither these announcements nor the vote-counting process has inspired confidence in electoral observers. In a vast unlit hangar at the fairgrounds, electoral workers toiled Monday in thick heat and humidity, counting ballots from Kinshasa. They were not halfway done by the evening.        

The well-dressed families at Ngobila Beach, hoping for a boat to Brazzaville, were not waiting for the end. &ldquo;We would have been trapped,&rdquo; said Esther Tshamala, sitting with her young daughter, and explaining that she lives in the city center. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s where they attacked the last time. And they don&rsquo;t protect people when there are attacks like that.&rdquo;        

Jolie Masia brushed aside a question about why she and other families with young children were there. &ldquo;Can&rsquo;t you see with your own eyes?&rdquo; she asked. And she did not want to speculate on what the projected announcement might bring, adding, &ldquo;I&rsquo;m so frightened, I can&rsquo;t even say.&rdquo;        

The electoral commission is giving provincial totals, omitting more localized breakdowns. Observers say it is thus impossible to double-check the results being announced. Additionally, electoral officials had been setting aside, with little explanation, vote summaries from Kinshasa, a bastion of support for Mr. Tshisekedi; that practice appeared to have slowed after international observers vigorously protested.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;We&rsquo;re in the presence of a large-scale manipulation of numbers,&rdquo; said Pascale Kambale of the Open Society Initiative for West Africa, an organization that receives support from the billionaire George Soros. &ldquo;In 2006 they published by centers of vote, so you could verify. Now, no one can verify. So, we&rsquo;re confronting a fraudulent manipulation.&rdquo; In addition, a government shutdown of text messaging, in a country with shaky Internet service, is hindering the communication of vote totals, Mr. Kambale said.        

On Monday the European Union observer mission called on the electoral commission to publish more detailed results, to &ldquo;guarantee the support&rdquo; of the electorate for the eventual announcement.        

Other election observers do not use the word fraud but nonetheless express deep concern about how ballots are being handled. &ldquo;The chain of custody is being broken, materials are just thrown into the back of trucks, there&rsquo;s evidence of extremely large numbers of envelopes with vote-tally sheets that have been opened,&rdquo; said David Pottie of the Carter Center, the Atlanta-based organization founded by former President Jimmy Carter to promote human rights. &ldquo;There are inconsistencies in the application of procedures &mdash; in some cases these are extremely serious, on a massive scale,&rdquo; Mr. Pottie said.        

Apart from an occasional show of force, the government has been largely silent about problems in the vote counting, as have been the foreign embassies here. Mr. Tshisekedi is popular on the streets of Kinshasa but not in foreign ministries. South African observers have already congratulated Congo for a successful vote, but that view appears shared by few outside Africa.        

At the electoral commission, the vice president &mdash; one of the members not tied to Mr. Kabila &mdash; rejected the suggestions of fraud.        

&ldquo;Fraud means that there is a desire to cheat,&rdquo; said the vice president, Jacques Djoli Eseng&rsquo;Ekeli. &ldquo;What I think is going on are irregularities of organization and logistics. This election is no more than a reflection of the difficulties of the state.&rdquo;        
