
SANA, Yemen &mdash; Thousands of pro- and anti-government demonstrators held peaceful protests in this impoverished capital on Thursday, playing out themes that have rocked nations across the Arab world as autocratic leaders struggle to press back the roaring demands of movements hungry for democracy, accountability and the rule of law.        

Yemen&rsquo;s tribal culture and its heavily armed population raised fears of violence as events here seemed to unfold at a consolidated pace, with all sides trying to draw lessons from popular uprisings in Tunisia and then Egypt. But the events in the city appeared to end peacefully one day after the president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, went on television to offer his own concession to large opposition protests. He promised that he would not run &mdash; and that his son would also not run &mdash; when his term expired in 2013.        

He also saw to it that the capital was full of supporters when the opposition arrived. &ldquo;I came here today to take part in the rally against extremism and to promote democracy,&rdquo; said Sadiq al-Qadoos, a pro-government demonstrator joined by thousands who were camped in Sana&rsquo;s Tahrir Square, or Liberation Square, for the last two days. &ldquo;And to show I am against chaos.&rdquo;        

The events in Yemen, a sliver of a nation at the foot of the Arabian Peninsula, were among the many fires racing across a region that has long been a bastion of autocratic rule. The flames licked across the landscape of Algeria, too, a former French colony in North Africa ruled by a clique of the elite: a president, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, the military, businessmen and a bureaucracy. The president announced plans to lift a state of emergency imposed in 1992, initially to combat terrorism but often used, critics contend, to silence political opposition. He did not say when it would be lifted, but in a meeting with cabinet ministers he also called for state-controlled television to give more of a voice to all political parties.        

His announcement came with a major opposition demonstration planned for the middle of the month.        

The day&rsquo;s events were both driven by &mdash; and helped propel &mdash; a popular movement for change that drew its inspiration from the revolt in Tunisia that forced the president to flee into exile. Nationwide, crowds of protesters turned to the streets in seven provinces, and while most were peaceful, one person was killed and seven were wounded in clashes between demonstrators and the police in the southern port city of Aden.        

Opposition protesters wore pink bandannas in Sana, a sign of what has become known as the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia. The opposition  had hoped to demonstrate in Tahrir Square but had to move to the campus of Sana University. Still, the excited crowds chanted, &ldquo;The people want to topple the regime.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We need real reforms, otherwise there will be a revolution,&rdquo; said Watha Thaha, 23, a student at Sana University who was wearing a pink bandanna and a scarf with the Palestinian flag.        

The day&rsquo;s events in Yemen suggested that all sides had carefully watched and tried to learn from the vicious battle taking place in Egypt to control the course of change. Yemen&rsquo;s opposition tried to pick up momentum, calling for a &ldquo;day of rage&rdquo; and pressing for nationwide participation, while the president and his supporters sought to avoid what they might have perceived as the missteps of Egypt&rsquo;s president, Hosni Mubarak, and his ruling party. The government supporters came into central Sana in droves from outside the city, encouraged by their tribal chiefs and the president, in what proved an effective hedge against the opposition call for protests.        

&ldquo;In an attempt to avoid the mistakes made by Mubarak by responding too little too late, the Yemeni government sought to try to get out ahead of the opposition,&rdquo; said Christopher Boucek, a Middle East associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.        

But as Mr. Boucek pointed out, events are so fluid, reactions so unpredictable and societies so different, it appeared that Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s effort might have backfired by emboldening the opposition. &ldquo;While Saleh&rsquo;s announcement was an effort to reduce tensions in advance of Thursday&rsquo;s scheduled protests, it appears to have had the opposite effect,&rdquo; he said, noting the size and energy of the opposition crowd.        

But a demonstration that many feared would explode into violence tapered off on a peaceful note around lunchtime. Opposition protesters went on their way promising to return every Thursday until their demands were met.        

&ldquo;This requires the opposition to be prepared to continue with its demands and political rallies,&rdquo; said Yayha al-Shami, a member of the political bureau of the opposition Socialist Party.        

As with President Bouteflika in Algeria, while Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s promise was well received, skepticism remained. Some wondered if his statement was strategic, intended to siphon vigor from the anti-government protests. A week earlier the opposition staged the largest protests against Mr. Saleh, who has ruled for 32 years. He promised in 2005 not to run again, but then reneged and secured another term.        
Laura Kasinof reported from Sana, and Michael Slackman from Berlin. Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon, and Muhammad al-Ahmadi from Sana.
