
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of the Shiite militant group Hezbollah, made a rare public appearance on Tuesday in Beirut, reiterating his support for Syria&rsquo;s government and saying that his group was better trained and armed than ever.        

&ldquo;I want to deliver a message that is not new, but final and conclusive to all those who are conspiring and hoping and betting on change,&rdquo; Mr. Nasrallah said. &ldquo;This resistance in Lebanon will survive, and you will not be able to defeat it through your psychological, media, political and intelligence wars.&rdquo;        

Hezbollah, the single most powerful group in Lebanon, has faced a growing challenge amid the eight months of tumult in Syria. Syria&rsquo;s government, alongside Iran&rsquo;s, remains Hezbollah&rsquo;s most strategic ally.        

Mr. Nasrallah&rsquo;s support for President Bashar al-Assad of Syria has damaged Hezbollah&rsquo;s standing among protesters in Syria. Opponents of Hezbollah in Lebanon have become bolder amid predictions that the decades of rule by the Assad family may be coming to an end.        

Mr. Nasrallah said his appearance was meant to send a clear message to those &ldquo;who believe they can threaten us.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We will never let go of our arms,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Our numbers are increasing day after day, and we are getting better and our training is becoming better and we are becoming more confident in our future and more armed. And if someone is betting that our weapons are rusting, we tell them that every weapon that rusts is replaced.&rdquo;        

For weeks, Hezbollah seemed less strident in its public support for Mr. Assad, but Mr. Nasrallah&rsquo;s statements on Tuesday were unambiguous. He called Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government &ldquo;a resistance regime&rdquo; and lashed out at Mr. Assad&rsquo;s opponents, in particular an opposition group organized in Turkey, the Syrian National Council, accusing them of working with the United States and Israel to try to &ldquo;destroy Syria.&rdquo;        

He said the United States was seeking the ouster of Mr. Assad to make up for what he described as its loss in Iraq. American troops are to fully withdraw by Dec. 31 after nearly nine years of war.        

&ldquo;The American administration abandons its followers and allies at the first crossroad to search for its interests,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Our Arab and Islamic nations should know that the American administration is the enemy and the threat.&rdquo;        

Tuesday was Ashura, the holiest day on the Shiite Muslim calendar, and tens of thousands of the group&rsquo;s followers gathered in the southern suburbs of Beirut, a Hezbollah stronghold. Mr. Nasrallah spoke for a few minutes before disappearing and delivering the rest of the speech on a large screen. It was his first public appearance since July 2008, when five Lebanese prisoners were released by Israel.        

Television footage showed Mr. Nasrallah dressed in black and surrounded by armed guards. He made his way toward a stage as his supporters pushed and shoved one another to get a closer look of him. He appeared relaxed and even made a joke, telling his audience, &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t go away, I&rsquo;ll be right back on that screen,&rdquo; before he disappeared.        

Israeli officials and analysts did not read much significance into Mr. Nasrallah&rsquo;s brief public appearance, or view it as particularly threatening.        

&ldquo;It went largely unnoticed,&rdquo; said Yigal Palmor, the spokesman for Israel&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry. His response reflected a sense in Israel that Hezbollah was immersed in its own concerns about the upheaval in Syria and internal problems in Lebanon, and that it was not likely to initiate any imminent confrontation with Israel.        

Israel fought a 34-day war against Hezbollah in 2006, which many deemed a failure for Israel because Hezbollah maintained its ability to fire rockets to the end. But Israeli experts noted that the war had restored Israeli deterrence and brought relative quiet to Israel&rsquo;s northern border for more than five years.        
Isabel Kershner contributed reporting from Tel Aviv.
