
BEIJING &mdash; An Australian businessman whose business dealings with a state-owned Chinese company soured last year has been sentenced by a Chinese court to 13 years in prison on bribery and fraud charges, his lawyer and Australian officials said Tuesday.        

Two associates of the Chinese-born businessman, Matthew Ng, were also sentenced to 16 and 3.5 years in prison, Mr. Ng&rsquo;s lawyer, Chen Youxi, said in a telephone interview.        

The sentences, which Australian news reports called unusually harsh, were also totally unexpected. Mr. Chen said he had not attended Tuesday&rsquo;s hearing, in which prosecutors had been scheduled to present oral evidence in the case.        

Mr. Chen said Mr. Ng would appeal the verdict and sentence. &ldquo;My client is innocent,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The court does not have either enough evidence or legal basis for the sentence.&rdquo;        

The lawyer was quoted in an August interview calling the bribery charge &ldquo;ridiculous,&rdquo; noting that the payment in question was both publicly reported and taxed, and suggesting that his client had been framed.        

He declined comment on Tuesday, directing an interviewer instead to a Chinese-language Web site that presents a defense against the charges.        

Mr. Ng was detained in November 2010 amid a dispute between a travel company he founded, Et-China, and Chinese buyers led by Lingnan Group, a hotel and travel conglomerate owned by the Guangzhou municipal government.        

According to Et-China&rsquo;s Web site and news reports, Lingnan had earlier sold Et-China a controlling stake in a subsidiary, GZL, that runs Guangzhou&rsquo;s largest chain of travel agencies, for a reported $10 million.        

In June 2010, a Swiss firm, Kuoni Group, agreed to buy Et-China in a deal that valued the company at about $125 million &mdash; including a multifold profit on its stake in GZL. Lingnan officials then demanded to buy the GZL shares back at their original selling price, news reports state, but Mr. Ng refused.        

Between September and November 2010, Guangzhou authorities detained Mr. Ng; Et-China&rsquo;s chairman, Zheng Hong, and its accountant, Kitty Yang. Mr. Hong was sentenced to 16 years, and Ms. Yang to 3.5 years, at Tuesday&rsquo;s hearing.        

In sentencing Mr. Ng., the Guangzhou Intermediate Court ruled that he was guilty of embezzlement, bribery, corruption and falsifying records.        

Kuoni has since backed out of the purchase of Et-China.        

Australia&rsquo;s prime minister, Julia Gillard, expressed concern about the charges in April during a meeting with Prime Minister Wen Jiabao. Australian diplomats had raised questions about the case with top Communist Party officials in Guangzhou, and sought without success to open the trial to news coverage and move it to a larger courtroom.        

Mr. Ng&rsquo;s case is one of several involving Chinese-born Australians that some critics say underscore the risks confronting foreign business executives in a legal system controlled by the same Communist Party that controls governments and many corporations.        

Stern Hu, the Chinese-born Australian who negotiated iron-ore sales to Chinese steel mills for Australia&rsquo;s Rio Tinto Group, was sentenced to 10 years in prison on bribery and espionage charges in 2010 after an especially bruising round of negotiations.        

Another Chinese-born Australian, Charlotte Chou, has been in Guangzhou jails for two years after becoming embroiled in a business dispute involving an educational institute she had founded. Australian officials also are reported to have raised that case with Chinese authorities without results.        

An Australian Embassy official in Beijing did not return a call on Tuesday requesting comment.        
Mia Li contributed research.
