
Iran&rsquo;s foreign minister promised that Iranian protesters will not overrun and vandalize any more embassies in Tehran, the way they did Britain&rsquo;s diplomatic facilities in Tehran last week.        

&ldquo;This will not recur,&rdquo; the foreign minister Ali Akbar Salehi, said in an interview published Tuesday in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, a leading German newspaper. He called the pillaging of Britain&rsquo;s embassy and a residential compound on Nov. 30 &ldquo;unlawful actions.&rdquo;        

Mr. Salehi denied accusations by Britain and other countries that Iran&rsquo;s hierarchy approved the embassy assault. Asked why the police had not acted more forcefully to prevent or stop it, Mr. Salehi responded: &ldquo;What should they have done? Shoot?&rdquo;        

The assault, which evoked memories of the 1979 takeover of the United States Embassy after the Islamic revolution, has deepened Iran&rsquo;s diplomatic isolation over the past week, a development that Mr. Salehi&rsquo;s remarks in the interview appeared intended to counter.        

After the assault, Britain downgraded relations with Iran to the lowest level in more than 20 years, evacuating its diplomats from Iran, expelling Iranian diplomats from Britain and ordering Iran&rsquo;s embassy in London to shut down.&nbsp;        

The assault was criticized even by countries that have friendly ties to Iran. Several European countries, including Germany, recalled their ambassadors in protest.        

Reuters reported from Tehran on Monday that international schools there, including the French and German schools, had closed indefinitely, raising fears among some Iranians that foreigners were leaving the country in a further aftershock from the assault.        

It began as a street demonstration by thousands of Iranians to protest Britain&rsquo;s sanctions against Iran over its suspect nuclear program. But many of the demonstrators appeared to be members of the Basij militia, and the state-run media&nbsp; covered the assault with television cameras, suggesting that the government wielded a guiding hand.        

Mr. Salehi, who was in Saudi Arabia when the assault took place, said in the interview that &ldquo;I called my employees and urged the police chief to do everything, so that this stops as fast as possible.&rdquo;        

He also said that William Hague, the British foreign secretary, had telephoned him. &ldquo;We talked for half an hour, and I expressed to him my regret,&rdquo; Mr. Salehi said.&nbsp; But he also echoed the public statements of other Iranian officials, who said the protest reflected genuine anger at Britain for what they called Britain&rsquo;s long history of imperialist arrogance toward Iran.        

Mr. Salehi was in Bonn, Germany, on Monday, attending a conference on aid for Afghanistan; Mr. Hague was there as well. Asked why he had not used the opportunity to apologize personally, Mr. Salehi said: &ldquo;I already expressed my regret.&rdquo;        
