
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &ndash; An unexpected announcement that President Asif Ali Zardari has left Pakistan for a medical checkup in Dubai caused a swirl of wild rumors on Wednesday about his hold on power.        

Faratullah Babar, the spokesman for Mr. Zardari, said the president flew out of the country late Tuesday and that the medical checkup was of&nbsp; a &ldquo;routine nature and linked to a previously diagnosed cardiovascular condition&rdquo;.        

It was not clear when Mr. Zadrari planned to return to the capital Islamabad.        

Mr Babar said that before leaving the country, Mr. Zardari held meetings with Prime Minister Yusuf Raza Gilani and Farooq H. Naek, the chairman of the Senate.        

Mr. Naek assumes the role of a caretaker President in the absence of Mr.Zardari, according&nbsp; to the country&rsquo;s constitution.        

The Pakistan president&rsquo;s abrupt departure from Pakistan came against a backdrop of increased&nbsp; tensions straining the alliance with the United States. Pakistanis are furious over a NATO airstrike less than two weeks ago that killed 24 Pakistani soldiers along the Afghanistan border, where Pakistan-based militants base themselves. President Obama telephoned Mr. Zardari on Sunday to express condolences but that did little to assuage the anger, and Pakistan boycotted an international conference on Afghanistan&rsquo;s future in Germany on Monday.        

Mr. Zardari has been facing immense pressure from his political opponents and the military over a controversial memo that sought American help to rein in the powerful Pakistani military.        

Husain Haqqani, a close aide to Mr. Zardari and former ambassador to Washington, was forced to resign last month after accusations that he had orchestrated the memo, a charge the former ambassador denies vehemently.        

Mansoor Ijaz, a United States businessman of Pakistani origin who publicized the existence of the memo, said Mr. Haqqani had asked him to have it delivered to Adm. Mike Mullen, then the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in May.        

According to Mr. Ijaz, the memo asked for United States help in heading off a possible military-led coup and promised concessions in return.        

Opposition politicians allege that the memo was likely to have had the knowledge and approval of President&nbsp; Zardari. A spokesman for Mr. Zardari has denied any knowledge of the memo but the controversy surrounding the memo has caused a political storm in Pakistan, which was once a close American ally but which now has an increasingly tense relationship with the United States.        

Rumors about differences between Mr. Zardari and the country&rsquo;s powerful military generals have circulated here for as long as his tenure. Mr. Zardari was elected president in 2008.        

While Mr. Zardari has been credited as a shrewd and skilled politician, his economic policies and style of governance have led to widespread criticism, causing his popularity to decline.        

Mr. Zardari was planning to address a special mandatory session of the parliament soon, and his quiet and sudden trip to Dubai led to rumors that he had been asked to step down by the country&rsquo;s powerful military, which has been flexing its muscles recently.        

However, a senior official of the ruling&nbsp; Pakistan Peoples Party , who is also close to the Zardari family, dismissed the rumors about Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s tenuous hold on power.        

&ldquo;President Zardari is in Dubai along with his sisters,&rdquo; said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.        

&ldquo;He is not well. That&rsquo;s all.&rdquo;        

&nbsp;        
