
VILNIUS, Lithuania &mdash; The United States and two dozen other nations called for the adoption of a declaration of freedoms in cyberspace at a European security conference here on Tuesday, but the proposal stalled in the face of opposition from Russia and countries that view the Internet as a threat to their political systems.        

The draft declaration, circulated at the annual meeting of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, came only two days after parliamentary elections in Russia that included a crackdown on dissent before and after the vote, with computer attacks reported on Web sites of election observers and the news media.        

Despite the support of more than half of the organization&rsquo;s 56 member nations, including Canada and most of Europe, the proposal has no chance of being adopted because the organization acts only by consensus, allowing countries to wield a veto. Still, in the wake of the Russian elections in particular, it became a proxy for a broader debate within the organization over basic freedoms.        

&ldquo;We must recognize that rights exercised in cyberspace deserve as much protection as those exercised in real space,&rdquo; Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said in remarks to officials from the organization&rsquo;s member states, which also include Russia.        

&ldquo;Fundamental freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly, association and religion apply as much to a Twitter conversation and a gathering organized by N.G.O.&rsquo;s on Facebook as they do to a demonstration in a public square,&rdquo; she added, referring to nongovernmental organizations.        

For a second day, Mrs. Clinton sharply criticized Sunday&rsquo;s parliamentary elections in Russia, underscoring a new souring in relations already strained by disputes over missile defenses, conventional forces in Europe, Russia&rsquo;s support for Syria and Iran and other issues.        

The organization&rsquo;s election observer mission in Russia reported widespread electoral abuses, including pressure on some parties and local observers and outright ballot stuffing. While the organization did not pass judgment on the credibility of the vote, Mrs. Clinton did, saying it was &ldquo;neither free nor fair.&rdquo;        

Russia&rsquo;s foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, did not directly address the elections in his own remarks but generally accused the organization of imposing &ldquo;double standards&rdquo; by focusing on rights in some countries and losing sight of its core mission of promoting security.        

&ldquo;The established machinery of the O.S.C.E. is getting rusty,&rdquo; he said.        

While the Obama administration&rsquo;s strategy lacks the teeth of a punitive enforcement mechanism for countries that continue to abuse rights, it represented an important statement of strategy and values in American foreign policy. It was also very much in keeping with Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s focus as secretary on issues of women, children and others under-represented in politics, business and society.        

In Moscow, officials sharply rebuked her remarks and other international criticism. &ldquo;The issue of Russia&rsquo;s political system is not their business,&rdquo; President Dmitri A. Medvedev said, according to the news agency RIA Novosti. &ldquo;Soon, they will tell us how we should write our Constitution.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Clinton also criticized two other former Soviet republics: Belarus and Ukraine, also members of the O.S.C.E. The imprisonment of Ukraine&rsquo;s former prime minister, Yulia V. Tymoshenko, raised &ldquo;serious questions about political motivations,&rdquo; she said. Ukraine&rsquo;s foreign minister sat three seats away from her during her remarks.        

&ldquo;In Belarus, less than 40 kilometers away from here, human rights defenders face unremitting persecution,&rdquo; she said, noting that two presidential candidates, Mikhail Statkevich and Andrei Sannikov, remained in jail more than a year after they were arrested following the country&rsquo;s last presidential election.        

Mrs. Clinton met with six Belarussian human rights advocates here in Vilnius, including associates of Ales Byalyatski, a leader of the human rights group, Vyasna, who was sentenced last month to four and a half years in prison. His &ldquo;real crime, in the eyes of the state, was helping victims of state repression,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said in her speech.        

At least 50 Belarussians are being held on what the United States considers to be political crimes. Taciana Reviaka, who works for Vyasna, told Mrs. Clinton that many had no legal representation, while lawyers who assisted others had their licenses stripped. &ldquo;Basically we have a ban on the profession of law,&rdquo; Ms. Reviaka said.        

Nataliya Radzina, an editor of the pro-democracy Web site Charter 97, told Mrs. Clinton of her own arrest and beating, and of the 39 days she spent in jail after last year&rsquo;s fraudulent re-election of the country&rsquo;s president, Aleksandr G. Lukashenko. She has since fled the country and lives in Vilinus.        

&ldquo;Being in prison was hell for me,&rdquo; she said, adding, &ldquo;This dictatorship is not just dangerous for Belarus, but to all of Europe.&rdquo;        
An earlier version of this article misstated the name of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and misspelled the name of the news agency RIA Novosti. 
David M. Herszenhorn contributed reporting from Moscow.
