
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; A Pakistan-based extremist group claimed responsibility for a series of coordinated bombings aimed at Afghan Shiites on Tuesday, in what many feared was an attempt to further destabilize Afghanistan by adding a new dimension of strife to a country that, though battered by a decade of war, has been free of sectarian conflict.        

The attacks, among the war&rsquo;s deadliest, struck three Afghan cities &mdash; Kabul, Kandahar and Mazar-i-Sharif &mdash; almost simultaneously and killed at least 63 Shiite worshipers on Ashura, which marks the death of Shiite Islam&rsquo;s holiest martyr.        

Targeted strikes by Sunnis against the minority Shiites are alien to Afghanistan. So it was no surprise to Afghans when responsibility was claimed by a Sunni extremist group from Pakistan, where Sunnis and Shiites have been energetically killing one another for decades.        

The group, Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, had not previously claimed or carried out attacks in Afghanistan, however, and its emergence fueled suspicions that Al Qaeda, the Taliban or Pakistan&rsquo;s spy agency &mdash; or some combination of those three &mdash; had teamed up with the group to send the message that Afghanistan&rsquo;s future stability remained deeply tenuous and indeed dependent on the cooperation of outside forces.        

&ldquo;Never in our history have there been such cruel attacks on religious observances,&rdquo; said President Hamid Karzai, in a statement released by his office. &ldquo;The enemies of Afghanistan do not want us to live under one roof with peace and harmony.&rdquo;        

The timing of the attacks was especially pointed, coming a day after an international conference on Afghanistan in Bonn, Germany, that had been viewed as an opportunity for Afghanistan to cement long-term support from the West.        

But the conference fell considerably short of the objectives that officials had envisioned because Taliban insurgents and Pakistani diplomats did not attend. Pakistan pulled out of the conference as a protest over the deaths of 24 of its soldiers in an American airstrike, carried out from Afghan territory, which American officials have depicted as the result of a misunderstanding.        

Critics of Pakistan were quick to read Monday&rsquo;s boycott and Tuesday&rsquo;s bombings as a signal from the Pakistanis, delivered by Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, that Afghanistan could not ignore Pakistan.        

&ldquo;Pakistan is our historical enemy and wants us to never live in peace,&rdquo; said Noor Mohammad, one of the wounded worshipers, who was covered in blood minutes after the attack in Kabul. &ldquo;What should we do, where should we go? The terrorists are not even letting us carry on our religious practices.&rdquo;        

Abdul Qayou Sajadi, a Hazara member of Parliament, made similar assumptions, though he did not mention Pakistan by name. &ldquo;As you know, the peace efforts by our government and the international community are going on, but some of our neighboring countries failed in this regard,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Now they are trying to divide our people along religious lines, and create another war among Afghans as they did in the past.&rdquo;        

While members of Afghanistan&rsquo;s Shiite minority, mostly ethnic Hazaras, faced savage discrimination during the years of Taliban rule, they had not been singled out for attacks during the current insurgency.        

The actual intentions of those behind Tuesday&rsquo;s attacks remained murky, however, not least because of the tangled history of Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, which once operated openly in Pakistan with the support of its spy service, the Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence, or ISI, but has since been outlawed. In recent years it has struck up alliances with Al Qaeda and the Pakistani Taliban, an umbrella group of Pakistani militants that has attacked Pakistan&rsquo;s cities and security forces numerous times.        

Lashkar-e-Jhangvi is inspired by a fundamentalist Deobandi philosophy that justifies killing Shiites because of their beliefs, and it has on several occasions attacked Americans, Christians and other Muslim minorities as well. There is no record of previous operations by the group in Afghanistan, however, so no one seriously thought Lashkar-e-Jhangvi could carry out a coordinated series of bombings in three Afghan cities without substantial support from other sources.        

Tuesday&rsquo;s bombings aroused fears that extremists were trying to provoke a reaction like the one after the 2006 bombing of a Shiite shrine in Samarra, Iraq, which ignited two years of tit-for-tat sectarian violence. That attack was carried out by militants aligned with Al Qaeda, which also has an anti-Shiite philosophy.        
Reporting was contributed by Sarifullah Sahak, Luke Mogelson and Sangar Rahimi from Kabul, and Taimoor Shah from Kandahar, Afghanistan.
