
MOSCOW &mdash; The Russian authorities acted decisively to quash a second day of protests against the government and Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin on Tuesday, flooding the appointed site with throngs of pro-government activists who banged on tin drums, drowning out the chants of &ldquo;Russia without Putin!&rdquo;        

Several hundred protesters convened in a central square, hoping to maintain the momentum from Monday, when as many as 5,000 protested alleged fraud in parliamentary elections. The smaller crowd that formed Tuesday, however, was rapidly choked off by riot police officers who dragged many of them away.        

Police officials told the Interfax news service that 250 people had been detained, slightly fewer than the 300 who were detained Monday. Even as those reports filtered out, antigovernment activists were calling via Twitter for a third round of protests on Wednesday.        

The authorities have made an example of two of the leaders of Monday&rsquo;s protest &mdash; a liberal activist, Ilya Yashin, and the blogger Aleksei Navalny, who famously branded Mr. Putin&rsquo;s party, United Russia, &ldquo;the Party of Swindlers and Thieves.&rdquo; Both men were sentenced to 15 days in prison on Tuesday for disobeying police orders. Supporters camped out on the street in hopes of glimpsing Mr. Navalny, sharing cold cuts and thermoses of tea and a mood that was almost giddy because of Monday&rsquo;s turnout.        

Meanwhile, military buses carried reinforcements to help the troops that have been deployed in the capital since Sunday&rsquo;s elections.        

As Tuesday&rsquo;s rally dissolved, Valentin Scutaru, 24, said he was not troubled. He said the events of the last weeks had convinced him that public opinion was turning against Mr. Putin.        

&ldquo;This is not going to be our last meeting,&rdquo; Mr. Scutaru said. &ldquo;Many people have been lied to, and they know they were lied to, lied to in an ugly way. We know that we believe in something, and we are going to insist on it.&rdquo;        

Many young people said this round of parliamentary elections had drawn them into political activism for the first time. A 19-year-old economics student, Dmitri Sherbak, related the story of his first arrest buoyantly, saying it had motivated him instead of frightening him.        

Dmitri Mikhailchenko, 23, who said he witnessed ballot-box stuffing at a Moscow polling place on Sunday, said: &ldquo;People&rsquo;s mentality has changed. I can&rsquo;t stand being lied to anymore.&rdquo;        

As the Tuesday protest wound down, a&nbsp;column&nbsp;of several hundred people broke off and began marching down a major thoroughfare. As people in passing cars honked their support, some protesters tried to block traffic, but they were set upon by riot police officers, one of whom was hit by a car in the scuffle.        

In Sunday&rsquo;s elections, the governing party, United Russia, lost a surprisingly large number of seats in the Duma, the lower house of Parliament. With 99.9 percent of the votes counted, election officials said United Russia had won 238 seats in Parliament, or about 53 percent, down from its current 70 percent. The Communist Party won 92 seats; Just Russia, a social democratic party, won 64 seats and the national Liberal Democratic Party won 56 seats.        

Leaders of the opposition parties said that United Russia&rsquo;s losses would have been steeper were it not for ballot-stuffing and other abuses reported by international observers and, in some cases, documented by citizens who posted home videos on the Internet.        

The Kremlin&rsquo;s leading political strategist on Tuesday acknowledged the dissatisfaction in an interview published Tuesday on the Web site of the Ekho Moskvy radio station. Vladislav Y. Surkov, first deputy head of the presidential administration, dismissed charges of voter fraud, saying violations occurred but had no significant effect.        

But he also said that he supported the creation of &ldquo;a mass liberal party or, more precisely, a party for the annoyed urban communities,&rdquo; and that in order for Russia&rsquo;s political system to survive, it needed to open up to &ldquo;new players.&rdquo;        

More than 10,000 supporters of the government, including members of the pro-Kremlin youth movement, Nashi, who had been bused in from other regions, attended a rally near Red Square earlier on Tuesday. Supporters of United Russia have said that the election results represented a &ldquo;clean victory,&rdquo; and that the antigovernment protests were being encouraged by Russia&rsquo;s enemies.        

&ldquo;These are young people who have gathered here because we don&rsquo;t want a repeat of the events of Egypt and Libya,&rdquo; said Maria Kislitsyna, a Nashi commissar. &ldquo;We want our country to have freedom, and not war, or the pointless spilling of blood.&rdquo; She said that the pro-Putin group had come to the square to &ldquo;prevent possible provocations.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Today, John McCain wrote on his Twitter account that soon the Arab Spring would come to Russia,&rdquo; she said, referring to the Republican senator from Arizona. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want war in my country. I am prepared to prevent this using any means.&rdquo;        
David M. Herszenhorn and Michael Schwirtz contributed reporting.
