
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; In one of the worst episodes of sectarian carnage in Syria since the uprising began nine months ago, dozens of corpses were recovered from the streets of Homs this week, some of them dismembered, decapitated and bearing signs of torture, activists and residents said Tuesday.        

Most of the bloodshed occurred Monday, as Homs, a central Syrian city, was convulsed by kidnappings, random shootings and tit-for-tat killings, activists said. In the worst episode, 36 bodies were dumped in a square in a neighborhood that sits along a fault line between the city&rsquo;s Sunni Muslim majority and its Alawite minority, said Mohammed Saleh, a 54-year-old activist there who has tried to stanch the growing sectarian tension.        

&ldquo;What happened yesterday is a massive crime,&rdquo; he said by phone. &ldquo;I am in pain, so much pain. I was getting a call every minute telling me that someone new got killed.&rdquo;        

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, an opposition group based in London, called it &ldquo;one of the deadliest days since the start of the Syrian Revolution.&rdquo;        

Rumors swirled through Homs, the country&rsquo;s third-largest city, over whom to blame. Mr. Saleh and another activist blamed the government for inciting the tension, and said it was hewing to what its opponents see as a longstanding policy to divide and rule. But both said parties on each side, whether for the sake of revenge or incitement, shared a role in the strife.        

Residents described themselves as terrified by the seemingly random nature of the violence. Some said they feared to leave their houses after 3 p.m. Others talked of persistent gunfire in a city that has borne the brunt of the government&rsquo;s crackdown on the uprising.        

&ldquo;It is crazy in Homs,&rdquo; said a 28-year-old housewife, speaking by phone, who refused to give her name for fear of reprisals. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know what to say. I feel that all doors are shut and there&rsquo;s not a trace of hope or light at the end of the tunnel anymore.&rdquo;        

Near the Lebanese border, Homs, like the rest of Syria, has a Sunni Muslim majority. But four neighborhoods have a majority of Alawites, a heterodox Muslim sect from which President Bashar al-Assad draws much of his leadership. Long discriminated against and still poor even by Syria&rsquo;s standards, the minority represents the bulk of security forces, which have led the crackdown against the uprising. The city also has a Christian minority, which has generally remained on the sidelines of the deepening conflict.        

Time and again, the city has manifested new tendencies within the uprising. It has drawn armed defectors to havens within Homs, and they and allied fighters have fought security forces with growing tenacity. Though less pronounced than in the countryside, sectarian tension has mounted, and reports of vendettas have grown since last month.        

The problem has become so dire in recent weeks that opposition groups like the Syrian National Council and the Local Coordination Committees have called for restraint by their own supporters, fearing that the problem could spiral out of control.        

&ldquo;We call on the families and relatives of people kidnapped not to be drawn into acts of revenge, which will cost them and their families and pose great dangers to the whole community,&rdquo; the Local Coordination Committees said in a statement last month.        

Monday&rsquo;s bloodshed appeared the worst so far.        

Mr. Saleh, in an account confirmed by an opposition group, said 32 bodies were delivered to the National Hospital in Homs on Monday morning. Kidnappings and killings continued through the day, and Mr. Saleh and other activists said 11 more people had been killed. By nightfall, the 36 bodies were dumped in the square in Al Zahra, an Alawite neighborhood, he said. Several residents said the killings grew worse after a report on Monday that Syria had agreed, with conditions, to accept the entry of monitors from the Arab League.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s chaos, random killing and many killed unintentionally,&rdquo; Mr. Saleh said.        
Reporting was contributed by Hwaida Saad and a New York Times employee from Beirut, Steven Lee Myers from Geneva, and David D. Kirkpatrick from Cairo.
