
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; United States and South Korean negotiators on Tuesday resumed their low-key but highly sensitive talks on whether South Korea should be allowed to do what Washington has tried to stop North Korea from doing: enrich uranium and reprocess spent nuclear fuel.        

Under a 1974 treaty with the United States, the South agreed to refrain from using those technologies, which can be used to create fuel for nuclear power plants, but also to make nuclear weapons. They began talks a&nbsp;year ago to rewrite the treaty.        

South Korea wants the ban lifted, arguing that it desperately needs to reprocess its accumulating spent fuel from nuclear reactors to reduce its stored waste. It also wants to use&nbsp;reprocessing and enrichment to secure fuel supplies for its expanding nuclear power industry.&nbsp;The country aspires to meet 60 percent of its electricity needs with nuclear power by 2030 and become a global exporter of nuclear reactors.        

The United States supports a revised agreement that &ldquo;will reflect the increased importance that the Republic of Korea is playing in the global nuclear energy arena,&rdquo; the chief United States negotiator, Robert J. Einhorn, said Monday in Seoul, using South Korea&rsquo;s formal name.        

His South Korean counterpart, Park Ro-byug, said the current agreement was drafted in the days when South Korea was what he called a &ldquo;unilateral recipient&rdquo; of American help in civil nuclear engineering. He said it was time for the two allies to create a &ldquo;mutually beneficiary&rdquo; treaty that acknowledges South Korea as a global player in peaceful uses of nuclear power.        

Behind such diplomatic talk lurk the two nation&rsquo;s different views on uranium enrichment and reprocessing spent fuel.        

&ldquo;The United States opposes the spread of enrichment and reprocessing even to South Korea, because it wants to set an absolute standard to prevent nuclear weapons proliferation,&rdquo; said William Tobey, a senior fellow at the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs at Harvard University. &ldquo;While Seoul does not pose such a threat, a hard-and-fast standard will be the strongest bulwark against weapons proliferation by other states.&rdquo;        

Song Min-soon, a former South Korean foreign minister who is now an opposition lawmaker, said the negotiations would &ldquo;serve as an important test&rdquo; of how the United States wants to be regarded by South Koreans. &ldquo;If they pressure South Korea too much, it might spawn anti-American sentiment,&rdquo; he said, along with what he characterized as &ldquo;calls for a nuclear sovereignty.&rdquo;        

North Korea has built its nuclear bombs with plutonium obtained by reprocessing spent nuclear fuel. Last week, it said it had also made rapid progress in uranium enrichment.&nbsp;        

&ldquo;Any hope of curbing the North&rsquo;s nuclear weapons program must entail like restrictions on the South,&rdquo; Mr. Tobey said.        
