
KINSHASA, Democratic Republic of Congo &mdash; With a contentious election still unresolved more than a week after the voting, an uneasy quiet held here on Wednesday, punctuated by occasional blasts of tear gas, hurled rocks, gunshots and promises of more intense confrontations to come.        

The election&rsquo;s official outcome is not in much doubt. The incumbent president, Joseph Kabila, is widely be expected to be declared the winner, justly or not.        

But what might happen afterward has people in the Congo holding their collective breath. How would residents in Kinshasa, the capital, react to news that the presidential candidate &Eacute;tienne Tshisekedi, popular for 30 years in this sprawling city&rsquo;s muddy neighborhoods, had lost?        

&ldquo;Tomorrow, we will be in the street,&rdquo; said Willie Kabungi, a shopkeeper. &ldquo;People will be shot. And people will die.&rdquo;        

Shops remained shut tight behind prisonlike bars on Wednesday, schoolchildren and many office workers stayed home, and the usually traffic-choked streets were clear.        

The national elections commission, bound by law to release final results on Tuesday, was granted a 48-hour extension after the calamitous election on Nov. 28, during which ballot sacks were lost, polling stations were burned and voting was allowed to continue even after Election Day.        

This week, helicopters were sent to fetch ballots across the country, which is the size of Western Europe, with its 63,000 polling stations and less than 1,800 miles of paved roads. So the waiting game continued on Wednesday, though partial and hotly contested results gave the incumbent a wide and apparently insurmountable lead.        

Mr. Kabila, 40, is a taciturn man who was propelled to office by his father, a former rebel leader who became president in 1997 and was assassinated in 2001. He was up against Mr. Tshisekedi, 78, a politician whose opposition to the country&rsquo;s successive autocracies for more than three decades has given him a hold on citizens in Kinshasa, even though his sometimes inflammatory statements have made foreign powers wary of him.        

Mr. Kabila, on the other hand, is criticized as an outsider from the distant east who cannot speak the dominant local language. Skyscrapers are going up in the capital of Congo, one of the world&rsquo;s major copper and cobalt producers, but university graduates in the neighborhoods complain of having to sell phone-recharge cards at corner stalls to survive.        

Mr. Tshisekedi&rsquo;s authority on the street &mdash; and his potential to mobilize supporters &mdash; seemed only amplified on Wednesday by the near-certain announcement of his defeat.        

His supporters are convinced that a botched election is being stolen by Mr. Kabila &mdash; a close ally runs the election commission. International monitors have spoken of grave irregularities and even possible fraud but have not said that the vote should be nullified. They have called into question the partial release of results not backed by detailed tallies from individual voting places.        

Mr. Kabila, as is his custom, has said nothing, even as party officials on the other side denounce the election.        

In Matonge, a dirt-street district in the capital of battered low shops, open-air food stalls and bars, there was talk of resistance. But it was unclear how far it would carry &mdash; and how much the cantankerous Mr. Tshisekedi would push it &mdash; in the face of well-armed security forces. Convoys of armed soldiers cruised the capital&rsquo;s streets.        

&ldquo;We are going to fight,&rdquo; said Agathe Eyenga, a garment worker. &ldquo;There will be violence.&rdquo;        

Others promised a reaction, hesitating only about its scale.        

&ldquo;We are going to react,&rdquo; said Christian Moto, who said he had studied physics and math at a university but now worked at a diamond brokerage. &ldquo;When people are hungry they don&rsquo;t listen.&rdquo;        

A laid-off teacher, Borbor Bona, said: &ldquo;We want to show the world we are not dupes. If our parents had been afraid of weapons, we wouldn&rsquo;t be free.&rdquo;        

Earlier Wednesday, officials from Mr. Tshisekedi&rsquo;s party remained ambiguous about what instructions their candidate would give to his followers when the expected result &mdash; a victory for Mr. Kabila &mdash; was announced.        

The public &ldquo;will take its responsibility, in the same way it did on the 28th of November,&rdquo; said Jacquemain Shabani Lukoo, secretary general of Mr. Tshisekedi&rsquo;s party, the Union for Democracy and Social Progress. &ldquo;We remain confident. The people have punished those in power. The Congo is not a jungle.&rdquo;        
