
WASHINGTON &mdash; Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. visited Prime Minister Lucas Papademos of Greece in his Athens office on Monday. Timothy F. Geithner, the Treasury secretary, hopscotched across Europe on Tuesday and Wednesday, urging leaders to address the European debt crisis more urgently. And President Obama has been on the phone almost every other week &mdash; including on Wednesday &mdash; with either Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany or President Nicolas Sarkozy of France.        

Publicly, Obama administration officials talk only about the economic consequences of a potential debt conflagration in Europe. Privately, though, they are well aware that Europe&rsquo;s success in dealing with the troubles &mdash; and the administration&rsquo;s success in persuading them to do so &mdash; is arguably the single most important factor that will determine Mr. Obama&rsquo;s re-election chances.        

The American economy has shown signs of life recently, with talk of a double-dip recession fading and job growth picking up. The change has raised the prospect that the economy may not be quite the political weight around Mr. Obama&rsquo;s neck in 2012 that his advisers had feared &mdash; unless Europe goes downhill. Mr. Obama&rsquo;s aides realize that there is no easy way to plan a re-election strategy for one potential body blow: an implosion of the European currency. Such an event, experts say, would undoubtedly send the American unemployment rate higher and possibly induce another recession. Other than lobbying from the sidelines, Mr. Obama and his administration have little control over the situation.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s certainly true that Europe is the gorilla in the room when people look at how the economy could affect the election,&rdquo; one senior Obama adviser said, speaking on grounds of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly. Added Edwin M. Truman, former adviser to Mr. Geithner: &ldquo;If the euro comes apart in a messy way &mdash; and it&rsquo;s hard to imagine it will come apart in a nonmessy way &mdash; it would make the fall of 2008 look like a clambake.&rdquo;        

And so it is, Mr. Truman and others said, that Mrs. Merkel and Mr. Sarkozy could have far more to say about who will be the next president of the United States than anyone thought.        

For Mr. Obama, the change of fortune is stark. This is a president whose election was greeted in Europe with rapture; as a candidate, he visited both Mrs. Merkel and Mr. Sarkozy in the summer of 2008, where he received welcomes more fitting to World War II heroes &mdash; including a speech at the Tiergarten near the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin and an arrival ceremony at the &Eacute;lys&eacute;e Palace in Paris. France would be &ldquo;delighted&rdquo; with Mr. Obama&rsquo;s election, Mr. Sarkozy gushed at the time.        

Now, incongruously, it is Mrs. Merkel and Mr. Sarkozy who could play a part in whether Mr. Obama wins re-election. The president himself has called Europe the &ldquo;wild card&rdquo; in the domestic economic recovery and his aides have privately expressed frustration at what they view as a passive response from European leaders to the debt crisis. Obama administration officials say that leaning on European leaders to get their house in order, as the president has been doing, is in best interest of the United States, and not something that Mr. Obama is doing for his own political benefit.        

Mr. Geithner is in Europe this week in advance of the latest European summit meeting on Thursday that is meant to, yet again, try to deal with the debt issue. In a hurried, five-city, three-day tour, meeting with heads of state, Europe&rsquo;s central banker and high-ranking economic officials, Mr. Geithner has quietly dispensed advice on the sovereign-debt crisis while pressing for decisive action for the good of the global economy.        

Some prominent Europeans have bridled at what they consider the unsought American intervention. On Wednesday, Val&eacute;ry Giscard d&rsquo;Estaing, the former French president, told Reuters: &ldquo;Geithner&rsquo;s visit is inopportune. He should not be meddling in European affairs.&rdquo; Cognizant, no doubt, of such sensitivities, Mr. Geithner has tried to chart a careful course in Europe this week, meeting behind the scenes, careful never to push or prescribe publicly, and so far taking only two questions from the news media. So far, European leaders have largely declined to yield to pressure from Obama administration officials who are advocating the same aggressive way that the United States responded to its own banking crisis in the fall of 2008 and through early 2009.        

Frustrated Obama officials have been urging their European counterparts to move as much money as possible to prop up the debt of countries like Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain. &ldquo;Ultimately, Europe will need to find a path that allows for stronger growth, but right now, the most important thing Europe can do for the global recovery is to manage this crisis successfully,&rdquo; Michael Froman, the deputy national security adviser for international economic affairs, said in an interview.        

On Thursday in Brussels, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said: &ldquo;We have great confidence in Europe. There is absolutely no doubt about that. But we do need a plan to rally behind in order to know the way forward.&rdquo;        

Administration officials say that besides the potential for drying up demand in Europe for American goods and the looming potential of a European bank failure&rsquo;s setting off another financial debacle, the European crisis could stymie growth not only in Europe, but also in emerging markets.        
Helene Cooper reported from Washington,  Annie Lowrey from Paris, and Steven Lee Myers from Brussels.
