
MOSCOW &mdash; Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the last leader of the Soviet Union, added his voice to a nascent anti-Kremlin protest movement on Wednesday, calling for the results of increasingly disputed parliamentary elections last weekend to be scrapped.        

&ldquo;With every passing day, more and more Russians are ceasing to believe that the results of the elections were honest,&rdquo; Mr. Gorbachev said in an interview with the Interfax news agency. &ldquo;In my view, ignoring public opinion will discredit the authorities and destabilize the situation. That is why I think the government should make but one decision: annul the results of the elections and hold new ones.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gorbachev&rsquo;s remarks come after days of demonstrations against the authorities that have drawn street protests of a size unseen in Russia in years. Hundreds have been arrested and several opposition leaders given 15-day prison sentences. The Russian blogosphere was abuzz on Wednesday with calls for a large demonstration in Moscow this weekend to be held at Revolution Square outside the Kremlin.        

Yet Mr. Gorbachev is in many ways a curious addition to an amorphous and still largely undefined movement of Russians tenuously united in frustration with the government of Vladimir V. Putin. Mr. Gorbachev&rsquo;s own refusal to crack down heavily on dissent as leader of the Soviet Union helped hasten its demise. Yet, he is widely disliked by Russians of all political stripes who blame him for having allowed the country to fall into chaos.        

At any rate, it was considered unlikely that the authorities would pay much heed to Mr. Gorbachev&rsquo;s appeal. Russia&rsquo;s leaders have insisted that any violations in the elections on Sunday were insignificant.        

In an interview published on Wednesday, Vladimir V. Churov, the head of Russia&rsquo;s Central Election Commission, dismissed dozens of amateur online videos that appeared to show ballot stuffing and other fraud. He suggested that they had been faked in home studios.        

&ldquo;There is a lot of rubbish on the Internet about violations,&rdquo; Mr. Churov, said in an interview with Itogi, a current affairs magazine. &ldquo;Even before the elections, I heard about several fake polling places in apartments, where these movies were shot.&rdquo;        

The videos, many of them jittery, amateur-looking productions shot on smartphones, have been touted as a new tactic in the fight against electoral malfeasance in Russia. They have resonated widely in the wake of the elections on Sunday, ricocheting through Russia&rsquo;s rambunctious blogosphere and contributing to the increasingly evident displeasure with the country&rsquo;s leaders.        

In some videos, it is indeed not apparent what violation the camera operator is purporting to document. But most were clearly not shot in apartments.        

Most of the complaints about falsification have been against Mr. Putin&rsquo;s governing party, United Russia, which, despite the allegations of widespread fraud, suffered heavy losses. The party lost its constitutional majority in the recent elections, gaining 50 percent of the vote.        

Critics say that even that was too high to realistically reflect support for the party.        

The dispute has led to heightened tensions, particularly in Moscow, where thousands of riot police remain on alert in large trucks that line the main thoroughfares. There were sporadic attempts to hold protests in the capital on Wednesday, though the police quickly intervened. Several arrests were reported.        

The Russian police response to protests since the election drew criticism abroad. &ldquo;All countries have the duty to respect the dissenting opinion of its own citizens,&rdquo; said Matteo Mecacci, who heads the human rights committee at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. &ldquo;Restricting these basic civil and political rights is not the way for any democracy to function and is a dangerous path for the authorities to follow.&rdquo; He called on Russia to allow free assembly, release detained protestors and refrain from unnecessary use of force. Many observers are now looking to the demonstration this weekend to either make or break the protest mood here. On a Facebook page set up for the event, more than 20,000 people had said they would attend as of Wednesday evening.        

On Triumfalnaya, a popular protest site here, a certain euphoria noticeable earlier in the week was clearly absent among the few dissenters who showed up. Caught amid throngs of helmeted police, some pointed gloomily up at a huge poster recently hung across from the square. It was advertising the latest installment of the movie, &ldquo;Mission Impossible.&rdquo;        
