
Iranians shut down the United States&rsquo; Tehran embassy 32 years ago. They shut down its virtual Tehran embassy on Wednesday.        

Barely 24 hours after its debut, the United States&rsquo; &ldquo;virtual embassy&rdquo; in Iran was blocked from view inside the country. The semiofficial Fars news agency reported that blocking the site &ldquo;was a decisive reaction by the Iranian authorities to the latest plots hatched by Washington against the Iranian nation.&rdquo;        

The Fars report mocked the American effort at digital diplomacy, saying the site would have been ineffective anyway: &ldquo;The Web site would turn into a social Web site with no tangible result for the U.S.&rdquo;        

Those trying to visit the virtual embassy in Persian or English from Iran were redirected Wednesday to a page of links to official information and local Internet services.        

The White House said the blocking of the site showed Iran&rsquo;s determination to create &ldquo;an electronic curtain of surveillance and censorship around its people.&rdquo;        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, who announced the virtual embassy in October as a complement to official State Department accounts in Persian on Facebook and Twitter, greeted visitors in a YouTube video. The site was unveiled on Tuesday.        

As the site notes, the United States has not had a diplomatic presence or brick-and-mortar embassy in Iran since students and militants took over the American Embassy after the Islamic Revolution, holding 52 Americans hostage from November 1979 until January 1981. The new site includes a section on the former embassy, which officially closed in April 1980.        

The debut and blocking of the virtual embassy occurred a week after Iranian protesters mobbed and vandalized the British Embassy in Tehran to protest the West&rsquo;s sanctions on Iran&rsquo;s suspect nuclear program. Many countries, including some of Iran&rsquo;s friends, criticized the Iranian assault, and officials have promised to prevent attacks on any other diplomatic posts in Tehran.        

Iran&rsquo;s leaders still say the British Embassy protest was justified. And Fars, which frequently points to the Occupy Wall Street movement, is now calling the breach of the British Embassy the Occupy Embassy protest.        
