
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; President Hamid Karzai paid an emotional visit on Wednesday to a hospital full of survivors of a series of suicide bombings claimed by a Pakistani extremist group, and he promised to pursue the issue with Pakistan&rsquo;s government.        

Mr. Karzai, however, stopped short of accusing Pakistan of involvement in the suicide attacks, which killed about 60 people &mdash; including at least a few infants &mdash; and wounded more than 200, most of them in Kabul. One of the dead in Kabul was an American man, according to the Public Health Ministry. The American Embassy confirmed that, but it declined to identify the victim.        

On Tuesday, the militant group Lashkar-e-Jhangvi claimed responsibility for the three bombings, in Kabul, Mazar-i-Sharif and Kandahar. All were directed against Shiite worshipers on the holiest day in their calendar, commemorating the death in 680 of Imam Hussein, the grandson of the Prophet Muhammad.        

The group has mounted many sectarian attacks against Shiites in Pakistan, and has ties to the Taliban and Al Qaeda. Many experts also say it has ties to the Pakistani government&rsquo;s top spy agency, Inter-Services Intelligence, or ISI.        

&ldquo;Certainly we will discuss this issue with the government of Pakistan and we will talk to them, this issue is extremely serious and important to us,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai said in a brief news conference after he toured the Italian Emergency Hospital, where many of the most seriously wounded were taken.        

&ldquo;This is the first time we have seen such an act on such an important religious day, and there is no doubt that this just shows hatred for the people of Afghanistan and contempt for Islam,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai said.        

&ldquo;Lashkar-e-Jhangvi is located in Pakistan and took the responsibility, and the government of Afghanistan with all its strength and power and with the support of the international community will pursue this issue,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Otherwise the blood shed by our children will have no meaning.&rdquo;        

Five of the 14 dead taken to the hospital on Tuesday were infants. Eight more children remained hospitalized there on Wednesday, doctors said.        

&ldquo;These children admitted in the Emergency Hospital have lost their body parts, have received injuries, lost their families, brothers, sisters,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai said. &ldquo;It is really sad, those children I saw, even very little children, but the touching thing was that even in pain they were smiling at me.&rdquo;        

Mr. Karzai had gone to Bonn, Germany, to plead for military and political support for another decade at Monday&rsquo;s international conference on Afghanistan and had planned to go on to Britain. Instead, he rushed back to Kabul on Tuesday night.        

The triple bombings were among the worst attacks on civilians in the course of the current war, and were its first episode of purely sectarian violence. Afghanistan has a large Shiite minority, mostly among ethnic Hazaras, who suffered savage discrimination under the Taliban.        

After a Parliament session on Wednesday, Shukrai Barakzai, head of the defense and security committee, claimed that Pakistan&rsquo;s interior minister, Rehman Malik, had thanked the Pakistani Taliban for refraining from attacks during Ashura in Pakistan, but had not criticized the extremists for their attacks in Afghanistan.        

&ldquo;This shows the open and clear support of Pakistan for terrorist groups,&rdquo; she said.        

A spokesman for the Afghan Foreign Ministry said Wednesday that there had not yet been any expressions of condolence from Pakistan regarding Tuesday&rsquo;s bombings.        

Meanwhile, 19 civilians, some of them women and children, were killed on Wednesday by a mine planted on a highway in southwestern Afghanistan, Afghan officials said.        

Dawoud Ahmadi, the spokesman for the governor of Helmand Province, said the victims were among 24 people crammed aboard a minibus traveling from Lashkar Gah, the provincial capital, to Sangin district, a dangerous part of the province where Taliban insurgents have been active. The minibus drove over the mine.        

In addition to the 19 dead, which included 5 children, 5 people were wounded, Mr. Ahmadi said. Some of the wounded were taken to NATO medical facilities for treatment.        
Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar, Afghanistan.
