
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; President Asif Ali Zardari was reported to be in stable condition at a Dubai, United Arab Emirates, hospital on Wednesday after undergoing cardiovascular tests, the government said, denying rumors swirling in Pakistan that his abrupt and hasty exit from the country the night before was a signal that he was stepping down.        

Mr. Zardari, 56, suddenly left for Dubai on Tuesday evening, leading to talk that he was being forced to resign by the country&rsquo;s powerful military.        

On Wednesday, leaders of the Pakistan Peoples Party, or P.P.P., which leads the government, dismissed the speculation, though there was confusion about the state of Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s health.        

Some officials said that Mr. Zardari had suffered a minor heart attack, and others said that he had gone to Dubai for scheduled medical checkups. Mr. Zardari suffers from diabetes and high blood pressure and has had heart troubles, according to his close aides.        

In a signal to skeptics that the P.P.P. was in control, Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, the eldest son of Mr. Zardari who is also the chairman of the party, met with Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani at the prime minister&rsquo;s house on Wednesday.        

A press statement released by the prime minister&rsquo;s office after the meeting stated that Mr. Zardari had left for Dubai at the insistence of his children, &ldquo;following symptoms related to his heart condition, and after the initial medical tests, doctors found him to be in stable condition.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The doctors are yet to determine whether the president&rsquo;s condition was due to adverse reaction to the medication he was taking or a development related to his pre-existing cardiac condition,&rdquo; the statement added.        

No official date was announced for the return of Mr. Zardari, though party officials said he was expected to be home by the weekend.        

In Washington, the State Department spokesman, Mark Toner, said the United States had no reason to believe that Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s departure for Dubai was political. &ldquo;Our belief is that it&rsquo;s completely health-related,&rdquo; Mr. Toner told reporters at a regular daily briefing. A day later, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, speaking on a trip to Brussels,&nbsp; said the United States expected that Mr. Zardari would &ldquo;be able to return in full health to his duties.&rdquo;        

But the speculation set off by Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s trip to Dubai was further fueled by a post on a Foreign Policy magazine blog quoting an unnamed former United States official who said that Mr. Zardari might resign because of ill health after being pushed out of power by the Pakistani military.        

Mr. Zardari has been facing immense pressure from his political opponents and the military over a controversial memorandum that sought American help to rein in the powerful Pakistani military.        

Husain Haqqani, a close aide to Mr. Zardari, was forced to resign as Pakistan&rsquo;s ambassador in Washington on Nov. 22 after accusations that he had orchestrated the memo, a charge he denies.        

Opposition politicians said that the memo was likely to have been approved by Mr. Zardari. A spokesman for Mr. Zardari has denied any knowledge of the memo, but the controversy surrounding it has caused a political storm in the country.        

Rumors about differences between Mr. Zardari and the country&rsquo;s generals have circulated here for as long as Mr. Zardari has been in office. He was elected president in 2008.        
