
BEIJING &mdash; Top American and Chinese military officials began an annual review of major issues here on Wednesday pledging to seek greater cooperation and trust in a relationship that, to many, more resembles a budding rivalry.        

The Defense Consultative Talks, now in their 12th year, opened on the heels of President Obama&rsquo;s pledge last month to bolster the United States&rsquo; military presence in the Pacific, a move seen by many here as aimed at countering China&rsquo;s rise. And it follows a frenetic year of expansion by the Chinese military in which a new aircraft carrier and carrier jet, a new stealth fighter jet and a host of other advanced weapons were unveiled.        

In remarks at China&rsquo;s Defense Ministry on Wednesday, the senior Chinese officer at the talks, Gen. Ma Xiaotian, emphasized the need for both sides &ldquo;to enhance communication, to expand common ground, to promote mutual understanding.&rdquo;        

The lead American official, Under Secretary of Defense Mich&egrave;le Flournoy, expressed hope that the militaries could &ldquo;agree on issues and interests that the two sides share.&rdquo;        

The United States and China are seeking to stabilize their usually rocky relationship at a time of domestic political uncertainty &mdash; 2012 will see a new Chinese leadership and an American presidential election &mdash; and global economic turmoil that could strain diplomatic ties between Washington and Beijing.        

&ldquo;I see this as a signal that bilateral relations will be conducted on less stormy waters,&rdquo; Zhu Feng, the deputy director of Peking University&rsquo;s Center for International and Strategic Studies, said in a telephone interview. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think either side wants to see an action-reaction cycle that turns into a new cold war.&rdquo;        

The government Xinhua news agency stated that the talks would touch on the United States&rsquo;  recent $5.85 billion sale of weapons to Taiwan, maritime piracy and the state of regional hot spots from the Korean Peninsula to the Middle East to the South China Sea.        

The annual talks sometimes set the tone for military-to-military relations in the succeeding year. In a briefing paper issued before the meeting, the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies stated that one measure of success would be whether the sides agreed on a future schedule of country-to-country military exchanges.        

The exchanges, including trades of visiting delegations of officers from each military, are designed to promote good will and allow future generations of military leaders to put a human face on a rival force that they may now regard only as an abstract enemy.        

Arms sales to Taiwan, which China calls a breakaway province that must be reclaimed by force if needed, are perhaps the biggest obstacle to better relations between the two forces. The People&rsquo;s Liberation Army suspended some exchanges in September, after the United States agreed to the arms deal with Taiwan. But the American deal &mdash; to upgrade Taiwan&rsquo;s fleet of F-16s rather than sell the country 66 new-generation models of the jets &mdash; appeared calibrated to try to avert deepening strains with China.        

Indeed, the P.L.A.&rsquo;s reaction was tepid compared with two years ago, when another arms sale by the Obama administration plunged military ties into a yearlong deep freeze.        

Mr. Obama&rsquo;s new focus on the Pacific offers a broad realm for new frictions, coming as China&rsquo;s military expands and revamps its navy and renews claim to territorial or economic control of much of the South China Sea.        

The region has seen a series of run-ins this year between Chinese naval and other vessels and those of the Philippines and Vietnam, which also claim part or all of the sea&rsquo;s hundreds of islands.        

Premier Wen Jiabao last month warned unnamed &ldquo;external forces&rdquo; against meddling in the territorial disputes, a clear reference to the United States.        
Shi Da contributed reporting.
