
KANDAHAR, Afghanistan &mdash; The bomb under the general&rsquo;s chair was pretty clearly an inside job.        

Maj. Gen. Abdul Hameed&rsquo;s chair was on a dais full of military dignitaries, including American trainers, as he officiated at a graduation ceremony here for 200 Afghan National Army sergeants on Thursday.        

&ldquo;The enemy of this country wanted to kill me,&rdquo; General Hameed, the highest-ranking Afghan officer in the south, said moments after the explosion, his voice shaking. He was reached by cellphone.        

The ceremony was inside the training center of the A.N.A.&rsquo;s 205th Corps, nicknamed the Atal Corps, or Hero Corps. The insurgents had managed to penetrate at least three rings of heavy security around the base, sneak onto the dais and rig five grenades together under the general&rsquo;s chair, with a remote-controlled detonator attached, General Hameed said.        

Fortunately, the insurgents once again proved better at infiltration than at munitions. Just as fortunately, the order of the ceremony changed at the last minute. Having given his speech, the general sat down, but got back up to start handing out graduation certificates when the grenades were set off by remote control.        

The bomb was more embarrassing than lethal, wounding only one soldier who was close by.        

&ldquo;The blast was powerful enough though,&rdquo; General Hameed said. &ldquo;It demolished the chair where I had been sitting. I could have died if I were on it, but thank God I was not.&rdquo; He sounded both amazed and angry.        

The kind of remote-control device used had to have been set off from somewhere relatively nearby, certainly within the sprawling training center, which is near the major American military base at Kandahar Air Field. &ldquo;We are investigating the event, and soon we will find the plotters,&rdquo; General Hameed said.        

It was a reminder of the ease with which the Taliban have been able to infiltrate even the most heavily guarded Afghan facilities, particularly in this southern city that was their original power center.        

This year, an insurgent infiltrated the Afghan Army and worked as a medic for six months, until one day in October when he strapped on a suicide vest and tried to enter the crowded bank branch at the 205th Corps headquarters. He was stopped before he entered and shot by guards, but he detonated his explosives, wounding three people.        

Last April, a series of attacks took place. First, a police officer who infiltrated the Kandahar Police Department sidled up to the police chief, Gen. Khan Mohammad Mujahid, and set off a suicide bomb, killing him.        

Then someone in an army uniform sneaked into the heavily guarded headquarters of the 201st Corps in Laghman Province, in eastern Afghanistan, and detonated a suicide bomb, killing five NATO soldiers.        

Another insurgent in an Afghan Army uniform shot his way into the headquarters compound of the Ministry of Defense in Kabul wearing a suicide vest and carrying a rifle; he killed two soldiers but was shot before he could detonate his explosives.        

And later in April, 500 Taliban insurgents  escaped en masse from the Sarposa Prison in Kandahar, through tunnels that took months to build and were an open secret around the prison. The warden and nine other prison officials were arrested and charged with aiding the escapees.        

In July, the powerful Kandahar provincial council chairman, Ahmed Wali Karzai, a half brother of President Hamid Karzai, was assassinated by one of his bodyguards. At his funeral, a suicide bomber with a bomb hidden in his turban killed several mourners. And two weeks later, a man posing as a tribal elder hid a bomb in his turban and killed the Kandahar mayor.        

Infiltration is a worrisome problem for the NATO coalition and the Afghan government as they seek to rapidly increase the size of Afghanistan&rsquo;s army, which now has about 175,000 troops, in a country without identity cards, where even birth certificates do not exist. Compounding the need for constant recruitment, the A.N.A. attrition rate is now about 24 percent annually, according to NATO statistics. That means nearly a fourth of all Afghan soldiers quit or desert every year.        
