
BERLIN &mdash; In the battle over how to save the euro, Germany has plenty of leverage but not many friends. Among its staunchest supporters is also one of the most surprising, its historic enemy, Poland.        

For all the damage wrought by the sovereign debt crisis in Europe, it has brought even greater harmony to the fraught and often bloody historical relationship between Poland and Germany. In the midst of discord, the former foes find themselves closer than ever, perhaps paving the way to a new axis of Paris, Berlin and Warsaw that could eventually form the core of a more deeply integrated Europe.        

Poland is a crucial supporting player in the euro drama that is reaching a crossroads with the summit meeting Thursday and Friday in Brussels. It represents a scarce commodity &mdash; a growing economy with enthusiasm for European integration &mdash; and even plans to eventually join the euro zone.        

&ldquo;There is no Plan B for Poland other than Europe: stronger Europe, more active Europe, economically but also politically,&rdquo; said Eugeniusz Smolar, a foreign policy expert at the Polish Institute of International Affairs in Warsaw.        

Poland&rsquo;s prime minister, Donald Tusk, supports Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany in her push for full treaty changes to mandate tighter budget rules and oversight, rather than a deal between the countries that use the euro. And in the wheeling and dealing behind the scenes to reach agreement in Brussels, Poland has several advantages.        

It has close ties to former Soviet bloc countries as well as northern European countries like Sweden that do not use the euro. Poland occupies a special place as the leader among the nations that are not in the euro zone but have not officially opted out, and it has voluntarily joined the Euro Plus Pact to improve fiscal strength and competitiveness. It even stands to displace Britain&rsquo;s waning influence, depending on how events turn.        

Poland&rsquo;s enthusiastic support for European integration stands in stark contrast to Britain&rsquo;s constant demands for exceptions, carve-outs and caveats.        

And Poland&rsquo;s suffering at German and Russian hands, its history of invasion, partition and occupation, puts Polish leaders in a unique position to calm rising concerns of German dominance within Europe.        

In an address last week in Berlin, Poland&rsquo;s foreign minister, Radoslaw Sikorski, said that the greatest threat to Poland&rsquo;s security was not Russian missiles or the Taliban and that &ldquo;it&rsquo;s certainly not German tanks.&rdquo; Instead, Mr. Sikorski said, it was the collapse of the euro zone that offered the paramount danger to his country, and he said he demanded that Germany &ldquo;as Europe&rsquo;s indispensible nation&rdquo; take responsibility and lead.        

&ldquo;I will probably be the first Polish foreign minister in history to say so, but here it is,&rdquo; Mr. Sikorski said, in a line that has been quoted time and again since, in a speech that has government and foreign policy circles in Berlin still buzzing. &ldquo;I fear German power less than I am beginning to fear German inactivity.&rdquo;        

Many Polish politicians said that Mr. Sikorski went too far in calling for a federal Europe, offering to give up their hard-won sovereignty. And few are clamoring to join the euro quickly, preferring to wait until some resolution to the present crisis has been found.        

The greater concern among Poles is being left behind as countries integrate their economies more deeply. Mr. Tusk will be pushing for an agreement that involves all 27 members of the European Union, said Bartek Nowak, executive director of the Center for International Relations in Warsaw. Even if Germany and France lead the way to an agreement among the 17 European Union countries that use the euro, Poland may choose to participate.        

&ldquo;If the 17 decide to improve their economic governance, I think Poland will join voluntarily because Poland wants to join the euro zone,&rdquo; Mr. Nowak said.        

A senior German official told reporters in Berlin on Wednesday that Germany and France would move ahead with the 17 members of the euro zone rather than the 27 members of the European Union, if necessary, to enact reforms that would make fiscal discipline mandatory. But the official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, singled out Poland as an example of a country that had not yet adopted the euro but would be able to take part in the new system.        
(Page 2 of 2)
The convergence between Poland and Germany is the product of a generation of efforts on both sides. The German government made a commitment after the fall of Communism to bring its eastern neighbors into the European fold, and that has paid off through the maturation of a strong new ally.        

Poland, with 38 million people the largest of the former Soviet bloc states to join the European Union, is the only country in the group that has not fallen into recession since the financial crisis began. In the third quarter it grew 4.2 percent compared with the year before, making it one of the few countries growing at a fast clip in the generally anemic Continent.        

German exports to Poland have more than doubled since the Central European country joined the European Union in 2004. Total trade between the two nations reached nearly $89 billion last year.        

All this despite Poland&rsquo;s having emerged from Soviet domination in a vulnerable position. Its longtime enemy, Germany, had ended years of division and was again the most populous country west of Russia. Much of western Poland was once German territory, and fears that a resurgent Germany would try to reclaim it were commonplace.        

Instead Germany advocated for Poland and other Central and Eastern European countries to be brought into Western institutions like NATO and the European Union. This was largely a matter of self-interest, pushing the zone of instability away from its borders, but also an act of historic responsibility.        

When Mr. Tusk succeeded Jaroslaw Kaczynski as prime minister in 2007, he put an emphasis on repairing ties with European partners. &ldquo;The Tusk government from the beginning came to the conclusion that the key to improving Poland&rsquo;s position in the European Union lies in Berlin,&rdquo; said Kai-Olaf Lang, an expert on Central and Eastern Europe at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs.        

Under Mr. Tusk, Mr. Lang said, Poland has assumed Germany&rsquo;s former role as the &ldquo;custodian of unity in the European Union.&rdquo;        

A Polish politician, Jerzy Buzek, serves as the president of the European Parliament. And Poland assumed the rotating presidency of the European Union this past summer at a critical juncture.        

Mr. Tusk gave a speech before the European Parliament at that time that, like Mr. Sikorski&rsquo;s recent address in Berlin, attracted significant attention and solidified Poland&rsquo;s reputation as a force for European integration. &ldquo;I am convinced that the answer to the crisis is more Europe, more European integration, and this calls for strong European institutions,&rdquo; Mr. Tusk said.        
