
KATMANDU, Nepal &mdash; Nepal&rsquo;s bitterly divided legislature elected a new prime minister on Thursday, ending a stalemate that had paralyzed the country for months as competing political parties fought to control the government in this strategically located Himalayan nation.        

The new prime minister, Jhalanath Khanal, immediately called upon Nepal&rsquo;s rival political parties to support his administration and work together in finishing a new constitution expected to restructure the national government.        

&ldquo;My government will give full attention to the completion of the peace process and constitution writing,&rdquo; Mr. Khanal told reporters.        

Once a Hindu monarchy, Nepal is enduring a traumatic transition to democracy. A guerrilla war ended in 2006 after Maoist rebels agreed to stop fighting and form a political party. The Maoists then unexpectedly won a plurality in 2008 national elections and assumed control of the government before walking away from power roughly nine months later in a dispute over control of the military.        

The political controversy inflamed an already difficult situation, as Nepal faced a self-imposed deadline to complete its peace process and draft a new constitution by May 2010. Unable to meet that deadline, Nepal&rsquo;s special legislative body extended the deadline and left the country in the hands of a caretaker prime minister until lawmakers could elect someone for the job.        

But the process became deadlocked as rival leaders vied for the job, none able to muster the required majority vote. Lawmakers failed in 16 previous votes to choose a winner. Thursday&rsquo;s breakthrough came after the Maoist political leader, Pushpa Kamal Dahal, also known as Prachanda, unexpectedly withdrew from the race and threw the Maoists&rsquo; support behind Mr. Khanal.        

Mr. Khanal, the chairman of the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist), won with 368 votes out of 601 in Nepal&rsquo;s Constituent Assembly, defeating Ram Chandra Paudel, a leader in the Nepali Congress Party. Mr. Khanal&rsquo;s party had formed a coalition government with the Maoists after the 2008 national elections but then formed a new alliance with the Nepali Congress after the Maoists left the government.        

It is unclear what sort of power-sharing agreement will exist between Mr. Khanal and the Maoists, or what the new government will look like. Mr. Khanal&rsquo;s challenges are enormous. For one thing, politicians are still fighting over how to integrate former Maoist fighters into the nation&rsquo;s security forces. In the interim, more than 19,000 former Maoist combatants are living in camps around Nepal.        

There are also stark differences between the Maoists and other parties over the constitution, with some rival politicians accusing the Maoists of trying to subvert the process to weaken institutions that would support a multiparty democracy. The Maoists have denied such charges and blamed other parties for trying to maintain their grip on power at the expense of the country&rsquo;s poor.        

Before Thursday, the Nepalese public was growing increasingly angry with the protracted stalemate. Last month, a man slapped Mr. Khanal in public and blamed him and other political leaders for depriving the nation of a functioning government. The Maoist leader, Mr. Dahal, cited this incident in announcing the withdrawal of his candidacy in Parliament.        

&ldquo;People have started slapping leaders, and I now fear that people will throw shoes at us if we fail again to elect a new prime minister,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Dahal, noting that Nepal is now facing a May 28 deadline to complete the constitution, sounded an optimistic note after his withdrawal.        

&ldquo;The peace process and the constitution writing will now have momentum,&rdquo; he predicted. &ldquo;This has laid the foundation for success.&rdquo;        
Kiran Chapagain reported from Katmandu, and Jim Yardley from Dharamsala, India.
