
CAIRO &mdash; Egypt&rsquo;s military rulers on Friday night appeared to withdraw a plan for extending their influence over the writing of a new constitution, evidently bowing to a chorus of criticism just days after the proposal was unveiled.        

The withdrawal leaves the task of selecting a panel that will write a constitution in the hands of a newly elected Parliament expected to be dominated by Islamists.        

Gen. Mamdouh Shahin, a member of the governing military council, said that, as previously stipulated, Parliament would have sole responsibility for selecting the members of the Constituent Assembly, which will draft the constitution, state news media reported Friday.        

&ldquo;The Parliament is the only entity responsible for forming the Constituent Assembly through its elected members,&rdquo; the general said, according to the Web site of the state newspaper Al Ahram.        

In a briefing for a small group of foreign journalists on Wednesday, a member of the governing military council said it would oversee the formation of a constitutional assembly because it did not believe that Parliament was adequately representative.        

Islamists, including the mainstream Muslim Brotherhood as well as a smaller bloc of ultraconservatives known as Salafis, have won about two-thirds of the votes in the first round of parliamentary elections.        

The military council had previously said that Parliament would select a committee of 100 to write the constitution.        

The change in the rules provoked a swift backlash from liberal leaders as well as the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt&rsquo;s strongest political force. Leaders of the Brotherhood&rsquo;s political party accused the generals of undermining the elected legislature and withdrew from the military&rsquo;s new advisory council in protest.        

It was unclear why the military council so quickly changed its mind about its plan or concluded that Parliament could handle the task.        
Mayy el Sheikh contributed reporting.
