
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; It was after dark when the four gunmen battered their way into the small home in the northern city of Kunduz, threw the father of the family into his cowshed and broke into his house to throw corrosive acid on his three school-age daughters.        

Their chief target was Mumtaz, 18. One of the attackers had asked for her hand, and had been rebuffed by her father, a poor laborer named Sultan Mohammed. Now the spurned suitor and his brothers, who are suspected of being members of a local militia, were taking revenge. They splashed her face and hands with the acid and threw it on her two younger sisters and her mother, according to Mr. Mohammed and local government officials.        

On Friday, four of the men suspected of being involved in the attack, which took place on Nov. 28, were brought to the capital, Kabul, from Kunduz by the Interior Ministry for investigation and, potentially, prosecution. They were arrested Thursday in Kunduz.        

Mr. Mohammed came to the ministry on Friday to give a news conference.        

Human rights advocates praised the Afghan government&rsquo;s public stand on the case and its fast reaction. The police department in Kunduz Province, where the attack occurred, moved quickly to find the suspects, making arrests within 10 days, and the Interior Ministry called the crime &ldquo;brutal violence.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The attackers defamed Afghanistan in the eyes of the world,&rdquo; said the ministry&rsquo;s spokesman, Sediq Sediqui. &ldquo;It was the harshest violence they could ever carry out.&rdquo;        

He said that the Afghan police were warning &ldquo;those who commit such brutal acts that they will be brought to justice at any cost.&rdquo;        

Afghan women&rsquo;s advocates and Georgette Gagnon, human rights director for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, said they hoped that the government would prosecute the attackers under the Elimination of Violence Against Women law, which was passed last year.        

It outlawed for the first time a number of traditional practices that are harmful to women, although in some cases it requires that the victim of the crime file a complaint against the suspect, such as in cases of under-age marriage and when women are traded to settle disputes. In reality, a woman in such a situation would rarely be in a position to protest to a court.        

The law, however, specifically prohibits chemical attacks on women.        

&ldquo;According to this law, the attacker gets a punishment of at least 10 years of imprisonment and at most life imprisonment,&rdquo; said Nadera Geya, head of the Directorate of Women&rsquo;s Affairs in Kunduz Province, adding that she was requesting that the government apply that law to those men if they were convicted. &ldquo;It is an inhumane action against women in Afghanistan,&rdquo; Ms. Geya said, referring to the acid attack.        

The United Nations in a report issued last month noted that in the first year that Afghanistan enacted the law banning violence against women, from March 2010 to March 2011, there had been 2,299 complaints of gender-motivated abuse registered with the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, but that only 7 percent of those cases ended up in a prosecution.        

Acid attacks on women are not an everyday occurrence, but they have taken place in a number of areas of the country. They are often carried out in conservative rural areas by men and aimed at girls who are going to school.        

Particularly sinister in this case was the possibility that the attackers were militia members. The north of Afghanistan has had a proliferation of groups of irregular gunmen in the last two years who work locally, sometimes protecting their neighborhoods and villages, but often terrorizing residents, extorting money and goods.        

Kunduz has had a particular problem with the numerous militias, the so-called arbakai, in its area. Only a small percentage of the men are in a program run by American Special Forces to train them as neighborhood watchmen for their communities. The others often receive weapons and some financial support from the government as a buffer against Taliban insurgents.        

The Kunduz security commander, Brig. Gen. Ghulam Mohammad Farhad, described the attackers as &ldquo;illegal gunmen,&rdquo; and Ms. Geya said they were members of an arbakai.        

From the point of view of Mr. Mohammed, the girls&rsquo; father, what was most upsetting was that he knew the men who disfigured his daughters and beat his wife.        

&ldquo;I knew these men very well,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They use the same mosque as we use, and I did not get any warning from them before this incident. It was a sudden and shocking event.&rdquo;        

The spurned suitor, Naseer, has gone into hiding and was not one of those detained, though he was there the night of the attack, Mr. Mohammed said. Among the four arrested were Naseer&rsquo;s older brother, who may also have been involved in planning the attack, Mr. Mohammed said.        

He had rejected Naseer&rsquo;s offer of marriage at the time it was made, he said, because his daughter was too young. Recently he and his wife, with the agreement of his daughter, had searched for a suitable fianc&eacute; and had found one. She was to marry in a few weeks.        

Now, wedding plans are in limbo. A disfigured girl is hard to arrange a marriage for, and in any case, she was so badly burned that she could not be treated in Afghanistan and was sent to India.        
Jawad Sukhanyar contributed reporting from Kabul, and an Afghan employee of The New York Times from Kunduz, Afghanistan.
