
LONDON &mdash; When he rejected a new European accord on Friday that would bind the continent ever closer, Prime Minister David Cameron seemingly sacrificed Britain&rsquo;s place in Europe to preserve the pre-eminence of the City, London&rsquo;s financial district. The question now is whether his stance will someday seem justified, even prescient.        

Mr. Cameron refused to go along with the new European plan of stricter fiscal oversight and discipline hammered out in Brussels this week, in great part because of fears that the City would be strangled by regulations emanating from Brussels. He evidently felt he had little choice, and given the virulence of the anti-Europe sentiment in his own Conservative Party, few were inclined to argue that point.        

&ldquo;I said if I couldn&rsquo;t get adequate safeguards for Britain in a new European treaty, I wouldn&rsquo;t agree to it,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said in a news conference. &ldquo;What is on offer isn&rsquo;t in Britain&rsquo;s interests, so I didn&rsquo;t agree to it.&rdquo;        

Mr. Cameron said as early as October that the City was coming under pressure from the European Union. Some lawmakers were concerned even then that Brussels would pass laws or financial regulations that would move lucrative financial services from London to Frankfurt or Paris.        

&ldquo;London is the center of financial services in Europe,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said in October. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s under constant attack through Brussels directives. It&rsquo;s an area of concern; it&rsquo;s a key national interest that we need to defend.&rdquo;        

But many experts questioned Mr. Cameron&rsquo;s decision to take such a hard line, abandoning Britain&rsquo;s traditional strategy of acting both within and without the European club.        

The summit was &ldquo;a disaster for the U.K.,&rdquo; Charles Grant, director of the Center for European Reform, a pro-European research group here, said in a statement. &ldquo;For more than 50 years, a fundamental principle of Britain&rsquo;s foreign policy has been to be present when E.U. bodies take decisions, so that it can influence the outcome.&rdquo; What should really worry London now, Mr. Grant said, is that it no longer has a seat at the negotiating table.        

In the past, said Olaf Cramme, director of the Policy Network, a left-leaning research group in London, Britain has never lost a single European vote regarding financial service regulations. But since it has &ldquo;taken itself out of these preparatory negotiations, even as others move closer together,&rdquo; he said, it is likely to find it much more difficult to get its way.        

It was clear after a marathon session on Thursday that Mr. Cameron had alienated his continental counterparts. Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, told reporters, &ldquo;I really don&rsquo;t believe David Cameron was ever with us at the table.&rdquo; Nicolas Sarkozy, the French president, at one point snubbed Mr. Cameron in a hallway, refusing to shake his hand.        

&ldquo;The European Union is very much built on mutual trust, the relationships between leaders and the bonds of different countries,&rdquo; Mr. Cramme said. &ldquo;Cameron has taken a very tough line, and this will backfire.&rdquo;        

There was widespread confusion over how this would all play out. One view was that no matter what Mr. Cameron says, Britain will still be subject to European regulations, at least as far as Europe has jurisdiction over its non-British banks. Others doubted that the euro zone would long stand for having its main financial center in a nonmember country, and said it would inevitably begin directing its banking activities to Frankfurt or some other financial capital.        

&ldquo;The concern is that if the U.K. finds itself increasingly isolated,&rdquo; said Bob Penn, a partner at the law firm of Allen & Overy. &ldquo;You can see &mdash; if you&rsquo;re a pessimist &mdash; that Europe could get its revenge on the U.K. by a whole array of bureaucratic and regulatory reforms.&rdquo; In that scenario, Continental banks would be prohibited from dealing with the City unless the British firms adhered to Europe&rsquo;s regulations.        

Down that road lies Britain&rsquo;s possible exit from the European Union, a prospect that many British Conservatives find positively alluring. &ldquo;There is also an exciting sense that we are at the beginning of a very profound change in which our tortured relationship with Europe will be redefined, at long last,&rdquo; said The Daily Mail.        

An American banking industry official said he would not totally brush aside the possibility of retaliatory actions by Germany and France, but he said such responses were unlikely. After all, those countries have a long history of championing their global banks and would probably want to continue having an outsize presence in the City.        

&ldquo;The City has huge benefits for the E.U., and it&rsquo;s not in the euro zone&rsquo;s interest to see that evaporate and moved somewhere else,&rdquo; Yael Selfin, a director at PricewaterhouseCoopers, said. &ldquo;This is all part of a much longer bargaining process.&rdquo;        

London, many finance experts noted, is more an international financial center than a purely European one. Even if it were excluded from the euro zone, it would retain many of the attractions that have led Asians and Americans to locate major branches in London and to cut their deals by the Thames.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s the time zone and the fact that English is their native language,&rdquo; said an official at a European bank in New York. &ldquo;That has not changed.&rdquo;        

In fact, many of the same questions about London&rsquo;s competitiveness were raised when the euro zone was created, the official said, and Britain decided not to adopt the single currency but to stay with the pound. Despite fears that London would lose out to Frankfurt, the home of the European Central Bank, the City flourished.        

It is possible, however, that over time financial firms may decide to stop investing in Britain, with new hires being placed in Zurich or Frankfurt rather than London. &ldquo;In the worst case, they may face death by attrition,&rdquo; one bank official said.        
Reporting was contributed by Steven Erlanger in Brussels, Rachel Donadio in Rome and Graham Bowley, Susan Craig and Eric Dash in New York.
