
Iran said Friday that it had formally complained to the United Nations Security Council about what it called the hostile and aggressive behavior of the United States in sending a sophisticated radar-evading spy drone over Iranian territory, one that Iran&rsquo;s military said it had intercepted and captured last weekend.        

The complaint, which appeared to have been made more for its propaganda value than for any Iranian hope of Security Council action, was announced a day after Iran showcased what it described as the captured drone on national television, as if it were a war trophy. Members of Iran&rsquo;s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps were shown displaying a bat-winged aircraft on a platform bedecked with anti-American slogans and a mock American flag with skulls instead of stars.        

American officials reviewing the footage have declined to confirm or deny that it showed the same model as the RQ-170 Sentinel surveillance aircraft that they have acknowledged was lost recently by C.I.A. controllers based in Afghanistan, a lapse attributed to an unspecified technical malfunction. But military experts have said privately that the Iranians appear to have an RQ-170, one of the Pentagon&rsquo;s most technologically advanced reconnaissance drones.        

How that happened remained unclear. Iran has asserted that it captured the aircraft via a cyberattack, saying its armed forces detected the drone on Sunday over northern Iran and were able to guide it to a safe landing about 155 miles from the Afghanistan border.        

The loss of the drone is a potentially significant intelligence setback for the United States and has further elevated tensions with Iran, which were already high over Western suspicions that the Iranians are secretly developing a nuclear weapon despite their denials.        

Iran&rsquo;s complaint, submitted to the Security Council by the Iranian ambassador, Mohammad Khazaee, denounced what he called &ldquo;the provocative and covert operations against the Islamic Republic of Iran by the U.S. government, which have increased and intensified in recent months.&rdquo;        

In the complaint, which Iranian news agencies reported, the ambassador said that as part of the trend &ldquo;an American RQ-170 unmanned spy plane, bearing a specific serial number, violated Iran&rsquo;s airspace.&rdquo; He said Iran &ldquo;strongly protests such hostile and aggressive moves and warns about harmful consequences of the repetition of such actions.&rdquo;        

It was considered highly unlikely that the Council would punish the United States, one of the five permanent members with veto power.        

Iran&rsquo;s Islamic hierarchy also sought to exploit what it considered the propaganda value of the showcased drone by making it the subject of the Friday Prayer address at Tehran University, often used to send messages to Iran&rsquo;s foreign adversaries. The cleric who led the service, Kazzem Sediqi, praised the armed forces for capturing &ldquo;the United States&rsquo; most advanced spying tool,&rdquo; according to the semiofficial Fars News Agency.        

American officials have said the use of the RQ-170 was part of a stepped-up operation to monitor Iran&rsquo;s suspect nuclear sites. Western suspicions about Iran&rsquo;s uranium enrichment program grew after the International Atomic Energy Agency, the nonproliferation arm of the United Nations, last month issued an incriminating report that said Iran needed to explain evidence that it may be working on a nuclear weapon. Iran has repudiated the report as fiction.        

The drone footage on Iranian television on Thursday coincided with a diplomatic protest lodged with the ambassador from Switzerland, who represents American interests in Iran. The State Department confirmed on Friday that Iran&rsquo;s Foreign Ministry had summoned the ambassador from Switzerland, but a department spokeswoman, Victoria Nuland, declined to specify what had been discussed.        
