
MOSCOW &mdash; The calls started coming in the afternoon and tied up phones for hours at the headquarters of at least two organizations strongly critical of the Kremlin. &ldquo;Putin is life; Putin is the light; love Putin and your life will have meaning; Putin will give you happiness; Putin will open your eyes,&rdquo; a woman&rsquo;s ethereal voice chanted over and over and over.        

The mysterious recording seemed intended to incapacitate the organizations, the liberal Yabloko party and the opposition newspaper Novaya Gazeta, which have been promoting a large protest against the government of Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin that is planned for Saturday in Moscow.        

It was one of several bizarre episodes in a week that has left many here in a state of excited confusion. Anger over parliamentary elections last Sunday has impelled many Russians to shake off years of political apathy and take to the streets.        

The authorities have granted permission for a demonstration of up to 30,000 people on Saturday, a decision that by all accounts is unparalleled in Mr. Putin&rsquo;s 12-year reign. But they are also taking measures meant to discourage attendance.        

In one such attempt, Russia&rsquo;s chief public health official, Gennady Onishchenko, warned on Friday that protesters risked getting sick. &ldquo;Given the heightened rate of illness now observed, mass gatherings of people on the street could promote the transmission of respiratory infections,&rdquo; he said, according to the Ria Novosti news agency.        

An anonymous law enforcement source also told the Interfax news agency that officers would be looking for draft dodgers at the protest.        

Moscow&rsquo;s department of education sent out a directive on Friday requiring students in grades 9 through 11 to report for a mandatory Russian exam on Saturday during the time of the protest.        

After the test, &ldquo;headmasters will conduct an extra class with students about the rules of safe behavior in the city,&rdquo; said the directive, which was published by several Russian news agencies.        

Twitter posts about the protests were swamped by pro-government comments, the BBC reported, quoting Internet security experts who said that many of the messages appeared to come from a network of hijacked computers, or a botnet.        

YouTube, which Mr. Putin&rsquo;s critics employed frequently before and after the elections to lampoon the authorities, has also been deployed against the protesters. In one video making the rounds, protesters are portrayed as long-fanged orcs in a clip from the &ldquo;The Lord of the Rings&rdquo; movies, chanting &ldquo;Russia without Putin&rdquo; as they storm the gates of a castle, swords in hand.        

Protest supporters have responded with their own unusual tactics.        

Activists from the feminist group Femen stripped to the waist outside Moscow&rsquo;s main cathedral on Friday, wearing only upside-down Orthodox Christian crosses on their chests and holding signs that read &ldquo;God, chase out the czar!&rdquo;        

More ominous was an altered photograph of Mr. Putin circulating in the blogosphere that showed him dressed in the flowing robes of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the deposed leader of Libya, whose violent death in October was condemned by the Russian prime minister.        

If dealing with the authorities was not enough, protest supporters also had to contend with one another. For most of the day on Friday, Internet chatter about the protest was overshadowed by a spat over the location.        

The rally was initially supposed to be held at Revolution Square, outside the Kremlin walls. But in late-night negotiations with the mayor&rsquo;s office on Thursday, several self-proclaimed organizers agreed to move the protest to an island in the Moscow River.        

Bolotnaya Square, the new location, translates as &ldquo;swamp.&rdquo;        

There were howls of protest from some corners.        

&ldquo;I would rather march from the swamp to revolution than from the revolution to the swamp,&rdquo; Anatoli Baranov, an opposition journalist, said at a news conference on Friday.        

Yevgenia Chirikova, a young environmental activist who has become a leading opposition voice, took to Twitter to denounce Boris Y. Nemtsov, an opposition leader involved in the talks.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve been betrayed, but at least an agent of the F.S.B. has been outed,&rdquo; she wrote, referring to Russia&rsquo;s domestic intelligence agency.        

By Friday evening, most seemed to have agreed to the location change, vowing, if begrudgingly, not to let their squabbles overshadow what most admitted was a phenomenon larger than themselves.        

Not all, though. The National Bolshevik Party has said it will hold a separate rally at the original location. The Kremlin has long used the party&rsquo;s tactics, like when it invades government buildings and throws produce at officials, to taint all critics.        

&ldquo;In the opposition, we do have lovers of sadomasochism,&rdquo; said Ilya V. Ponomaryov, a left-wing activist and member of Parliament. &ldquo;Though, thankfully, the majority of those who go to protests are not these types.&rdquo;        
