
MOGADISHU, Somalia &mdash; Ban Ki-moon became the first United Nations secretary general to set foot in this war-ravaged country in almost 20 years on Friday, and he promised to relocate the United Nations&rsquo; political office for Somalia to Mogadishu next year, though other United Nations officials were skeptical.        

Dressed in a black flak jacket with &ldquo;United Nations&rdquo; stamped across his chest, Mr. Ban met with leaders from Somalia&rsquo;s Transitional Federal Government, a weak, divided and thoroughly unpopular entity that the United Nations has been trying to prop up.        

&ldquo;We are now at a critical juncture &mdash; a moment of fresh opportunities for the future of Somali people,&rdquo; Mr. Ban said. But, he warned, &ldquo;we have a very limited window of opportunity.&rdquo;        

Somalia has lurched from crisis to crisis since 1991 when the central government imploded and hundreds of thousands of people perished in famine and civil war. Since then, the United Nations has pumped billions of dollars into the country, trying to achieve some sense of stability, though chaos and suffering continue to be the norm.        

Mr. Ban&rsquo;s team kept this trip a closely held secret until the last minute. The last time a United Nations secretary general traveled here was in 1993, when a visit by Boutros Boutros-Ghali set off menacing street protests.        

This time, Somali forces and African Union peacekeepers &mdash; the true backbone of security here &mdash; locked Mogadishu down, with checkpoints and roadblocks across the city. The battered minibuses that usually cruise the bullet-pocked streets were nowhere to be found. Instead, traditional dancers with spears and white gowns flooded the avenues, singing songs of praise.        

Many Somalis were especially excited by Mr. Ban&rsquo;s promise of relocating the United Nations political office from Nairobi, Kenya.        

&ldquo;Many jobless people will get jobs of different kinds, and our young educated people will have opportunity,&rdquo; said Naasir Ali, a car mechanic.        

But Mogadishu, Somalia&rsquo;s capital, remains one of the most dangerous cities on earth, and in the past month, Islamist insurgents have killed several people with suicide bombs, adding to the thousands of lives lost here in recent years. High-ranking United Nations officials have promised to relocate to Mogadishu several times. But it has not happened because of the grave security concerns and the enormous logistical effort it would take to protect expatriates living here.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s a tremendously impermissible environment,&rdquo; said one United Nations official, who predicted that some of the organization&rsquo;s political officers would relocate to Somalia in the next few months but hardly all of them. Right now, the United Nations political arm for Somalia has a small office in Mogadishu, with about five people, but the bulk of the staff &mdash; which includes more than 50 employees &mdash; remains in Nairobi.        

The United Nations has been backing Somalia&rsquo;s transitional government, which is seen by Western powers to be the best bulwark against the Shabab, a brutal Islamist insurgent group that has been terrorizing Somalia for years and controls large tracts of territory. This year, as a famine swept across southern Somalia, killing tens of thousands of people, the Shabab blocked aid agencies from delivering food.        

But the Shabab have suffered a string of setbacks in the past few months. They now face Kenyan troops in the south, Ethiopian soldiers in central Somalia and a beefed-up African Union peacekeeping force in the capital, which has succeeded in driving most of the Shabab fighters out of Mogadishu.        

Kenya&rsquo;s Parliament voted this week to have the Kenyan forces become part of the official African Union mission, a move that could shift the financial burden from Kenya to countries like the United States that help pay for the African Union operations. But before that can happen, the African Union needs authorization from the United Nations Security Council to expand its mission, and Kenyan officials have said that process could take months.        

Bronwyn E. Bruton, a democracy and governing expert who wrote a provocative essay published by the Council on Foreign Relations urging the West to withdraw from Somalia, said it was &ldquo;utterly unsurprising that Kenya and/or Ethiopia would want to get in on the act.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The international war against the Shabab could provide them with a handsome Western subsidy for setting up shop in the country and &mdash; one assumes &mdash; forcibly setting up their proxies&rdquo; in Somalia, she said.        

During his visit to Mogadishu, which lasted just a few hours, Mr. Ban saluted the African Union for doing &ldquo;a tremendous job in very difficult circumstances.&rdquo;        

He also urged Somalia&rsquo;s transitional government to establish local administrations in newly liberated areas that are increasingly falling under the control of violent warlords.        

After Mogadishu, Mr. Ban flew to Dadaab, the world&rsquo;s largest refugee camp, near the Somalia-Kenya border. Dadaab hosts nearly half a million refugees, mostly from Somalia, and many lost children and loved ones in the long march to get there.        

&ldquo;My heart and mind are crying inside,&rdquo; Mr. Ban said at Dadaab, according to The Associated Press. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve heard so many concerns and difficulties.&rdquo;        
Mohammed Ibrahim reported from Mogadishu, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Nairobi, Kenya.
