
MEXICO CITY &mdash; Just over a month after he took charge of the police force in one of the country&rsquo;s most violent cities, Manuel Farf&aacute;n, a former brigadier general in the army, died Thursday in a torrent of bullets.        

Mr. Farf&aacute;n, 55, had been appointed police chief in Nuevo Laredo, on the Texas border, with great acclaim. He was one of 11 retired military officers appointed in the past year as local chiefs in troubled Tamaulipas State, a recent hot spot of smuggling and battles among rival drug trafficking organizations.        

The army officers come from one of Mexico&rsquo;s most trusted institutions and are seen as the kind of independent iron fist needed to clean up corrupt police forces and take on organized crime.        

The former police chief in Tijuana was an army officer credited with making gains against crime but also accused, by human rights groups, of attaining them through excessive force.        

Mr. Farf&aacute;n&rsquo;s short tenure suggests that even those with a military pedigree may not be able to escape the powerful gangs, which assassinated the police chief in Nuevo Laredo in 2005 just hours after he took office.        

The police gave no motive for Mr. Farf&aacute;n&rsquo;s slaying, but it bore the hallmarks of an organized crime attack, delivered with high-powered weapons as he drove home in his pickup truck. Aside from Mr. Farf&aacute;n, two of his bodyguards and his personal assistant were killed.        

Mr. Farf&aacute;n talked a hard line. In early January, he announced a list of 50 extortionists the police would hunt down, in part by posting their pictures around town. He also promised to fire officers who could not pass polygraphs and other confidence tests.        

Mexican government statistics show that 115 people were killed in Nuevo Laredo last year in violence related to organized crime, a significant increase from the 12 tallied in the city in 2009.        

Egidio Torre Cant&uacute;, the governor of Tamaulipas who took office Jan. 1, pledged a crackdown on organized crime, speaking from personal experience. His brother, Rodolfo, was assassinated in June while running for governor.        
