
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; A bomb exploded near a United Nations convoy helping patrol southern Lebanon on Friday, wounding five peacekeepers in the third attack on the contingent this year, a United Nations spokesman and security officials said.        

No one was killed in the attack, but it underlined a growing sense of unease in Lebanon, as the country braces for repercussions from the nine-month uprising in neighboring Syria. Lebanon is divided between factions opposed and allied to the Syrian government, and many have worried that a proxy war of sorts could be fought here.        

As on past Fridays, Syria witnessed another round of protests and crackdowns, and a London-based opposition group, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, said 14 people were killed there. Ten of them died in and around Homs, a city near the Lebanese border where protests have proven resilient, even amid a worsening in sectarian strife among religious communities. Opposition activists have accused the government of stoking the strife, while acknowledging an increase in tit-for-tat kidnappings and killings.        

The violence came amid what residents described as deteriorating conditions in the city, Syria&rsquo;s third largest. Fuel shortages endemic in the country are pronounced there, and many fear that the government may try a large-scale assault to reimpose its control.        

&ldquo;We couldn&rsquo;t offer medical treatment to the wounded,&rdquo; said a 40-year-old activist there who gave his name as Abu Ammar, speaking by phone. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t have medical stuff and equipment to help the wounded who are hospitalized in private clinics.&rdquo;        

The attack in Lebanon occurred at 9:30 a.m., when the bomb exploded on the southern outskirts of the port of Tyre, the officials said. The United Nations declined to identify the nationality of the peacekeepers but officials here said they were French.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s difficult to say anything more,&rdquo; said Andrea Tenenti, a spokesman for the United Nations force. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s still early to speculate on reasons behind it.&rdquo;        

Lebanese security officials said the bomb weighed nearly seven pounds, was detonated remotely and had been left in a trash bin along the route.        

The bombing was the first this year against the United Nations force in the region it actually patrols, an area that straddles the Lebanese-Israeli border. In May, six Italian peacekeepers were wounded by a roadside bomb in Sidon, another port city north of Tyre. In July, six French soldiers were wounded in an attack in the same region.        

Lebanon&rsquo;s prime minister, Najib Mikati, condemned the attack, echoing a sentiment heard often here that the violence plays into the region&rsquo;s broader tension.        

&ldquo;Such attacks don&rsquo;t only target Unifil but also Lebanon&rsquo;s stability and security,&rdquo; Mr. Mikati said in a statement, using the acronym for the peacekeeping force.        

&ldquo;The blast is related to the dynamic in the region,&rdquo; said Elias Hanna, a former Lebanese general and military analyst. &ldquo;Today&rsquo;s attack is a message to the main players.&rdquo;        

The United Nations force was created after Israel invaded Lebanon in 1978, then expanded in 2006 after a cease-fire between Israel and Hezbollah, which fought to a standoff that year.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.
