
BEIJING &mdash; Chinese border guards began joint patrols on Saturday on the Mekong River with their counterparts from Laos, Myanmar and Thailand, according to Xinhua, the state news agency. The effort is a significant step by China toward playing a larger role in regional security.        

The joint patrols came about after an Oct. 5 attack on two Chinese cargo ships led to the deaths of 13 sailors.        

Photographs of the sailors&rsquo; bodies were circulated on the Internet and aroused anger among some Chinese. At least some of the sailors had had their hands tied and their mouths gagged before being executed; others had been blindfolded with tape.        

Two weeks after the attack, the four countries agreed to start joint river patrols, Xinhua reported. The headquarters for the initiative, in Xishuangbanna, a tropical region in the far south of Yunnan Province, opened on Friday, and the first patrols, escorting 10 cargo ships into Southeast Asia, left from the town of Guanlei after a ceremony on Saturday.        

Their departure also marked the resumption of international shipping on the Mekong, which had been halted after the October attack. It took place within the so-called Golden Triangle, a border area known for drug smuggling.        

Nine Thai soldiers belonging to an antidrug task force  surrendered in late October after the Thai police issued arrest warrants, according to reports in the Thai news media.        

One report cited Chalerm Yubamrung, the deputy prime minister, as saying that &ldquo;solid evidence&rdquo; suggested that the weapons used to attack the Chinese ships, the Huaping and Yu Xing 8, were fired from within the Thai border.        

China has selected 200 officers from its larger border patrol force for the river patrols. Photographs and video images of the unit at Guanlei showed rows of men in black uniforms, helmets and orange life jackets standing at attention and clutching automatic rifles.        

The men appeared to be using small speedboats with six seats each and Yamaha engines; one larger boat had a mounted machine gun.        
