
RIO DE JANEIRO &mdash; Peru&rsquo;s cabinet chief, Salom&oacute;n Lerner, abruptly resigned Saturday after failing to negotiate a resolution to simmering protests against a large mining project led by an American company, the Newmont Mining Corporation. Peru&rsquo;s president, Ollanta Humala, replaced Mr. Lerner with his interior minister, &Oacute;scar Vald&eacute;s Dancuart, a former military officer.        

Mr. Humala, himself a former military officer, did not disclose the reason for the resignation of Mr. Lerner, a noted moderate who led his campaign. But the shake-up raises questions over a potential reorientation of policy by Mr. Humala, who became known for leading a failed military uprising in 2000.        

Aldo Panfichi, a political analyst at Catholic University in Lima, Peru, said the move could signal a shift from the conciliatory policies of Mr. Lerner toward a more hard-line approach. &ldquo;The new minister is a retired military man who had been Humala&rsquo;s instructor,&rdquo; Mr. Panfichi said, noting that Mr. Humala relies on royalties from mining projects to finance social welfare programs.        

The resignation comes at a difficult time for Mr. Humala, who declared a state of emergency last week in the northern region of Cajamarca after weeks of clashes between demonstrators and the police over the $4.8 billion gold and copper mine proposed by Newmont and a Peruvian company, Buenaventura.        

The Conga mine, which has drawn the anger of farmers in Cajamarca who say it would contaminate water supplies, is among Peru&rsquo;s largest private investments. Aided by high global commodities prices, Peru&rsquo;s economy has recently benefited from exports from other large mines. But protests against numerous projects have persisted.        

In a resignation letter, Mr. Lerner said he had sought to achieve &ldquo;dialogue and a search for consensus.&rdquo; By resigning, he said, Mr. Humala could move on with a &ldquo;new stage of government work.&rdquo;        
