
PESHAWAR, Pakistan (AP) &mdash; The deputy chief of the Pakistani Taliban announced Saturday that the militant group was in peace talks with the government and that an agreement to end its brutal four-year insurgency was within striking distance.        

The statement by the Taliban leader, Malvi Faqir Mohammad, which appeared timed to exploit tensions between the Pakistani Army and the United States, will be likely to stoke concerns in Washington over Pakistan&rsquo;s reliability as a long-term partner in the fight against extremists.        

There have been reports of talks between the Pakistani Taliban and the government before, but this was the first time a named Taliban commander confirmed them. It was unclear though whether Mr. Mohammad was speaking for the entirety of the increasingly factionalized network, especially its leader, Hakimullah Mehsud.        

The Pakistani government did not deny the talks, as it has in the past.        

Asked about Mr. Mohammad&rsquo;s statement, Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani said that his government had followed a policy of &ldquo;dialogue, deterrence and development&rdquo; toward militants.        

Pakistani officials have earlier stated that they do not talk to militants unless they surrender.        

Despite pushing for peace talks to end the related insurgency in Afghanistan, Washington is unlikely to support similar efforts to strike a deal in Pakistan. Ties between the two countries have been on a downward trend all year, and were dealt a big blow by an airstrike from U.S-led NATO forces in Afghanistan two weeks ago that killed about two dozen Pakistani soldiers. The attack triggered fresh anti-Americanism in Pakistan, including within the army ranks.        

Mr. Mohammad, in a phone interview, did not specify the terms being discussed, but he said talks were &ldquo;progressing well, and we may soon sign a formal peace agreement with the government.&rdquo;        

The Pakistani Taliban, closely allied with Al Qaeda, have been behind much of the violence tearing apart Pakistan in the last four and a half years. At least 35,000 people have been killed in insurgent attacks and army offensives.        
