
CAIRO &mdash; Members of the Muslim Brotherhood helped run a clinic to treat injured protesters. Construction workers from southern Egypt smashed rocks for the defense of Tahrir Square.        

Lobna Elshoky and Nora Abusamra, both 25, swept trash into a plastic bag. &ldquo;We also brought food and water,&rdquo; Ms. Abusamra said.        

A dentist from Aswan, Mohamed Mustafa, traveled 600 miles to be at the antigovernment protest. &ldquo;I was expecting to find the Wafd were the leaders, or the Brotherhood were the leaders,&rdquo; he said, speaking of two of Egypt&rsquo;s best-known opposition movements. But what he found was far better, he said.        

&ldquo;There are no leaders at all.&rdquo;        

Nine days after a diverse band of protesters mobilized on the Internet and gathered by the thousands in Tahrir Square, shocking both themselves and their country with their numbers, their campaign to oust President Hosni Mubarak seems to have survived, improbably, without a recognized cadre at the top giving orders.        

The groups associated with the initial success of the protests, like the April 6 Youth Movement, remain key organizers. The diplomat Mohamed ElBaradei was authorized by several groups of protesters to negotiate on their behalf. But not one prominent, popular figure has emerged as the movement&rsquo;s acknowledged leader.        

Events may have outpaced the search for such leaders. After two days of attacks by pro-government forces, the protest movement has adopted a war footing and is now defined by the battle for Tahrir Square, also known as Liberation Square. The only real leaders seem to be the young people who have returned to the barricades, again and again, for days now.        

&ldquo;Those young men defended Egypt,&rdquo; said George Ishak, the head of the National Association for Change, Mr. ElBaradei&rsquo;s opposition umbrella group. &ldquo;They took the bullet.&rdquo;        

For now, supporters say, the decentralized structure is the movement&rsquo;s great strength, but it may also be a looming liability in the face of a government with deep experience in crushing opposition groups.        

As the protest continues, some supporters worry that if they fail to remove Mr. Mubarak, or to seriously upend his  government, they will be the first to pay the price. There are also fears that other Egyptians will grow weary of the unrest, and turn on the protesters.        

But for now, their success so far &mdash; a change in Egypt&rsquo;s government has been promised, if not on their terms &mdash; has drawn the support of the country&rsquo;s established opposition figures, who have worked to capture some of the energy from the revolt. On Thursday, leaders representing Communists, the Muslim Brotherhood and Mr. ElBaradei&rsquo;s umbrella movement walked across Tahrir Square, arm in arm, a solidarity march that protesters captured on their cellphones.        

They were just a few of the many opposition figures who have made cameos in the square &mdash; visits the protesters cautiously embrace.        

&ldquo;Some of the older political figures are trying to impose themselves on the situation,&rdquo; said Ahmed Naguib, who has taken on the role of press liaison for the protesters. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s no leader.&rdquo;        

That vacuum has created logistical challenges, he said, including in the distribution of food and in protecting the dozens of detainees captured by the antigovernment protesters.        

Even so, a remarkable sense of order prevails in much of Tahrir Square, from the layers of the checkpoints at the entrances to the warning system of metal bars striking metal, sounded when an attack from pro-government forces seems imminent.        

Injured people are rushed to one of several clinics, staffed by volunteers like Ahmed Mohammed, 26, a surgeon who cut short his trip in Asia to join the effort.        

&ldquo;People are saying we might get killed,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;In the future, they will say these people made history.&rdquo;        

Medicine donated by sympathizers arrived in shopping bags and was quickly sorted and stacked by a group of young pharmacists.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t need a leader,&rdquo; said one of them, Amira Magdy, 22. &ldquo;This system is beautiful.&rdquo;        

Less orderly are the detentions of men accused of being government infiltrators and provocateurs. Several detainees were beaten as they were herded through the crowd, despite calls by many protesters to treat them peacefully.        

As the opposition tries to ride the wave of protests, and considers new relationships with the government, it is not clear whether their goals will continue to coincide with those of the people in the barricades.        

&ldquo;They&rsquo;re dealing now with the pre-existing internal divisions and agendas,&rdquo; said Hossam Bahgat, a human rights advocate. Some want to engage with the government and some do not, he said.        

&ldquo;There are those who think that now is the time to get close to Suleiman and get on his good list,&rdquo; he said, referring to Omar Suleiman, the new vice president. &ldquo;Whether some of the Brotherhood will be willing to engage with the regime for the first time remains to be seen.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ishak said there would be no negotiations until Mr. Mubarak leaves. &ldquo;We will negotiate about the transition with Omar Suleiman,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We want the young people to be the ones to form a negotiating committee.&rdquo;        

Amr Ezz, one of the founders of the April 6 Youth Movement, said his members were &ldquo;continuing on the same path.&rdquo; He dismissed the fear that Egyptians might grow weary of the protests. &ldquo;They were not actually out there,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They did not see people die in front of them.&rdquo;        

By Thursday, the government seemed to be regaining its confidence. They detained Mr. Ezz and several of his colleagues, according to other April 6 members.        
 David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting.
