
Ante Markovic, who as the last prime minister of Yugoslavia tried to stave off the ethnic warfare that led to the disintegration of that nation, died on Nov. 28 in Zagreb, the Croatian capital. He was 87.        

Croatia&rsquo;s state news agency, HINA, reported the death.        

Mr. Markovic, a Croat born in what is now Bosnia and Herzegovina, was named prime minister in January 1989, two years before his formerly Communist country fell apart. Despite ancient ethnic rivalries, Yugoslavia had been held together during the 35-year regime of Marshal Josip Broz Tito as perhaps the most open of the totalitarian Eastern European states. Mr. Markovic&rsquo;s predecessor, Branko Mikulic, made early attempts at liberalization, but resigned in December 1988 when the Yugoslav Parliament rejected his economic reforms. On Jan. 19, 1989, the collective presidency &mdash; representing Yugoslavia&rsquo;s six republics and two autonomous provinces &mdash; chose Mr. Markovic as prime minister.        

Tensions rose as Slovenia and Croatia, the two most prosperous republics, sought a loose confederation that would give them greater autonomy over their economies. Serbia, with 36 percent of the population, opposed decentralization.        

Hoping to keep the country together, Mr. Markovic instituted economic programs that, for a time, significantly reduced unemployment and inflation that in 1988 had reached 2,400 percent. But his programs faltered as many formerly state-subsidized enterprises went out of business, leaving thousands out of work.        

By January 1990, the Communist Party had surrendered its constitutionally guaranteed monopoly on power, and the six republics had seized local control. Soon after, in another attempt to unify the country, Mr. Markovic announced that the central government would conduct free, multiparty national elections.        

&ldquo;We must find a way of living together,&rdquo; he told the Croatian Parliament in June 1991. &ldquo;We could find ourselves sitting on a bomb, which could blow us all up.&rdquo; Still, Croatia, Slovenia and Macedonia soon declared their independence. And when Bosnia and Herzegovina did the same in December 1991, Mr. Markovic resigned, clearing the way for Serbia to essentially control the central government.        

Ante Markovic was born in the town of Konjic on Nov. 25, 1924. He joined the League of Communist Youth in the 1930s and, during World War II, fought with the resistance organized by Tito against the German and Italian occupation.        

Mr. Markovic received an electrical engineering degree from Zagreb University, became afactory manager in Zagreb and rose through the Communist Party. On June 27, 1991, two days after Croatia and Slovenia voted to secede, the Yugoslav Army, by then controlled by a largely Serbian officer corps, swept into Slovenia. War would ravage parts of the former Yugoslavia for a decade.        
