
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The death toll in the Syrian uprising has exceeded 5,000, a United Nations official said on Monday.        

The estimate came as the Syrian government called on voters to turn out for local elections that it portrayed as good-faith reform efforts. But activists said that most citizens, observing a second day of a general strike, rejected the polls as irrelevant to a country in such turmoil.        

The United Nations human rights commissioner, Navi Pillay, briefed the Security Council on Syria and then told reporters that at least 300 children were among the people killed since the uprising began in March, The Associated Press reported. She noted that the death toll had been just 2,000 in August. An estimated 14,000 people have been detained, Ms. Pillay said.        

Opposition groups reported at least 18 deaths on Monday in clashes between security forces and army defectors in several regions.        

The Syrian government has maintained that its crackdown is aimed at battling armed renegades and has offered occasional concessions, like freeing some political prisoners.        

The municipal vote was carried out in that vein. Syria&rsquo;s prime minister, Adel Safar, called on Syrians to cast their ballots to &ldquo;stand together to save our country from the conspiracies against us.&rdquo; The government reported that the turnout was good and that voting was &ldquo;proceeding in a democratic spirit.&rdquo;        

Activists, however, said that turnout was high only among those who support the government of President Bashar al-Assad and that most Syrians abstained from voting. In some areas, they said, residents were forced to head to polling stations.        

&ldquo;Homs is on strike, and around 90 percent of the people did not participate in the elections,&rdquo; said Salim Qabbani of the Local Coordination Committees, an opposition group in Syria. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s only the regime supporters who participated, so there was basically no elections in Homs.&rdquo;        

The authorities said that the elections were part of a reform package Mr. Assad announced this year and that they would lead to parliamentary elections and constitutional amendments next fall. But critics said these elections would have little significance because municipal councils have no major power in the government, whose domination by the Baath Party is enshrined in the Constitution.        

The government also denied that the general strike was being observed. The state news agency said the strike was a failure and published an eight-page report to prove it, along with several pictures showing open shops and busy markets.        

&ldquo;The markets in Syrian provinces had normal movement yesterday,&rdquo; the report said. It added that the ordinary workday came &ldquo;despite incitement by foreign-linked terrorist groups to stop economic and social activity.&rdquo;        

However, activists from the Local Coordination Committees and the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, as well as residents reached by phone in Damascus, Homs and Dara&rsquo;a, said shops were closed as were some schools on Monday.        

&ldquo;It seems that the strike was successful this time,&rdquo; a 29-year-old resident of Damascus said.        

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights also reported clashes between security forces and army defectors.        

The Local Coordination Committees said 12 people were killed in Homs and 3 in Hama, 2 in Idlib in northern Syria and 1 in a suburb of Damascus.        
