
MOSCOW &mdash; Increasingly assailed by charges of electoral fraud, Russia&rsquo;s governing party, United Russia, held a rally in Moscow on Monday apparently meant as a show of strength after a big anti-Kremlin protest over the weekend.        

But attendance at the party&rsquo;s demonstration was sparse, not enough to fill part of the modest square designated for the event, and not even close to the 25,000 people the authorities later said attended. Moreover, many of the attendees seemed to have been taken there against their will.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t have a clue why I&rsquo;m here,&rdquo; said a 23-year-old student named Edik, who like others would not give his last name, fearing reprisals. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s for television. These people are lying, promising everything and doing nothing. They canceled our classes for us to come here. I don&rsquo;t need this.&rdquo; He added a few unprintable expletives.        

Another attendee, Olga, 23, an accountant for a United Russia district office in Moscow, said she was &ldquo;forced to come.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Apparently it&rsquo;s our duty,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re supposed to make up the masses.&rdquo;        

United Russia, which is led by Russia&rsquo;s prime minister, Vladimir V. Putin, has been steadily bleeding support over the last year. The party lost its constitutional majority after parliamentary elections this month, winning about 50 percent of the vote.        

Even that result, domestic and international election observers say, was achieved with the help of large-scale falsification, to the displeasure of some voters. On Saturday, as many as 40,000 people gathered for the protest in central Moscow to demand a new, fraud-free election.        

It was the largest protest against Mr. Putin&rsquo;s government since he took power 12 years ago, and it contrasted conspicuously with the pro-United Russia rally on Monday, held in honor of Constitution Day.        

Held just outside the Kremlin walls, the demonstration seemed divided between a cheering section of pro-Kremlin youth groups, who crowded a glittering stage, and another far less boisterous crowd farther back made up of stone-faced union workers, students and administrators from various Moscow city district offices.        

Several said they attended on their own as a show of support for United Russia.        

&ldquo;We want stability in Russia,&rdquo; said Valentina Simonova, a 60-year-old retiree, who said she used to support the Communist Party. Under United Russia, she said, &ldquo;life became better, life changed.&rdquo;        

Most, however, refused to talk to a reporter.        

In speeches, United Russia leaders and government officials repeated claims made by Mr. Putin last week that antigovernment protests were being provoked from abroad, namely by the United States.        

&ldquo;There are forces today that consider Russia easy prey,&rdquo; Dmitri O. Rogozin, Russia&rsquo;s ambassador to NATO, said from the stage. &ldquo;They bombed Iraq. They destroyed Libya. They are approaching Syria. They stepped all over the people of Yugoslavia. And they are now thinking about Russia and are waiting for a moment when it is weak.&rdquo;        

The disconnect between the paltry attendance and claims by officials that 25,000 showed up provoked chortling among bloggers, who quickly posted overhead photos of the United Russia rally alongside pictures from Saturday&rsquo;s far larger protest.        

Even some United Russia members appear to have grown weary of the apparent deception. On Monday, several created a Facebook page calling for honest elections, adding a white ribbon, the symbol of Saturday&rsquo;s protest, to United Russia&rsquo;s logo.        

&ldquo;We do not think that the party can go any further with this stigma of being corrupt falsifiers,&rdquo; said Olga V. Kryshtanovskaya, one of the site&rsquo;s founders. &ldquo;We need to clean out the party and punish the guilty.&rdquo;        
