
WASHINGTON &mdash; The militant group Hezbollah has stepped up a public campaign against the Central Intelligence Agency in Lebanon, using a television broadcast to name 10 people who it said were C.I.A. officers who worked from the American Embassy in Beirut in recent years.        

The report Friday on Al Manar, Hezbollah&rsquo;s television channel, was the latest in a series of claims from Hezbollah and the Iranian government, its main sponsor, to have unraveled a web of C.I.A. informants and officers in Iran and Lebanon. American officials have confirmed that there have been setbacks in both countries, though they have not been willing to discuss the details.        

The Manar report used animation to portray supposed meetings between the C.I.A. officers and their Lebanese agents at fast-food outlets in Beirut, including Pizza Hut and Starbucks.        

Most C.I.A. officers, including those in Lebanon, pose as diplomats, though their true work is often identified by competing espionage services. When an undercover intelligence officer is publicly identified, it can be difficult or impossible for the officer to work again in a covert role overseas, for fear of compromising any informants the officer might recruit.        

A C.I.A spokeswoman, Jennifer Youngblood, declined to confirm or deny whether the names broadcast by Al Manar were in fact those of C.I.A. employees.        

&ldquo;The agency does not, as a rule, address spurious claims from terrorist groups,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s worth remembering that Hezbollah is a dangerous organization, with Al Manar as its propaganda arm. That fact alone should cast some doubt on the credibility of the group&rsquo;s claims.&rdquo;        

Hezbollah and the C.I.A. have been bitter foes since the 1980s, when the group was blamed for a 1983 bombing of the United States Embassy in Beirut that killed eight C.I.A. employees and the 1985 kidnapping and murder of William Frances Buckley, the Beirut station chief. Hezbollah was also accused of the 1983 bombing of the Marine barracks in Beirut, killing 241 Americans.        

An American official who would speak of classified intelligence matters only on condition of anonymity said Hezbollah had killed more Americans than any terrorist group except Al Qaeda. The official complained that &ldquo;repeating Hezbollah&rsquo;s claims does nothing but serve that group&rsquo;s interests&rdquo; but did not deny that the agency had suffered losses in Lebanon.        

The official added: &ldquo;No one is giving up against Hezbollah.&rdquo;        

The Manar report said the 10 C.I.A. officers included some women and had recruited spies to provide information on Hezbollah&rsquo;s fighters and officials. &ldquo;The C.I.A. officers were active in recruiting agents from various segments of the Lebanese society: government employees, security and military personnel, religious, banking and academic figures,&rdquo; the report said.        

Hezbollah&rsquo;s leader, Hassan Nasrallah, bragged last June on the same television station that he had exposed at least two C.I.A. spies who had penetrated the militant group. That was among the first public hints of the agency&rsquo;s troubles there.        
