
President Obama said on Monday that the United States had asked Iran to return an American surveillance drone that the Iranians say they captured on Dec. 4. It was Mr. Obama&rsquo;s first public comment about the drone, a remote-controlled spying aircraft, in a case that has raised American tensions with Iran.        

&ldquo;We have asked for it back &mdash; we&rsquo;ll see how the Iranians respond,&rdquo; Mr. Obama said of the drone in a short session with reporters at the White House. Mr. Obama appeared with Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq, with whom he discussed issues including American concerns about Iran&rsquo;s influence in the region.        

Mr. Obama was answering this question: &ldquo;And speaking of Iran, are you concerned that it will be able to weaken America&rsquo;s national security by discovering intelligence from the fallen drone that it captured?&rdquo;        

Mr. Obama did not elaborate on the episode or on Iranian assertions that its forces had captured the drone through a digital attack on the aircraft&rsquo;s avionics, which they say caused it to land safely inside northern Iran.        

American officials have attributed the loss of the drone to a technical malfunction. Just how the drone, which was managed by C.I.A. controllers in neighboring Afghanistan, ended up on the ground in Iran, apparently nearly intact, remains unclear.        

Last Thursday, the Iranian authorities staged an elaborate televised video presentation of what they said was the captured drone, an RQ-170 Sentinel. The RQ-170, a batwing aircraft with radar-evading technology, is capable of lingering for hours at 50,000 feet and monitoring developments on the ground. American officials have said the aircraft was part of an intensified effort to monitor suspect nuclear sites in Iran.        

On Monday, Iranian military officials were quoted in the state-run press saying they were extracting intelligence data from the drone and would reverse-engineer it to learn how it works. The semiofficial Fars News Agency said Iran&rsquo;s armed forces had captured a prize that &ldquo;can blunt the U.S. technological edge over its adversaries.&rdquo;        

Iran lodged formal complaints last week about what they called the drone incursion, protesting to both the United Nations Security Council and Switzerland&rsquo;s ambassador to Tehran, who is responsible for American interests in Iran. Iran also complained to Afghanistan for allowing the Americans to use it as a surveillance base, the Afghanistan Foreign Ministry said Sunday.        

Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta described efforts to seek the return of the drone from Iran as &ldquo;an appropriate request.&rdquo; But he cast doubt on chances that Iran would agree.        
Thom Shanker contributed reporting.
