
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Efforts by Libya&rsquo;s transitional government to assert its authority over the capital were marred over the weekend, after members of a powerful rebel militia exchanged fire with soldiers in the fledgling army, leaving two people dead.        

The clashes, which began when the Libyan National Army&rsquo;s highest ranking officer tried to speed through a militia checkpoint, underscored the continued inability of Libyan authorities to organize &mdash; or control &mdash; the thousands of armed men who fought for months against Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in ad hoc units that have proved enduring.        

The fighting does not bode well for a campaign by the Transitional National Council, Libya&rsquo;s postwar interim government, to persuade militias from other areas to leave the capital by Dec. 20. The militiamen poured into Tripoli as it fell to rebel forces in August, and hundreds of heavily armed men have lingered, staking out territory and occasionally skirmishing with one another, despite officials&rsquo; pleas to quit the city.        

From the earliest months of the Libyan uprising, rebel leaders have been trying to create a unified army from the remains of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s badly fractured military. In July, those efforts suffered a setback when the rebel force&rsquo;s chief of staff, Gen. Abdul Fattah Younes, was assassinated in Benghazi amid suspicions over his loyalties. As a top security official under Colonel Qaddafi, General Younes had been responsible for the detention and torture of countless Libyan dissidents.        

In recent weeks, a rival of General Younes, Gen. Khalifa Hiftar, has emerged as the army&rsquo;s most influential officer, though many of the militias still operating in the capital continue to answer to their own commanders.        

Tensions over the conflicting claims of control came to a head on Saturday when General Hiftar&rsquo;s convoy, on its way to the international airport, was attacked as he sped through a checkpoint run by fighters from the western mountain town of Zintan, according to rebel leaders and an army spokesman.        

Col. Mukhtar Farnana, head of the military council in western Libya, accused General Hiftar of &ldquo;trying to take the airport by force&rdquo; and called for an investigation into the clashes. He derided the national army as little more than a collection of militias from eastern Libya, where the interim government is based, that behaved like &ldquo;bodyguards for Hiftar.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This is not how the national army should behave, and we are waiting to see what the N.T.C. and the Ministry of Defense say because the situation on the ground right now is not bearable,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;We are waiting for answers about what they will do with Hiftar.&rdquo;        

Col. Ahmed Omar Bani, a spokesman for the Defense Ministry, disputed the militiamen&rsquo;s version of events. The Zintan militia was not even involved in the fight, he said, which he said had pitted the army against &ldquo;a group of uneducated men&rdquo; who were &ldquo;thinking about killing Gen. Khalifa Hiftar.&rdquo;        

He warned that General Hiftar enjoyed respect among army officers and that an attack on him &ldquo;would cause a disaster for Libya.&rdquo;        

The Libyan National Army is in the earliest stages of its development. Many of its members are defectors from Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s armed forces, but they are ill-equipped and poorly trained. The Transitional National Council is urging militiamen to join the army or lay down their arms and return to civilian life. It is an initiative that militia commanders say they support, although there appear to be widespread misgivings about the current force, which on Saturday appeared unable to go head to head with one of the country&rsquo;s more powerful rebel groups.        

As the clash unfolded, scores of soldiers rushed to the scene of the clashes in their own cars, battered sedans or old station wagons, haphazardly waving rifles and wearing ill-fitting and sometimes mismatched fatigues. Many fired randomly into the air.        

Colonel Bani said that the size of the army was currently unknown and that the force operated without a chief of staff, like &ldquo;a body without a head.&rdquo; Much of the confusion and tension among the rebels also stems from the lack of a clear chain of command within the fledgling army since the assassination of General Younes.        

&ldquo;After Abdul Fattah Younes was killed, a new head of the army should have been chosen right away,&rdquo; said Colonel Farnana. &ldquo;The N.T.C. must choose the head, and after that we can gather together the body.&rdquo;        

Both the army spokesman and the Zintan militia commander at the airport, Mukhtar al-Akhdar, agreed that the clashes began when General Hiftar&rsquo;s convoy tried to pass through the checkpoint, tucked under a highway overpass. The militia has guarded the airport since August, and its members wanted the convoy to properly identify itself, said Mr. Akhdar, who also accused the army of trying to seize the airport, a valuable strategic asset, &ldquo;by force.&rdquo;        

That confrontation sparked clashes that ricocheted between the highway checkpoint and an army base that General Hiftar used as his headquarters through the night, the militiamen said.        

The army had arrested two members of the Zintan militia in the initial confrontation and taken them to the base, and the Zintan militia soon followed, exchanging fire with soldiers. Mr. Akhdar said he &ldquo;gave Hiftar a few hours to release our men,&rdquo; a deadline that the army answered with a counterattack on the checkpoint, killing two fighters and leaving the concrete walls of the underpass pocked with bullet holes.        

The militiamen stormed General Hiftar&rsquo;s compound and took prisoners, using them as bargaining chips to free their two men, Mr. Akhdar said. In the tense final moments, his forces surrounded the general and his men near the back entrance of the base, he said, but let them leave unharmed on the insistence of the Defense Ministry.        

&ldquo;We told Hiftar, &lsquo;You are free, but do not come back to the airport,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Akhdar said. &ldquo;We had them and could have killed them all, but we gave them their freedom.&rdquo;        
