
WASHINGTON &mdash; President Obama, welcoming Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq to the White House on Monday, said that after nearly nine years of war, Iraq had become a &ldquo;sovereign, self-reliant and democratic&rdquo; country that could serve as a model for aspiring democrats across the Middle East.        

Mr. Obama, who as a young politician labeled Iraq a &ldquo;dumb war&rdquo; and campaigned on a pledge to end it, used language reminiscent of the Bush administration to justify the costly commitment of American lives and treasure. Thanks to these sacrifices, he said, &ldquo;what we have now achieved is an Iraq that is self-governing, that is inclusive and that has enormous potential.&rdquo;        

The two leaders appeared at a news conference after a morning of meetings, and a solemn wreath-laying ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery, meant to mark a historic milestone in the relationship between the countries as the last American military convoy prepared to roll out of Iraq this month.        

Yet the meetings also underscored the nations&rsquo; continuing ties, with Mr. Obama making it clear that the United States would supply Iraq with military hardware and training for years to come. The administration announced it would sell 18 more F-16 fighter jets to Iraq, helping rebuild an air force destroyed by war, and Mr. Maliki said he was seeking other military equipment.        

History will judge whether the decision to go to war was a mistake, Mr. Obama said. But he and Mr. Maliki both tried to keep their focus on the future, describing a partnership that they said would extend far beyond security to trade, energy investment and educational exchanges. Iraq&rsquo;s economy was projected to grow faster than that of China or India, Mr. Obama noted.        

Still, the complexity of the relationship was also in plain view, particularly regarding a split over how to respond to the brutal crackdown in Syria. Mr. Obama has imposed sanctions and called for President Bashar al-Assad to step down, saying his &ldquo;capacity to retain legitimacy inside Syria, I think, is deeply eroded.&rdquo; Mr. Maliki, while affirming support for the Syrian people, said he did not have &ldquo;the right to ask a president to abdicate&rdquo; and did not favor a trade embargo.        

Mr. Obama acknowledged there were &ldquo;some different tactical views in terms of how best to transition to an inclusive, representative government inside of Syria.&rdquo; But he added that he respected Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s decision.        

The White House meetings, and the wreath-laying, were part of a choreographed series of events to draw the war to a close. On Wednesday, the president and his wife, Michelle, will travel to Fort Bragg, N.C., to thank the troops for their service. Next week, a ceremony in Iraq will include the furling of the military&rsquo;s colors, which signifies the end of the mission.        

This will be a season of homecomings, Mr. Obama said, as military families around the country are &ldquo;reunited for the holidays.&rdquo;        

In a few weeks, the American military force that invaded almost nine years ago, and still numbered 150,000 when the president took office, will have shriveled to a vestigial presence of military liaison officers and embassy guards. Mr. Obama acknowledged that the embassy in Baghdad would maintain a larger-than-normal security force &mdash; a decision that has aroused criticism among some Iraqis. He said that measure was necessary to protect diplomats or American civilians working in the oil sector who might be targeted by militant groups.        

Mr. Maliki and Mr. Obama sent an indirect warning to Iran not to meddle in Iraq after the Americans leave. Iraq, the prime minister said, speaking through an interpreter, follows a foreign policy &ldquo;which does not intervene in the affairs of others and does not allow the others to intervene in its own affairs.&rdquo;        

Despite his assertion of Iraqi sovereignty, Mr. Maliki made it clear that Iraq would depend on the United States for military equipment and training. His most fervent answer of the news conference came when he made a pitch for Congressional approval of the 18 fighter jets.        

&ldquo;The military hardware creates a surrogate relationship with the American military,&rdquo; said Kenneth M. Pollack, director of the Saban Center for Middle East Policy at the Brookings Institution. &ldquo;It also sends a message to Iran.&rdquo;        

Unresolved issues include the status of Camp Ashraf, where thousands of dissident Iranians have been labeled terrorists and detained, and what will happen to the last remaining prisoner being held by the American military in Iraq, Ali Musa Daqduq, a Lebanese suspected of being a Hezbollah operative and accused of involvement in a 2007 raid by Shiite militants in Karbala that resulted in the deaths of five American soldiers.        

Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, who joined Mr. Obama for his meeting with Mr. Maliki and met later with the foreign minister, Hoshyar Zebari, said Mr. Daqduq&rsquo;s fate was &ldquo;still a matter of discussion.&rdquo;        

Outside the White House, about a thousand supporters of the Iranian dissident group the Mujahedeen Khalq, known as M.E.K., rallied to demand that the group be removed from the State Department&rsquo;s list of terrorist groups, and that the residents of Camp Ashraf be protected. They waved yellow banners and were addressed by Tom Ridge, the former secretary of homeland security, and other former senior officials, who support their demands.        
Steven Lee Myers and Scott Shane contributed reporting.
