
MEXICO CITY &mdash; After a nearly two-month standoff with international donors over its disputed presidential election, Haiti&rsquo;s electoral council  on Thursday announced that it had removed the government-backed candidate from the second round of voting in favor of a popular musician whose supporters had protested fiercely when he was initially excluded.        

The election authorities said Mirlande H. Manigat, a former first lady and college administrator who was the top vote getter in the Nov. 28 election, will face Michel Martelly, a performer with the stage name Sweet Micky, in a March 20 runoff.        

The decision was a turnabout for the government, which had released preliminary results in December showing that Jude C&eacute;lestin, a public works official who was President Ren&eacute; Pr&eacute;val&rsquo;s choice, had come in second, leading to days of violent protests over accusations of a stolen election.        

But Mr. Pr&eacute;val, whose popularity has fallen as the pace of rebuilding from the January 2010 earthquake has slowed, came under intense diplomatic pressure to accept the conclusion of a team of international experts who contended that Mr. C&eacute;lestin had not earned a spot in the runoff because of tainted results.        

The announcement comes at a moment of simmering political turmoil and intrigue, after the sudden return on Jan. 16 of Jean-Claude Duvalier, the former dictator known as Baby Doc, who now faces corruption and human rights charges stemming from his rule.        

There are also hints that Jean-Bertrand Aristide, a populist priest and former president pushed from power in 2004, may soon come back, too. His party, Lavalas, which is still popular in many poorer quarters, was among more than a dozen banned from the elections for what the authorities said were improper documents.        

Ms. Manigat and Mr. Martelly share many positions, both promising to slow a cholera epidemic, speed up rebuilding after the earthquake  and improve safety. But they are polar opposites on the public stage.        

Ms. Manigat stayed largely out of the limelight on Thursday while Mr. Martelly plunged into campaign mode, holding a news conference, giving interviews and posting messages on Twitter vowing to win and unite the country.        

&ldquo;We have many difficulties awaiting us, and together we can resolve them,&rdquo; he said at his news conference.        

Political analysts said the election might turn on personalities more than positions; both are considered relative conservatives, particularly on law-and-order concerns. Mr. Martelly has suggested reinstating the disbanded Haitian military, partly to address chronic unemployment, while Ms. Manigat has called for bolstering the national police to tamp down crime.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know that there is a significant difference between them,&rdquo; said Alex Dupuy, a Wesleyan University sociologist who studies Haiti.        

Whatever proposals they may have &mdash; Ms. Manigat has suggested remaking the education system, while Mr. Martelly has talked about revamping the agriculture sector &mdash; must pass muster with the international donors that prop up the country&rsquo;s budget, he said.        

Neither one is going to be able to &ldquo;set the priority for economic policy,&rdquo; Dr. Dupuy said. &ldquo;That is set by the donors, major financial institutions and the interim recovery commission&rdquo; guiding the rebuilding plans.        

With widespread confusion and disarray at polling places, some of them ransacked, nearly all of the primary candidates had denounced last year&rsquo;s election even before any ballots were counted.        

The Organization of American States, at the invitation of the government, issued a report last month suggesting that there were widespread flaws and possible fraud in the count and saying that its analysis showed that Mr. Martelly had come in second.        

Members of Mr. Pr&eacute;val&rsquo;s administration sent word that the president was dissatisfied with the methodology, which was also questioned by some outside organizations as manipulation by foreign governments. The Congressional Black Caucus, among other groups, called for holding a new election rather than accept the O.A.S. report.        

Still, intense diplomatic pressure followed, chiefly from the United States, France and Canada, Haiti&rsquo;s principal donors, pressing Haitian officials to accept the O.A.S. findings. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton visited Haiti on Sunday to deliver the message personally to the government, and American officials had hinted that future support depended in part on accepting the report.        

In a statement on Thursday, the American Embassy in Port-au-Prince  said the United States stood ready to assist Haiti in the next round of elections &ldquo;to promote a free and fair electoral process and reduce the level of fraud and irregularities that affected the first round.&rdquo;        

Schools and some businesses had closed Thursday in anticipation of violence, but the streets were calm after the announcement, which was delayed for hours. Shops began reopening, and young people in some neighborhoods where Mr. Martelly had drawn support cheered and began playing his music.        

There was no immediate explanation of how the council arrived at its decision.        

It was announced by Richardson Dumel, a council press aide, who  read a long list of legislative election results before reading the two names in the runoff. He left without taking any questions.        

Ms. Manigat and Mr. Martelly  have both promised to make Haiti less dependent on foreign governments and the hundreds of nongovernmental organizations that form the backbone of social services and operate essentially as a shadow government.        

Ms. Manigat, 70, served briefly as first lady in 1988 when her husband, Leslie, became president after a similarly disputed election. They ended up in exile after a coup four months later. She has sought to turn her age and establishment credentials to her advantage, saying that Haiti needs an experienced administrator. She denied that her husband would be pulling the strings if she was elected.        

Mr. Martelly, 49, is one of Haiti&rsquo;s most popular singers and performers, perhaps best known for his raunchy Carnival act. He cast himself, after the Haitian-born hip-hop star Wyclef Jean was denied permission to run, as just the outsider Haiti needed, punctuating his campaign appearances with songs.        

At the same time, he has met repeatedly with diplomats and business executives to persuade them to take him seriously. He dispensed with his stage name, took to wearing designer suits and surrounded himself with a circle of international political consultants who had worked for President Felipe Calder&oacute;n of Mexico, among others.        

Mr. Pr&eacute;val&rsquo;s term technically ends Monday, but he has said a law passed by the legislature will allow him to remain in office for up to three more months.        
Vladimir Laguerre contributed reporting from Port-au-Prince, Haiti.
