
MOSCOW &mdash; There were no balloons or streamers at the hastily arranged news conference on Monday where Mikhail D. Prokhorov announced that he would challenge Vladimir V. Putin in this spring&rsquo;s presidential elections: just Mr. Prokhorov on the podium, looking grave.        

Mr. Prokhorov, the billionaire who is majority owner of the New Jersey Nets basketball franchise, became famous in Russia as a playboy, with the tabloid nickname &ldquo;the Holiday Man.&rdquo; He has long walked a fine line in his relationship with the Kremlin, maintaining a degree of independence while rebels among his fellow oligarchs ended up in exile or in prison.        

Mr. Prokhorov&rsquo;s announcement, which prompted gasps from reporters in the room, was the latest wild card in a week that seemed to return real politics to Russia. Tens of thousands of middle-class urbanites gathered Saturday to vent their anger over tainted and noncompetitive elections. Aleksei L. Kudrin, a longtime Putin adviser and former finance minister, declared Monday that he plans to help found a party to represent reform-minded voters.        

Mr. Prokhorov, 46, has the resources to pose a real challenge to the Kremlin if he chooses. Over the years, he has sometimes made accommodations &mdash; like firing the editor of a newspaper he co-owned that had obliquely criticized Mr. Putin. Other times he has pushed back, as in September, when he clashed with Kremlin political strategists and was unceremoniously kicked out of his pro-business party, Right Cause. He spent the next two and a half months in a kind of political exile, until Monday, when he said he would run for president.        

&ldquo;I think the society is waking up, whether we want it to or not,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;That part of the government which does not establish dialogue with society, it will have to go in the near future. Serious changes are taking place in the world, and a new kind of man is emerging.&rdquo;        

All day, liberals buzzed over the question of whether Mr. Prokhorov was a candidate who could truly represent them. The columnist Anton Orekh, writing for the Web site of Ekho Moskvy radio, allowed that &ldquo;at the moment, he represents far from the worst option.        

&ldquo;Prokhorov is definitely not a Chekist,&rdquo; or K.G.B. officer, he wrote. &ldquo;Prokhorov will not try to build some parody of the Soviet Union. Prokhorov will not tell us antediluvian ghost stories about NATO and America and spend half the budget on the production of obsolete tanks.&rdquo;        

Others were distrustful, arguing that Mr. Prokhorov had entered politics with the Kremlin&rsquo;s blessing. The Kremlin strategist Vladislav Y. Surkov said in an interview published Tuesday that he supported the creation of &ldquo;a mass liberal party or, more precisely, a party for the annoyed urban communities.&rdquo; Some saw hallmarks of this strategy in Mr. Prokhorov&rsquo;s announcement.        

&ldquo;I hope it is his own wish, not a proposition to play the role of a spoiler,&rdquo; said Andrei Dunayev, a leader of Right Cause. &ldquo;If he wants it himself, then I will support him wholeheartedly. If he is taking the role of a spoiler because someone has proposed it to him, then it is disgusting.&rdquo;        

At his news conference on Monday, Mr. Prokhorov offered no political platform, saying he would publish it later. He showed a glint of cold anger toward Mr. Surkov, who was behind his removal as head of Right Cause in September. Asked how he would overcome the obstacle Mr. Surkov poses to his presidential hopes, Mr. Prokhorov smirked and said, &ldquo;I think I need to become his boss.&rdquo;        

He said his long period of seclusion had been spent doing the secret, meticulous work of preparing for a bid for the presidency. When he said entering the race was the most serious decision of his life, it sounded like the truth.        

&ldquo;We were not allowed to do what we wanted,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It is not in my nature to stop halfway.&rdquo;        

Mr. Prokhorov&rsquo;s relationship with the Kremlin has been a cipher for years. He became wealthy in his 20s, aided by warm ties with the government of President Boris N. Yeltsin, when he formed a fortuitous partnership with Vladimir O. Potanin, a deputy prime minister who oversaw privatization.        
David M. Herszenhorn contributed reporting. 
David M. Herszenhorn contributed reporting.
