
LONDON &mdash; The tabloid newspaper that Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s media empire shut down amid a hacking scandal may not have been responsible for a prominent episode in the scandal, the deletion of voice mail messages from a missing schoolgirl&rsquo;s cellphone, a police lawyer said on Monday.        

Accusations that an investigator working for The News of the World had not only illicitly gained access to the voice mail of the girl, Milly Dowler, in 2002 but had also deleted some of the messages to make space for more to be left that might contain scoops prompted widespread outrage in Britain over the summer. The Dowler family said the deletions, which occurred when Milly, 13, had not yet been discovered murdered, had given them false hope that she was alive.        

Shortly after the accusations appeared in The Guardian, Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s British media arm, known as News International, shut down the 168-year-old News of the World, and Mr. Murdoch met with the Dowler family to apologize.        

But on Monday, a lawyer for London&rsquo;s police force, giving evidence at a public inquiry, said the investigator, Glenn Mulcaire, had not been assigned to work on the Dowler story until after the voice mail messages had been deleted. Someone else at the newspaper might have been responsible, said the lawyer, Neil Garnham. But &ldquo;the most likely suggestion,&rdquo; he said, was that messages were being dropped automatically from the mailbox after 72 hours.        

A lawyer for the Dowler family, Mark Lewis, said in a statement on Monday that it &ldquo;remains unchallenged that The News of the World listened to Milly&rsquo;s voice mail and eavesdropped on deeply personal messages, which were being left for her by her distraught friends and family.&rdquo;        

The Guardian journalist who first reported the deletions, Nick Davies, told Channel 4 that his article was based on the available facts at the time. He noted that The Guardian was the first to report police suspicions that News of the World journalists may not have been responsible for the deletions, in an article posted on the newspaper&rsquo;s Web site on Friday.        

Even so, Jules Stenson, the former head of features at The News of the World, said in a telephone interview Monday that while he did not condone the hacking of Milly&rsquo;s phone, he was &ldquo;extremely angry that the bombshell story that set off the public inquiry and closed The News of the World&rdquo; had proved false.        

&ldquo;The Guardian,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;was wholly irresponsible.&rdquo;        
