
MOSCOW &mdash; A high-ranking editor and a top executive from one of Russia&rsquo;s most respected news publications were dismissed on Tuesday after an apparent conflict over coverage that appeared to highlight widespread anger with the results of parliamentary elections this month.        

The dismissals followed the publication this week of an election issue of the newsmagazine Kommersant Vlast, which detailed accusations of large-scale electoral fraud by the ruling party, United Russia, and included a photograph of a ballot scrawled with profanity directed against Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin.        

The firings came as tensions built between the Kremlin and a new constituency of reform-minded activists who held a protest against the election results here last weekend that drew tens of thousands of people.        

President Dmitri A. Medvedev announced on Tuesday that the first session of the new Parliament would be held on Dec. 21, an indication that the Kremlin would not concede to increasingly vocal calls for new elections.        

Meanwhile, the leaders of the protest movement met to plan what they said would be an even bigger demonstration on Dec. 24, and vowed not to relent in their demands.        

The tremors from this standoff have been particularly acute in the city&rsquo;s print and online newsrooms. Under Mr. Putin, the authorities have generally tolerated a community of liberal-minded journalists whose criticism of the Kremlin has often been withering, but not widely broadcast.        

&ldquo;But there are rules,&rdquo; said Yevgeniya Albats, the editor in chief of New Times, a magazine strongly critical of the Kremlin. &ldquo;Do not touch Putin.&rdquo;        

Yet an apparent desire by journalists to test the limits these days has brought some into confrontation with their bosses.        

This week&rsquo;s issue of Kommersant Vlast had several articles detailing bald attempts at falsification in the recent elections apparently aimed at increasing the vote for United Russia. One article warned that the declining popularity of United Russia would lead to a &ldquo;tightening of the screws.&rdquo;        

The magazine&rsquo;s cover showed Mr. Putin, lighted from the bottom and with a sinister expression, standing before a voting machine.        

But it was the photograph of the ballot, apparently defaced in protest, that caused an uproar.        

Scribbled across the ballot in thick orange marker was a searing Russian expletive in reference to the male anatomy, suggesting Mr. Putin should leave power. Beneath the profanity, which can lead to a fine or arrest if uttered in public here, a caption read sarcastically : &ldquo;A correctly marked ballot that was ruled invalid.&rdquo;        

The swipe at Mr. Putin was clearly too much for the owner of the Kommersant Publishing House, Alisher B. Usmanov, a billionaire metals tycoon who, like many of Russia&rsquo;s richest people, is wary of alienating the Kremlin.        

Mr. Usmanov, who incidentally owns a stake in Facebook, immediately fired Maksim Kovalsky, the editor in chief of Kommersant Vlast, and Andrei Galiyev, the general director of the publication&rsquo;s holding company. Another deputy editor announced that she was resigning. The photograph of the ballot was removed from the magazine&rsquo;s Web site, and printed copies were difficult to find on Tuesday.        

&ldquo;These materials verge on petty hooliganism,&rdquo; Mr. Usmanov told Gazeta.ru, a news Web site that is also part of his media holdings.        

News of the firings prompted a debate over journalistic ethics here. Some questioned the decision to publish the profanity, though many considered the response too severe.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s dead clear,&rdquo; Ms. Albats said. &ldquo;This is a signal sent to the entire mass media in the country: guys, be careful. There are limits.&rdquo;        

In a twist, a representative from an investment fund owned by Mikhail Prokhorov, another Russian billionaire, who this week made a surprise announcement that he was running for president, said he was considering making an offer to buy the Kommersant publishing house from Mr. Usmanov, according to Russian news reports. No further details were offered.        

Mr. Kovalsky, the editor of Kommersant Vlast, said he had never been pressured in his editorial decisions before.        

&ldquo;There have been difficult times when I knew that the Kremlin and the owner were unhappy,&rdquo; he told the online news portal, Slon.ru. &ldquo;But usually I learned of this after the fact, after publication when there was no possibility of changing anything. But in the last few weeks there was none of this.&rdquo;        

Pressures did begin to surface in some publications even before the elections. About a week before the vote, Grigory Okhotin quit his job as a freelance editor at the government-controlled RIA Novosti news agency when one of his managers recommended that negative material about United Russia and Mr. Putin not be posted on InoSMI, a Web site that publishes Russian translations of articles that appear in Western outlets.        

Mr. Okhotin then published a Web chat between himself and the manager, who told him that &ldquo;ahead of elections there are additional orders, because the situation is nonstandard. This will probably go on until summer.&rdquo;        

RIA Novosti rejected Mr. Okhotin&rsquo;s assertion and threatened to sue him.        

Journalists at publications owned by Mr. Usmanov said that he had rarely interfered in editorial decisions, but that they had come under serious scrutiny for their coverage of this month&rsquo;s elections.        

Roman Badanin, a former deputy editor at Gazeta.ru, resigned last month after he was told to remove from the outlet&rsquo;s Web site a map documenting campaign violations, mostly committed by United Russia.        

&ldquo;These were not simple elections,&rdquo; Mr. Badanin said. &ldquo;They were very nerve-racking, showing little support for both United Russia and Putin. And Alisher Usmanov is nervous. It is a fact that he has put a lot of pressure on editors recently.&rdquo;        
Ellen Barry contributed reporting.
