
PANAMA &mdash; Gleaming new skyscrapers line the waterfront like a mini-Dubai, as boosters say, including a new 70-story Trump tower that is the tallest building in Latin America.        

A new free-trade agreement with the United States promises a surge of jobs. The Panama Canal is in the midst of a $5.25 billion expansion. And another big dig began earlier this year, to build Central America&rsquo;s first subway system.        

Panama, said Sergio Yurman, one in a flock of Venezuelans who have fled their troubled country to start anew here, is the place to be.        

&ldquo;This is a third-world country on track to the first world,&rdquo; said Mr. Yurman, a lawyer who arrived five years ago and established a company providing office space to start-ups. &ldquo;The vision here is the right one.&rdquo;        

As the thin bridge between North and South America, Panama has long been a geographic and financial crossroads, propped up with a tight bond to the United States. The removal of Manuel Antonio Noriega and his military rule by United States forces nearly 22 years ago ushered in an era of political stability and financial investment that has now made this country of 3.5 million one of the fastest-growing economies in the Western Hemisphere.        

But Mr. Noriega&rsquo;s return on Sunday to face murder and other charges here &mdash; after serving prison sentences in the United States and France on drug and money-laundering charges &mdash; has reawakened questions over whether the glare of success has simply better hidden many of Panama&rsquo;s old ghosts.        

Several of the towers so impressive in the day stand out for another reason at night: Many of them are dark or nearly so, suggesting few or absentee tenants. Questions are raised here and abroad about the money behind them, and whether a bubble is swelling, particularly in the office market.        

Local and international corruption watchdogs rank the country low in transparency, and American law enforcement officials, while giving the country credit for improving its police forces and cooperation with international agencies, still consider it a major money-laundering haven.        

Streets flood from being overwhelmed by development. And while a new expressway promises to unclog ever-crowded streets, it has also become the center of protest over the toll of development, with plans for an extension that cuts close to the cherished Casco Viejo historic district and could lead to its removal from the list of Unesco World Heritage sites.        

The extension is expected to help develop yet another high-rise project and has the backing of the president, Ricardo Martinelli, a pro-growth supermarket magnate elected more than two years ago whose hard-charging, get-it-done style as he builds what he calls the &ldquo;Dubai of Latin America&rdquo; wins applause from supporters and derision from opponents.        

&ldquo;If you had asked me a few years ago, I would have said that Panama has improved in every way since Noriega left,&rdquo; said Patrizia Pinz&oacute;n, a real estate agent leading the protest against the highway. &ldquo;Now I am concerned that we are quickly heading back to being a kleptocracy.&rdquo;        

Others note that public education is lagging and poverty remains deep, particularly in rural areas yet to feel the boom.        

&ldquo;Growth has meant certain prosperity, but Panama has a dual economy whereby the urban areas benefit from the construction boom, government projects and foreign investment, but the rural, and particularly the indigenous areas, lag behind,&rdquo; said Orlando J. P&eacute;rez, a Latin American politics scholar at Central Michigan University and author of &ldquo;Political Culture in Panama: Democracy After Invasion,&rdquo; published this year.        

While Panama has one of the highest per capita income levels in the developing world, about a third of the population lives in poverty, according to United Nations figures. Dilapidated neighborhoods brush up against the glittering new ones.        

Still, people like Mireya Franklin, 32, a secretary in one of the new banking towers, cannot help but marvel at the transformation, with new shopping malls, cafes and nightclubs.        

&ldquo;I would not say it is like Miami now,&rdquo; she said, strolling along the bayfront avenue. &ldquo;But we feel like we have a piece of that here.&rdquo;        

Most analysts believe the roaring, diversified economy will continue for the time being, buttressed by the canal expansion and development on former American-owned land along it as well as public works. Some slowing is expected in 2012 because of global economic woes. Even so, gross domestic product growth is expected to exceed 8.5 percent this year, with some forecasts even higher.        
(Page 2 of 2)
The canal, handed over by the United States to Panama in December 1999, has contributed $6.6 billion in revenue since then and the widening, to be completed in 2014 to allow larger ships to pass, is expected to keep the cash cow thriving.        

At the same time, foreign investment is surging. It increased 33 percent last year, and has grown 17 percent in the first half of this year compared with the first half of 2010.        

Luis Laguerre, president of the American Chamber of Commerce here, said several companies &mdash; among them Dell, Caterpillar and Procter & Gamble &mdash; are moving regional operations here, or establishing and expanding existing offices, in part because of a law passed in 2007 that waives certain tax and visa requirements for multinational corporations.        

At the same time, Panama is taking steps to shake off its reputation as a place to hide money. In the past two years it has signed agreements with 12 countries, including the United States, to exchange tax and other information upon request, a tool to investigate financial criminals.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s more cumbersome and challenging to open a bank account in Panama than in the U.S.,&rdquo; said Felipe Chapman, an economist at the Indesa consulting firm and former chief executive of the Panama Stock Exchange. &ldquo;Panama has evolved tremendously in the past two decades.&rdquo;        

But American law enforcement officials remain troubled by money laundering. An American official who investigates such crimes but was not authorized to speak publicly said the bustling Col&oacute;n Free Trade Zone, a duty-free shopping mecca on the Caribbean coast, remains a haven to launder money.        

In addition, large amounts of cash, he said, pass easily through Panama City&rsquo;s international airport &mdash; itself a growing hub for flights to and from all over Latin America &mdash; because of loose and unenforced customs reporting requirements.        

And the newspapers still revel in reporting a never-ending wave of swindles, double-dipping and other shenanigans, some of them on the part of government officials. Transparency International gave Panama a score of only 3.3 out of 10 on the perception of corruption (with a 10 being considered clean).        

Even the canal project has been questioned.        

Leaked American diplomatic cables last year portrayed a Panamanian vice president&rsquo;s warning that the canal expansion was &ldquo;a disaster&rdquo; in the making and Mr. Martinelli&rsquo;s lamenting that the canal authority, a separate agency from the government, may have chosen a primary bidder because his cousin runs it.&nbsp; Panamanian officials later disputed the claims in the cable.        

Many are watching to see if and how Mr. Noriega is tried on pending murder charges as a sign of maturity among Panama&rsquo;s institutions.        

&ldquo;There is still some banana in the republic,&rdquo; said Maurice Belanger, a chamber executive and longtime Panama observer. &ldquo;But it is changing fast.&rdquo;        
