
LONDON &mdash; A senior European official said on Tuesday that Britain&rsquo;s demands for measures to protect its financial services industry at last week&rsquo;s summit meeting were impossible to meet and directly responsible for the collapse of a Europe-wide agreement meant to help save the euro.        

In blunt language, the official, Jos&eacute; Manuel Barroso, the president of the European Commission, said that the &ldquo;specific protocol on financial services&rdquo; requested by Prime Minister David Cameron would have presented &ldquo;a risk to the integrity of the internal market,&rdquo; as the European Union&rsquo;s vast trading area is known, and was thus untenable.        

&ldquo;This made compromise impossible,&rdquo; Mr. Barroso told the European Parliament in Strasbourg, France. &ldquo;All other heads of government were left with the choice between paying this price or moving ahead without the U.K.&rsquo;s participation and accepting an internal agreement among them.&rdquo;        

Mr. Barroso&rsquo;s portrayal of Britain as asking for extra protection for its financial services sector seemed to contradict the account given by Mr. Cameron, who told Parliament on Monday that he had asked for no special treatment for Britain, simply a &ldquo;level playing field&rdquo; with the rest of Europe.        

&ldquo;The choice was a treaty with the proper safeguards, or no treaty,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said. &ldquo;The result was no treaty.&rdquo;        

Britain&rsquo;s action had the effect of denying European leaders one of their main objectives in last week&rsquo;s meeting: to have all 27 European Union countries endorse changes to the Lisbon Treaty, the basic governing document of the European Union, which requires unanimity among all 27 members. Instead, at least 23 European countries, and possibly 26, agreed to exclude Britain in drafting and ratifying a different deal, an intergovernmental treaty between themselves.        

Working out the details of this proposed &ldquo;treaty within a treaty&rdquo; looks to be a highly complicated undertaking. The issue now likely to preoccupy lawyers in Brussels is whether such an agreement can be put in place and administered using official European institutions like the European Commission. Germany and France argue that it can, and that it would make no sense to have separate institutions that serve just the countries that sign the new agreement.        

But Mr. Cameron suggested on Friday that the current European Union institutions should be authorized to support only initiatives endorsed by all 27 union members.        

And this is hardly the end of the maneuvering. Several countries have said that they need to take the proposed new agreement to their Parliaments, and may in the end join Britain in opting out. Sweden, another large country that does not use the euro, says it might ask for some changes to the current proposal.        

But Britain clearly stands alone now, uncertain about how much influence it will be able to exert on future negotiations in Europe over financial regulations and other matters. Mr. Cameron argues that Britain&rsquo;s position in Europe has not changed; many people, including some of his now-irritated counterparts in Europe, disagree and warn that Britain may have argued itself out of a position at the table.        

Mr. Cameron is caught between the fiercely anti-European wing of his own party, the Conservatives, and his partners in Britain&rsquo;s governing coalition, the pro-European Liberal Democrats. British officials said that Mr. Cameron felt he needed to bring back some concessions for Britain&rsquo;s financial services industry in return for supporting a European Union treaty of all 27 members, and that without them he would have been hard-pressed to get the treaty passed at home.        

But European officials say that Mr. Cameron miscalculated the mood of other leaders and blindsided them with his demands. Moreover, they said, the other leaders resented being asked to include in the proposed treaty amendments that had nothing to do with the euro zone or the current crisis, and feared that if Britain received special treatment, other countries would want it.        
Sarah Lyall reported from London, and Steven Erlanger from Paris. Alan Cowell contributed reporting from London.
