
ROME &mdash; Prime Minister Mario Monti on Tuesday announced changes to a pension overhaul and reintroduced a property tax to gain parliamentary support for a budget that he hopes will calm world markets and rein in Italy&rsquo;s public debt.        

After facing his first big political test with lawmakers who voted confidence in his month-old government but wanted measures more palatable to their constituents, Mr. Monti said he had dropped plans for a tax on the wealthy that had been vehemently opposed by the center-right party of former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi.        

Mr. Monti, who was named leader of a government of technocrats last month after a political stalemate and fierce market pressure helped force Mr. Berlusconi from office, told lawmakers that a wealth tax would drive capital from the country and would not produce a significant increase in revenue.        

After protests from labor unions, the government said it would raise the threshold at which pensions do not receive cost-of-living increases. It also said it would lower the amount that pensions are reduced for those who retire before the designated retirement age.        

&ldquo;The new measures are more equitable,&rdquo; Mr. Monti said.        

The government said it would compensate for the lost revenue by raising the proposed tax on assets repatriated under an earlier tax amnesty and by raising a new tax on checking accounts with a monthly balance of more than $6,600.        

The measures also include the reintroduction of a property tax on first homes, which had been abolished by the previous government, as well as tax breaks for companies that hire workers under 35 on a full-time basis.        

The Lower House is expected to vote on the measures this week and the Senate next week.        

Mr. Monti told lawmakers that Italy, like all European Union countries, had ceded sovereignty as part of a treaty agreed to last week in Brussels. But he said the nation had also lost sovereignty because it had &ldquo;put itself in a position of weakness.&rdquo;        
