
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; At least 32 people were killed across Syria on Tuesday, including seven members of the security forces, amid rising sectarian tensions in some places, opposition groups said.        

The deaths added to a toll that was estimated by a United Nations official on Monday at more than 5,000 people since the uprising began in March.        

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said 19 people died in the northern province of Idlib, near the Turkish border, when security forces loyal to the government of President Bashar al-Assad fired at them. Five were killed in the province of Homs, in central Syria, and one in the nearby province of Hama.        

In addition, seven members of the security forces were killed in an attack on their military vehicle in the Bab al-Hawa area in Idlib Province, according to the observatory, an opposition group based in London. The attack, it said, was in retaliation for the shooting of antigovernment protesters earlier in the day in the province.        

Activists in Idlib said that 9 of the 19 civilians who died in the province on Tuesday were killed when residents from the town of Kfar Yahmour came under fire after they tried to block the road with burning tires as a convoy carrying security forces passed. Two other people were killed during a funeral procession, which came under attack by troops trying to break it up.        

SANA, Syria&rsquo;s state news agency, said security forces had killed seven members of &ldquo;an armed terrorist group&rdquo; in Idlib. The agency did not mention the attack on the military convoy. It also said soldiers had foiled an effort by &ldquo;armed terrorists to cross into Syria from Turkey, for the second time in a week.&rdquo;        

The violence came amid the backdrop of worsening sectarian tensions in Homs, which is populated by a Sunni Muslim majority and a minority of Alawites, a heterodox Muslim sect from which Mr. Assad draws much of his leadership. Mohammed Saleh, an activist from Homs, said that two Alawites were kidnapped in Homs on Tuesday, and that one of them was the brother of Yasser Jawhar, an opposition activist who was jailed for 12 years.        

The United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Navi Pillay, said on Monday that the death toll was now 1,000 higher than the estimate she had released at the beginning of the month. Ms. Pillay said that this number included civilians, army defectors and soldiers who refused to shoot at protesters. It did not, however, include security forces killed by the opposition.        

Meanwhile, activists said the Syrian authorities had charged an American-born blogger in Syria, Razan Ghazzawi, with trying to incite sectarian strife. Ms. Ghazzawi has written extensively on her blog, Razaniyat, about the uprising against Mr. Assad, and has documented human rights abuses. She was arrested on Dec. 4 at the Syrian-Jordanian border on her way to Amman, Jordan, for a conference on press freedoms. The charges include spreading false information and weakening the sentiment of nationalism; conviction could carry a prison term of up to 15 years.        

The Syrian Center for Media and Freedom of Expression in the Arab World, where Ms. Ghazzawi worked, said that she denied all the charges and it urged that she be released without delay.        

&ldquo;We demand the immediate and unconditional release of our colleague Razan Ghazzawi as well as an end to her trial and the annulment of the completely baseless charges against her,&rdquo; the group said in a statement.        
