
SYDNEY, Australia &mdash; Politics in Papua New Guinea has long been fractious. Now it has turned surreal.        

The latest in a series of twists and reversals has left the country with two rival prime ministers and cabinets, each claiming the sole right to govern, and with heavily armed police officers deployed in the streets of the capital, Port Moresby, on Tuesday, bracing for civil unrest.        

The trouble has been building since April, when the 75-year-old prime minister at the time, Michael Somare, underwent heart surgery at Raffles Hospital in Singapore and did not fare well afterward, remaining in the hospital for months. Mr. Somare was Papua New Guinea&rsquo;s first leader after independence from Australia in 1975, but allegations of corruption and a heavy-handed political style tarnished his reputation over his years in and out of office. When he had not returned to the country by August, Parliament declared the prime ministership vacant and elected a popular opposition leader, Peter O&rsquo;Neill, to take his place.        

Then in September, Mr. Somare did return, and started to fight for reinstatement, while Mr. O&rsquo;Neill&rsquo;s government drafted legislation to retroactively authorize his ouster.        

On Monday, hours after the legislation was passed, the Supreme Court came down on Mr. Somare&rsquo;s side, saying that he never vacated the office and that his ouster was unconstitutional. But Mr. O&rsquo;Neill refused to step down.        

Tavurvur, a prominent local blogger who, like many people in Papua New Guinea, uses only one name, summed up the situation in a Twitter message on Tuesday: &ldquo;PNG&rsquo;s political sandwich: a popular illegitimate Government versus a despised legitimate Government.&rdquo;        

The country of seven million people, north of Australia and east of Indonesia, has a history of political violence. A separatist revolt on the mineral-rich island of Bougainville lasted more than a decade and left thousands dead in the 1990s. And the 2002 election that began Mr. Somare&rsquo;s most recent stint as prime minister was marred with violence that killed more than a dozen people.        

The who&rsquo;s-in-charge-here problem now lands in the lap of the country&rsquo;s governor general, a vestige of its colonial history. The country&rsquo;s head of state is Queen Elizabeth II of Britain, who appoints a governor general nominated by the Papuan Parliament to be her representative; among the ceremonial duties are giving royal assent for new prime ministers to take office. Usually that is a formality &mdash; but this situation is anything but usual.        

Mr. O&rsquo;Neill tried to visit the residence of the governor general, Michael Ogio, on Monday night, but was blocked by the police, and the sound of automatic gunfire was heard in the area, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation reported.        

Both claimants tried to secure his endorsement on Tuesday, but nothing was resolved by evening.        

Jenny Hayward-Jones, a regional expert at the Lowy Institute for International Policy in Sydney, said Papua New Guinea was in uncharted waters. &ldquo;We have two prime ministers at the moment, one of whom is claiming his legitimacy from the Parliament and the other one from the Constitution,&rdquo; she said. The most dangerous condition, she said, may be the weaknesses and internal divisions of the police. &ldquo;They may be able to contain a small riot, but if it went on for some days, they would struggle,&rdquo; she said.        

Australia, Papua New Guinea&rsquo;s main trading partner and aid donor, urged its citizens to use caution there. Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd said he was &ldquo;deeply concerned&rdquo; by developments, including the appointment of rival police commissioners in Port Moresby. &ldquo;We are urging calm on the part of all parties,&rdquo; Mr. Rudd said on his Web site.        

What will happen next? In Papua New Guinea, Mrs. Hayward-Jones said, &ldquo;you can never rule anything out.&rdquo;        
