
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The senior American commander in Afghanistan said Tuesday that his plans for next year would emphasize deploying American and allied military trainers directly within Afghan security units, which could lessen the direct combat role of NATO and accelerate local forces&rsquo; taking the lead in a growing number of missions.        

The commander, Gen. John R. Allen of the Marine Corps, said he also was striving to consolidate security gains against Taliban forces in their traditional strongholds in the south and to counter insurgents crossing from Pakistan into volatile eastern Afghanistan.        

The death of two dozen Pakistani border troops in a NATO attack last month &mdash; which the United States said was an accident but which outraged officials in Islamabad and the public at large &mdash; has complicated coordinating security missions along the porous eastern border of Afghanistan.        

General Allen said he spoke by telephone on Monday with Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, the Pakistani Army chief, as part of a continuing American effort to cool tensions. Declining to characterize the private comments of his Pakistani counterpart, General Allen did express a cautious optimism that Pakistan would order the return of its personnel to border security coordination centers.        

&ldquo;I do have a sense of progress,&rdquo; General Allen said, noting that he ended his discussions confident that Pakistan wants &ldquo;to restore as much normalcy as we can to the border coordination as early as we can.&rdquo;        

General Allen spoke during a visit to Afghanistan by Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta.        

In retaliation for the deaths of its frontier troops, Pakistan withdrew its personnel from border security coordination centers and shut down routes used to move supplies to NATO forces in Afghanistan from its territory. General Allen said that land routes from the north, and air routes into Afghanistan, were costlier but ensured that his forces had ample supplies.        

The broad challenge facing the American-led mission is how to protect gains in security, and press ahead against a tenacious insurgency, even as the number of allied troops drops.        

Of the 33,000 additional troops ordered to Afghanistan by President Obama at the end of 2009, 10,000 are scheduled to return home by the end of this year and the rest by next September. That will leave the American troop presence at 68,000, with 38,000 more troops from NATO and other partner nations. Afghan security personnel total 305,000 today, and are scheduled to expand to 352,000 by the end of next year.        

An accelerated program to install small numbers of allied military trainers within larger numbers of Afghan security units, as described by General Allen, certainly could help fulfill the American and NATO campaign plan &mdash; but with far fewer American troops.        

At present, only smaller numbers of foreign trainers work within Afghan units. And where combat operations in the past have been carried out unilaterally by allied units, led by allied units or in partnership with Afghan forces, an emphasis on embedded trainers would put Afghans in the lead &mdash; but with a cadre of experienced officers and non-commissioned officers working with them from the inside.        

These plans for what General Allen called an &ldquo;increased advisory role&rdquo; for American and allied troops within the Afghan national security forces will accelerate next year and be fully in place by 2014, when the current NATO mandate expires.        
