
GIZA, Egypt &mdash; Egyptians turned out to vote again Wednesday with a new confidence in a promised transition to civilian democracy amid signals that the ruling military council may be backing off its efforts to extend its power.        

Emboldened by the unexpectedly smooth and generally credible results of the first round of elections last week, a different set of voters, casting ballots in the second round, expressed a new certainty that their votes would elect a legitimate Parliament with authority to stand up to the military council. Some said they were supporting the Muslim Brotherhood, the Islamist group whose party is leading the early returns with about 40 percent of the vote, specifically because of the strong stance it has taken against continued military rule.        

&ldquo;I know my vote will count, and the evidence is the first phase of the elections,&rdquo; said Gamal Abdel Wahab, 31, waiting to vote in the Bahr el-Azam neighborhood. &ldquo;We are saying, &lsquo;Here is the will of the people,&rsquo; and the people&rsquo;s will can stand up to any institution, including the military council. An institution can&rsquo;t crush the will of the people.&rdquo;        

Although the elections drained the energy from a week of protests against military rule, many voters and analysts now say the successful parliamentary voting poses a potentially more formidable challenge to the military&rsquo;s power. In a stark contrast to the first round of voting two weeks ago, many voters took for granted that the military council could not challenge the legitimacy of the first democratically elected legislature after six decades of military dictatorship.        

Many liberals had hoped for a backlash against the Islamists who dominated the first round of voting, which covered an area that includes Cairo and Alexandria. In addition to the Brotherhood&rsquo;s 40 percent, an ultraconservative faction known as Salafis was the runner-up, with about 25 percent of the vote.        

With the voting moving to rural areas where religious conservatives are strong, however, the Islamists may face more opposition from members of the former ruling party competing again for their old parliamentary seats under new party flags. In the rural southern region of Egypt, some former members of the ruling party are leaders of local clans who say they allied with the former president, Hosni Mubarak, only because it was the best way to serve their constituents.        

Though reports of turnout were mixed, lines of voters stretched around blocks in several polling stations in urban areas of Giza. Election officials kept the polls open an extra two hours to accommodate the crowds, and the voting continues Thursday. Nine governorates are voting in the second round of elections for the lower house, and the last nine will vote in the third and final round.        

A few hundred protesters have remained camped out in Tahrir Square in Cairo since mass demonstrations three weeks ago against military rule. But their tent city is looking increasingly bedraggled, and on Wednesday night a few dozen were hospitalized for poisoning by food that had been donated to their cause.        

But as the protests fade away the military council&rsquo;s attempts to reassert its own power have also fallen flat.        

Those efforts appeared to peak last month when the council sought to dictate a binding set of ground rules for a new constitution that would have given the military budgetary autonomy and a permanent political role. Its effort helped set in motion a week of protests around the country, a six-day street fight with the police that left more than 40 dead in downtown Cairo, and a call from the United States for the council to hand power to civilians &ldquo;immediately.&rdquo;        

In a briefing for a group of mostly American foreign reporters last week, a general on the ruling council appeared to try to reassert the military&rsquo;s authority over the constitution. He said that a newly formed civilian advisory council and the military-controlled cabinet would play a role along with Parliament in forming the 100-member committee expected to draft the constitution, arguing that the move was a necessary check against the potential domination of the Parliament by conservative Islamists.        
Mayy el-Sheikh contributed reporting.
