
Iran may relocate its uranium enrichment work to more secure locations, a senior Iranian defense official said Wednesday, an acknowledgment of increased concern that Iran&rsquo;s suspected nuclear program could face a military attack from Israel or the United States.        

The official, Gholamreza Jalali, who is the director of Iran&rsquo;s Passive Defense Organization, a unit of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, did not cite a particular threat or specify when the relocation might take place. But his statement came against the backdrop of sharply increased tensions with the West over the nuclear program, which Iran contends is solely for peaceful purposes.        

&ldquo;Our vulnerability in the nuclear area has reached the minimum level,&rdquo; Mr. Jalali said in remarks reported by Iran&rsquo;s semiofficial Mehr news agency. &ldquo;If circumstances require it, the uranium enrichment facilities will be relocated to safer places.&rdquo;        

Tensions were first elevated with the publication of a United Nations report last month that said Iran might be working on a nuclear weapon and a missile delivery system.        

Since then, the United States and European nations have toughened economic sanctions on Iran, American intelligence operatives have acknowledged increased surveillance of what are said to be Iran&rsquo;s nuclear sites and Iran captured an American spy drone.        

Iran also has faced a steady flow of ambiguous statements from Israel, which regards Iran as its most dangerous enemy, about the possibility of a military strike. And the Iranians have been confronted with a series of suspicious acts that seem to have been directed against their nuclear and missile capacities, including an unexplained explosion at a military base on Nov. 12.        

The blast was described by the Iranian media as an accident; it killed Iran&rsquo;s long-range missile pioneer and might have set back the country&rsquo;s long-range missile work by years.        
