
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta said Wednesday that the United States and its Afghan and foreign allies had been able to &ldquo;seize the momentum&rdquo; in Afghanistan and that they were winning the war.        

Mr. Panetta, a former director of the Central Intelligence Agency, spoke in glowing terms of the progress made in battling insurgents and stabilizing the country. He was less outspoken when asked for details of an American espionage drone flown from Afghanistan that apparently crashed in Iran this month. He said only that the United States would continue to carry out intelligence missions that would enhance the security of the United States and Afghanistan.        

On a day when he met with senior Afghan officials, senior American commanders and troops deployed in the volatile eastern part of the country, Mr. Panetta was unexpectedly upbeat about a war where progress has often proven fragile.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re winning this very tough conflict in Afghanistan,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta told troops at Forward Operating Base Sharana, in Paktika Province, about 35 miles from the border with Pakistan.        

Later, at an evening news conference with Hamid Karzai, the Afghan president, Mr. Panetta said, &ldquo;There is no doubt that over the last two years Afghan and international forces have been able to seize the momentum &mdash; seize the moment from the Taliban insurgency and establish security in critical areas, such as the Taliban&rsquo;s heartland in the south.&rdquo;        

He said 2011 was &ldquo;a very important turning point in the war&rdquo; because violence levels had fallen to their lowest in five years and insurgents had not retaken any towns or villages secured by foreign and Afghan security forces.        

But he salted his positive assessments with several grim caveats. &ldquo;We have not won,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta said.        

&ldquo;Are there challenges? Of course there are,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta said, acknowledging that the Taliban remained dangerous. And he predicted more high-profile bombings and major, if sporadic, armed attacks on public buildings, like those that have rocked Kabul and embarrassed local security forces.        

&ldquo;But are we going in the right direction? Are we making significant progress here in Afghanistan?&rdquo; Mr. Panetta asked. &ldquo;Yes, we are.&rdquo;        

Pressed about the American intelligence drone in Iran, Mr. Panetta engaged in a polite but opaque public exchange with Mr. Karzai over the security value of intelligence gathering missions, weighed against sensitivities over national sovereignty. &ldquo;These are operations I cannot discuss publicly and will not discuss publicly,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta said, though he added that missions &ldquo;to obtain important intelligence&rdquo; were &ldquo;part and parcel of the effort to not only protect Afghanistan but to protect the United States&rdquo; and that they &ldquo;will continue.&rdquo;        

Mr. Karzai also did not comment specifically on American drone missions over neighboring nations operated from Afghan soil. Instead, he said that Afghanistan wanted &ldquo;the best of relations&rdquo; with all its neighbors and that it did not want to be involved in &ldquo;adversarial relations between Iran and the United States.&rdquo;        
