
LI&Egrave;GE, Belgium &mdash; Belgians sought to make sense on Wednesday of a spasm of killing by a man with a history of trouble with weapons and drugs who unleashed his attack near a Christmas market at a historic square, bringing random death to a familiar scene of European holiday bustle.        

The attacker, identified as Nordine Amrani, 33, killed a year-and-a-half-old toddler and two teenage boys and left more than 120 wounded, with five of those people still in intensive care on Wednesday. Mr. Amrani killed himself with a bullet to the forehead. Compounding the gruesomeness of the case, the police found the body of a woman at a building he used to store guns, and, in the past, to grow marijuana. Prosecutors said they believed Mr. Amrani killed her before he went to the square.        

Friends of the dead and injured laid flowers and lighted candles on Wednesday at the Place St.-Lambert, the square where Mr. Amrani unleashed volleys of bullets and threw grenades that sent glass and shrapnel flying into crowds. Some said friends who had been there had been blinded.        

A Belgian of Moroccan descent whose troubled history showed no sign of Islamic extremism, Mr. Amrani had been summoned to appear before the police about a case of sexual abuse at around the same time as the attack. Instead, he armed himself and mounted some kind of desperate, final lashing out.        

Mr. Amrani had a record of gun and drug offenses. But he had still been able to amass a cache of weapons after his release from prison, where he served part of a 58-month sentence for possession of 9,500 weapons parts, and several complete weapons, as well as 2,800 marijuana plants.        

The sequence of events is particularly worrisome in Belgium, where there have long been questions about the integrity of its political and judicial systems, and which formed a government just two weeks ago after a gap of 18 months, a modern-day record.        

Memories here still are raw of the notorious pedophile and serial murderer Marc Dutroux, who in the 1990s won parole after molestation charges, managed to qualify for a government pension and be given prescriptions for sedatives that he ended up using on some of his young victims. He even escaped custody for a few hours one day in 1998, overpowering a guard and taking his gun as he was being delivered, unhandcuffed, to a court hearing. He was convicted seven years ago of murder, kidnapping and rape and remains in prison.        

Last year, a scandal engulfed the country after a Roman Catholic bishop&rsquo;s admission that he had sexually abused boys opened a floodgate of accounts of abuse by priests dating back decades.        

The Li&egrave;ge attack struck nerves made raw by the case of Anders Behring Breivik, the far-right extremist who has admitted to killing 77 people, mostly teenagers, on July 22, first by bombing the government headquarters in Norway&rsquo;s capital, Oslo, and then by attacking a summer youth camp on Utoya.        

There also was a deadly shooting on Tuesday in Italy, where a man opened fire in an outdoor market in Florence, killing two vendors from Senegal and wounding three other Senegalese before killing himself. News reports linked that attack in Italy to a man who had participated in racist marches by an extreme right-wing group, compounding fears of a new wave of violence in Europe.        

Implicitly acknowledging the breadth of the anxieties raised by the Li&egrave;ge attack, the Belgian authorities took pains to separate the case from any known terrorist or extremist movements.        

&ldquo;I totally rule that out,&rdquo; Dani&egrave;le Reynders, the city&rsquo;s prosecutor, said at a news conference early Wednesday, in answer to a question about the possibility of extremist motives. &ldquo;There was nothing at all discovered during the inspections that could link the events of yesterday to any kind of terrorism,&rdquo; she said.        

Instead, the focus was on a man orphaned early, raised in a poor neighborhood near Brussels, and alienated from society, though he lived with his girlfriend, a nurse.        

An interview with his lawyers, Abdelhadi Amrani and Didier De Qu&eacute;vy, that was published on the Web site of a Belgian newspaper, La Derni&egrave;re Heure, emphasized his mainstream identity, but also his personal troubles.        

&ldquo;He didn&rsquo;t feel at all Moroccan,&rdquo; one lawyer said, adding that he &ldquo;didn&rsquo;t speak a word of Arabic and wasn&rsquo;t a Muslim,&rdquo; and that &ldquo;he felt Belgian.&rdquo; At other points, the interview quoted the lawyers as saying that he &ldquo;was crazy about weapons, but as a collector&rdquo;; &ldquo;he felt that he&rsquo;d not had much luck in life&rdquo;; he &ldquo;thought he&rsquo;d been unfairly treated by the justice system.&rdquo;        

One said his action was that of &ldquo;a tormented soul who was at the end of his tether, cut off from the justice system and from society.&rdquo;        

Neighbors living a few doors away from Mr. Amrani said they were aware of his prison record. But a number of them emphasized his politeness, and he had even won the trust of one of the building&rsquo;s numerous older residents.        

&ldquo;What happened is incomprehensible, and I am totally shocked,&rdquo; said Micheline Clement, 67. &ldquo;He held open doors for me, and he carried my packages upstairs sometimes,&rdquo; she said.        

Still, fear began spreading among Belgium&rsquo;s Muslims after Mr. Amrani&rsquo;s Moroccan heritage was reported. Less known was that one of his victims, Mehdi Nathan Belhadj, 15, was from a similar background.        

&ldquo;One of the first things I told myself,&rdquo; said one such resident of Li&egrave;ge, Samira Bouchaouir, 45, &ldquo;is that I hope it&rsquo;s not an Arab who struck otherwise we could be hurt by this.&rdquo;        

Ms. Bouchaouir emphasized that all the evidence pointed to &ldquo;an attack that was carried out by someone who was profoundly deranged&rdquo; and that &ldquo;his race has nothing to do with it.&rdquo;        

Her niece, Malak Krima, 16, said she had seen messages on Facebook that expressed the view that the attack showed that the policies of far-right politicians, like Marine Le Pen in France, were justified.        

Ms. Krima said she would participate in a march on Friday to commemorate all of those who had died.        
Stephen Castle contributed reporting from Brussels.
