
MOSCOW &mdash; The chairman of Russia&rsquo;s governing party, United Russia, resigned from his post as speaker of the lower house of Parliament on Wednesday in an apparent effort to quell some of the uproar over perceived fraud in parliamentary elections last week.        

The chairman, Boris V. Gryzlov, is the highest-ranking official in United Russia after Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin, who serves as the party&rsquo;s leader. Intensely loyal to Mr. Putin, Mr. Gryzlov played a crucial role during his eight years as speaker in pacifying the Parliament, which he once famously said &ldquo;was no place for political battles.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gryzlov&rsquo;s decision underscores the pressure on United Russia, which lost its constitutional majority in the elections, officially receiving 50 percent of the vote, a significant decline in the party&rsquo;s support. But even that result has been called into question amid widespread accusations that United Russia engaged in ballot stuffing and other fraud.        

In a statement on United Russia&rsquo;s Web site, Mr. Gryzlov gave no specifics about the reason for his departure. He said he would remain United Russia&rsquo;s chairman, but he would not take a seat in Parliament.        

&ldquo;Having worked in the State Duma for eight years in a row, I have been able to achieve much of what was intended and much of what my colleagues and I planned to do,&rdquo; he said, referring to the lower house of Parliament. &ldquo;And while the law imposes no restrictions, at the moment I will not be going into the State Duma, believing it inappropriate to remain the speaker of the chamber for more than two terms in a row.&rdquo;        

The resignation appeared to be part of a packet of concessions by the authorities to a defiant and growing protest movement. It comes in the aftermath of an anti-Kremlin protest in Moscow last weekend, in which tens of thousands gathered to express frustration with United Russia and its suspected complicity in election fraud.        

In what appeared to be an earlier concession to the protesters, Mr. Gryzlov said Tuesday that United Russia would give control of nearly half the parliamentary committees to opposition parties in the Duma. United Russia members were previously the chairmen of most of them.        

It is unclear whether such measures will help to mollify the anger with United Russia or prevent the target of that anger from spreading from the party to its leader, Mr. Putin, who is running in the presidential election in March.        

Mr. Putin remains Russia&rsquo;s most prominent politician, but his popularity does not appear as bulletproof as it once seemed. His approval ratings have been steadily dropping in recent months.        

Since the elections, Mr. Putin has tried to distance himself from United Russia, excluding prominent party leaders from his campaign team.        

He will face a growing field of potential challengers in the presidential election. Several announced their candidacies on Wednesday, including the governor from the Irkutsk region of Siberia, joining a few opposition politicians and the billionaire Mikhail D. Prokhorov, who unexpectedly declared his presidential ambitions this week.        

&ldquo;He is used to being the alpha dog,&rdquo; Yevgeny S. Gontmakher, a prominent social scientist, said of Mr. Putin. &ldquo;But now it seems there are several alpha dogs.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;It is an absolutely unpredictable situation,&rdquo; he added. Referring to the Kremlin and Mr. Putin, he said, &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think they have a plan.&rdquo;        

The Kremlin has signaled that it will not meet the main demands put forward by the protest movement: a recount of the vote and new elections. Meeting with the leaders of Russia&rsquo;s political parties on Tuesday, President Dmitri A. Medvedev congratulated United Russia on its victory in the elections and set a date, Dec. 21, for the first session of the new Parliament.        

Undaunted, leaders of the protest movement have moved forward with plans for a new demonstration scheduled for Dec. 24.        

As speaker, Mr. Gryzlov helped transform Parliament into an effective rubber stamp for Mr. Putin&rsquo;s policies while he was president and prime minister.        

&ldquo;People who worked with him at the start of his career, above all speechwriters, spoke of him as an ideal client,&rdquo; Valery Khomyakov, director of the National Strategy Council, a Moscow-based research organization, told the Ria Novosti news agency. &ldquo;He never argues: a speech would be written for him, and he would memorize it, go out to journalists and read it, never arguing.&rdquo;        
Ellen Barry contributed reporting.
