
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Afghanistan withdrew its ambassador from Qatar in protest over reports that the Persian Gulf emirate has been in discussions about bringing in Taliban insurgents to jump-start peace talks, officials confirmed Thursday.        

The move was the latest in a series of setbacks for efforts to start talks between the insurgents and the Afghan government. It came after news reports in Pakistan and India said the United States had been mediating talks in Doha, the Qatari capital, and that the emirate planned to host a Taliban peace mission.        

The United States, Germany and Qatar have been in discussions recently about how to restart peace talks, according to Afghan officials; in diplomatic parlance, the talks have centered on how to establish an &ldquo;address&rdquo; for the Taliban, so that negotiators will know they are talking to the right intermediaries.        

Qatar apparently went beyond the scope of those discussions, reportedly spreading the notion of allowing a former Taliban official, Mullah Abdul Salam Zaeef, to act as the &ldquo;political address&rdquo; for the Taliban in Qatar. Mr. Zaeef, the former Taliban ambassador to Pakistan, who now lives in Kabul under an amnesty, said there was no substance to such reports.        

&ldquo;I have not heard anything, and I have not received any message neither from the Taliban nor from any other side,&rdquo; he said.        

An Afghan government official, speaking on condition of anonymity because of the diplomatic sensitivities involved, said that President Hamid Karzai supported &ldquo;the creation of a political address that would be a facilitative step in advancing the Afghan peace process.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;But we need to make sure anyone who is involved in this process keeps us fully engaged and consults us every step of the way,&rdquo; the official said. &ldquo;Our American and German partners have kept us in the picture, but the Qataris have not consulted with us on this.&rdquo;        

The Qatari Foreign Ministry could not be reached for comment.        

The Afghan official described the downgrading in relations, in which the ambassador to Qatar has been recalled from Doha to Kabul and replaced with a charg&eacute; d&rsquo;affaires, as a temporary measure. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll see what decision the government makes and what the president decides to do,&rdquo; the official said.        

The move was another indication of the hardening of Afghanistan&rsquo;s position about talks with the Taliban after a series of setbacks in such efforts. One former go-between who met with Mr. Karzai and American officials last year had been exposed as a fraud who managed to extort large amounts of money from the Americans but had no Taliban connections.        

Then in September, a Taliban peace emissary turned out to be a suicide bomber, and he killed the head of Afghanistan&rsquo;s peace commission, Burhanuddin Rabbani. That infuriated Mr. Karzai, who has since taken a much harder line on starting talks with the insurgents.        

&ldquo;We can&rsquo;t continue talking to suicide bombers,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai said at a conference in Istanbul in October. &ldquo;Therefore we have stopped talking about talking to the Taliban until we have an address for the Taliban, until we have a telephone for the Taliban.&rdquo;        

On Thursday, the Afghan president apparently toughened his conditions for talks. After two days of discussions with other Afghan leaders, according to a statement issued by Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s office, they agreed on the concept of opening an office for talks with the Taliban &mdash; but in Afghanistan, Saudi Arabia or Turkey, not Qatar. And such an office should not be opened, the statement said, until the Taliban stop their &ldquo;fighting and violence against the people of Afghanistan.&rdquo;        

The Taliban also have been adamantly opposed to any negotiations, at least in their public stance, saying talks cannot begin until all foreign forces leave Afghanistan.        

However, a Taliban spokesman, Zabiullah Mujahid, did not reject out of hand the idea of a Qatari role. &ldquo;We are waiting on our officials to give their comment on this issue, so we cannot confirm or deny the idea of a Qatar office,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It takes time for our messengers to walk all the way to our officials and then bring the written answer back.&rdquo;        

Mullavi Arsala Rahmani, the former Taliban minister of higher education and now a member of the Afghan High Peace Council, was more positive. &ldquo;We would welcome any political office for the Taliban in a third country where they are safe and secure and to pave the way for them to talk to us for peace,&rdquo; he said.        

Similarly, the former Taliban representative to the United Nations, Abdul Hakim Mujahid, welcomed a Qatari initiative. &ldquo;Opening such an office would be effective and beneficial for both sides, and we support such efforts,&rdquo; he said.        

The Afghan government official dismissed any speculation about a possible Taliban office in Qatar or anywhere else. &ldquo;We are talking about at most an address, not an office,&rdquo; he said. Afghan officials are concerned that allowing the Taliban to open an office would confer political legitimacy on them.        

A spokesman for the American Embassy in Kabul declined &ldquo;to confirm or comment on alleged ongoing negotiations,&rdquo; but added, &ldquo;We do support an Afghan-led process of reconciliation and reintegration.&rdquo;        

American officials have been quietly supportive of the idea of a Taliban office. In terms of peace talks, &ldquo;the biggest step forward would be them having a fixed address,&rdquo; said an American official this month, before the latest round of reports.        

The official, who asked not to be named because of the sensitivity of the matter, said the Americans had been working with friendly governments in the Persian Gulf that would be willing to host a Taliban office, suggesting that Qatar would be the most likely location for such an arrangement.        

But the official insisted at the time that no concrete plans were yet in place. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s definitely on our wish list for the new year,&rdquo; he said.        
Matthew Rosenberg contributed reporting.
