
BUDAPEST &mdash; The government of Prime Minister Viktor Orban has proposed legislation that could challenge the independence of Hungary&rsquo;s central bank, its chief said Thursday, part of what the bill&rsquo;s critics say is a sweeping drive to consolidate power that has undermined many of the country&rsquo;s institutions.        

In an interview with the Hungarian Web site Index.hu, Andras Simor, head of the National Bank of Hungary, said that a proposal to increase the number of political appointees participating in decisions on monetary policy added up to &ldquo;almost a total takeover&rdquo; of the institution.        

&ldquo;The new law comes dangerously close to the final elimination of the central bank&rsquo;s independence,&rdquo; Mr. Simor told the Web site.        

A separate proposal would merge the central bank with the country&rsquo;s financial regulator, which could result in a de facto demotion for Mr. Simor if the new body had its own chief.        

At a news conference in Budapest on Thursday, Mr. Orban told reporters that the legislation to combine the bank and the financial watchdog was &ldquo;only an option&rdquo; that would empower the government to take the step but not actually begin the process. Mr. Orban and Mr. Simor have sparred over bank decisions repeatedly, as Mr. Orban has pressed for policies that would spur faster economic growth.        

Hungary&rsquo;s credit rating was downgraded to junk status, or below investment grade, last month by the ratings agency Moody&rsquo;s Investors Service. Mr. Orban is in discussions with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund for support to help reassure investors of the country&rsquo;s ability to repay its debts.        

Mr. Orban, a former prime minister, returned to power in 2010 with a commanding majority that has allowed him to pass a new constitution that goes into effect on Jan. 1 and make significant changes to the country&rsquo;s judiciary and the agency that oversees the media. In the process, he has come under growing international criticism.        

Mr. Orban has also nationalized some pension funds and levied significant windfall taxes on the retail, energy, telecommunications and financial sectors. The government demanded that banks absorb losses to help take the pressure off Hungarian consumers who took out loans in Swiss francs and euros, which became onerous to repay after the local currency, the forint, fell sharply against those currencies.        

On Thursday the government announced that it had reached an agreement with the banks to share part of the burden of the repayment plan and to let them write off some of their losses against the windfall tax.        

&ldquo;If you look at the whole last six months, I think now we can see that the government had a clear tactical strategy that they hit the banks first, then they ask the banks to have a talk,&rdquo; said Gyorgy Barcza, chief economist at K&H Bank. He said that while the banks were suffering losses, there was no sign that they were leaving Hungary as a result.        

Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, issued what amounted to a written protest against the changes. In a legal opinion dated Wednesday and signed by Mr. Draghi, the bank complained that the Hungarian government had not consulted it about changes in the central bank law, as required, and expressed concern that the Hungarian central bank&rsquo;s independence from political influence was under threat.        
Jack Ewing contributed reporting from Frankfurt.
