
ROME &mdash; Prime Minister Mario Monti came into office last month with a mandate to restart Italy&rsquo;s economy and restore Europe&rsquo;s confidence in the country amid an intractable debt crisis. But the package he will put to a vote in Parliament on Friday consists primarily of tax increases, not the structural changes to the economy that many experts say are necessary to restart healthy growth.        

Mr. Monti&rsquo;s difficulty in carrying out economic reforms could weaken the underpinnings of the accord reached in Brussels last week in which European leaders agreed to greater political coordination to support the euro, combined with pressure to bring Europe&rsquo;s debt-ridden southern fringe back to growth.        

In addition to austerity measures, heavily indebted countries like Italy and Greece are expected to carry out structural reforms that experts say may eventually make their economies competitive with those in northern Europe, particularly Germany&rsquo;s. That lack of competitiveness has produced a chronic balance of payments deficit in the southern countries that economists say lies at the heart of the euro zone&rsquo;s troubles.        

It was hoped that Italian lawmakers would rally around Mr. Monti&rsquo;s government of technocrats and make the tough decisions they have avoided in the past. But if his experience with this week&rsquo;s measures is any guide, his government is bound to hit strong headwinds from vested interests that grip every corner of Italy&rsquo;s complex, neofeudal economy.        

After days of political wrangling in Parliament, the Monti government bowed to pressure from the right &mdash; most notably from the party of the former prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi &mdash; and dropped some elements of the $40 billion package of spending cuts and revenue increases, including a wealth tax and the speedy liberalization of closed professions like taxi drivers and pharmacists, a plan that drew protests from their powerful guilds. It also scaled back a newly reinstated property tax on primary residences.        

After protests from the left and labor unions, some counting more pensioners than workers among their members, Mr. Monti reinstated inflation increases on low-level pensions that he said would make the measures more equitable.        

Mr. Monti has said he wants to make Italy more equitable &mdash; especially for young people and women, whom he has called a &ldquo;wasted resource&rdquo; &mdash; and to help the economy grow. But even as he pledged on Thursday to address labor reform and other structural changes in the coming weeks, he has run up against a wall of vested interests.        

&ldquo;In Italian society, there is no division between left and right; there&rsquo;s a division between those who are inside or outside some organized groups,&rdquo; said Sergio Fabbrini, the director of the School of Government at Luiss Guido Carli University in Rome. &ldquo;All the main political parties from left to right represent the insiders. The left represents the pensioners, the trade unions. The right represent various insiders: the lawyers&rsquo; organizations, notaries.&rdquo;        

The only way for young people and women to be represented &ldquo;is to have a technical government,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;but of course a technical government will have to pass through the approval of the Parliament. And here again the insiders are well organized.&rdquo;        

For Friday, when the lower house is expected to approve the somewhat watered-down package in a confidence vote, labor unions have called a nationwide transport strike and have vowed more demonstrations. This week, Susanna Camusso, the leader of the largest labor union, C.G.I.L., said the country risked a &ldquo;social explosion&rdquo; over pension reform.        

But for the most part, the new austerity package is based on tax increases. It would reinstate a property tax on first homes, which Mr. Berlusconi had eliminated as an election promise in 2008. It would also impose a 1.5 percent tax on revenues brought into Italy under an earlier tax amnesty, and add taxes on cigarettes and gas, which is close to 1.70 euros per liter, or more than $8 a gallon.        

The governor of the Bank of Italy, Ignazio Visco, said last week that the measures would increase Italy&rsquo;s tax burden to 45 percent, a level that businesses say is unsustainable.        
(Page 2 of 2)
On Thursday, the day the minister for economic development, Corrado Passera, said the Italian economy was already in recession, Confindustria, the industrialists&rsquo; organization, said it expected the Italian economy to contract 1.6 percent in 2012, rather than grow .2 percent as it had previously expected.        

The organization&lsquo;s president, Emma Marcegaglia, on Thursday criticized groups like the taxi drivers&rsquo; and pharmacists&rsquo; lobbies &ldquo;and the political groups that bow down to them,&rdquo; which blocked Mr. Monti&rsquo;s proposal to allow cities to give out more taxi licenses and for some prescription medication to be sold outside of pharmacies.        

Mr. Monti&rsquo;s measures do include some efforts to lift growth, including tax incentives for those who hire women and workers younger than 35 on regular full-time contracts.        

Many economists say that Italy&rsquo;s growth is hampered by labor laws that protect older workers with lifetime tenure, leaving younger workers living on temporary contracts with low salaries and little job security.        

&ldquo;I would like Monti to be a bit more courageous on this front, about the labor market,&rdquo; said Sergio Romano, a columnist for Corriere della Sera and a former ambassador. &ldquo;But I can also understand that the times are what they are, and with the rapidity of the measures, they don&rsquo;t want to get involved in a war of attrition with the unions.&rdquo; And, Mr. Romano added, &ldquo;he has a majority in Parliament who want early elections.&rdquo;        

Indeed, on Thursday, Mr. Berlusconi, whose People of Liberty party grudgingly voted confidence in Mr. Monti&rsquo;s government, grabbed headlines for the first time in weeks, saying ominously that he was not sure how long Mr. Monti would last. He also said he did not like Mr. Monti&rsquo;s approach to liberalization.        

Mr. Fabbrini said Mr. Monti&rsquo;s strength is that &ldquo;there are no alternatives.&rdquo;        
