
MOSCOW &mdash; Vladimir V. Putin was back in the saddle during his annual televised question-and-answer session on Thursday night &mdash; glowing with health and sure of himself, reeling off catalogs of numbers and acid one-liners, just like old times.        

Mr. Putin, Russia&rsquo;s prime minister, was trying to put things in order after weeks of mounting evidence that political discontent is rising in Russia&rsquo;s large cities. He shrugged off an incident when he was booed by sports fans, saying that paid agents were working to undermine him. He dismissed a respected magazine&rsquo;s publication of an image with an obscenity directed at him, saying it was the work of traitors he had exiled.        

And asked about some 50,000 middle-class Muscovites who massed near the Kremlin last Saturday demanding political change, he said, &ldquo;I know that the young people were paid for coming.&rdquo; He also had a vulgar quip for the white ribbons they wore, too, saying they looked like &ldquo;condoms.&rdquo;        

For the Russian public, this marathon session offered the first chance to hear directly from Mr. Putin since last week&rsquo;s series of protests. For four and a half hours, Mr. Putin projected a cocky certainty, saying that he did not notice the first protests because he was busy taking ice hockey lessons. But he found himself drawn again and again to the question of his own legitimacy.        

&ldquo;Today one can rely only on the people of Russia,&rdquo; Mr. Putin said. &ldquo;I can tell you definitely, if I don&rsquo;t feel that support &mdash; not according to certain Web sites or even on the squares, in a democratic society it is determined by the results of a vote &mdash; if I see that there is no such support, I will not stay in my office a single day.&rdquo;        

For several weeks, people have been watching to see how Mr. Putin would respond. The sour mood began to percolate on Sept. 24, when he revealed his plans to seek the presidency again, frustrating those who had been hoping for liberal reforms. It boiled over last week, after parliamentary elections that were widely seen as fraudulent. Mr. Putin is starting what will be a difficult presidential campaign, not because he faces formidable opponents, but because voters are becoming tired of him.        

Thursday offered some evidence of how he will approach the protests. After the broadcast, even some of Mr. Putin&rsquo;s longtime supporters worried that he was underestimating the level of discontent that is taking shape and emboldening the opposition.        

&ldquo;He believes that it is a very small minority&rdquo; protesting the elections, said Nikolai Zlobin, a Washington-based political analyst who attended the question-and-answer session. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s a problem, because I think there are a lot of confused people in the society, and it is important for him to try to find a common language with them. My feeling is he feels there is a certain segment of society that just think so differently that it&rsquo;s not worth spending time trying to convince them to support him.&rdquo;        

Public support has been declining gradually for all parts of the government. The ruling party, United Russia, lost 77 seats in the Dec. 4 elections despite lackluster competition, and domestic and international observers say that even that result was inflated by fraud.        

Mr. Putin remains popular by international standards, but his ratings are also in decline. The state-owned All-Russia Public Opinion Center noted a sudden drop in respondents who said they trusted Mr. Putin, from 34 percent in late November to 25 percent on Dec. 10, the day of the biggest protests.        

Mr. Putin&rsquo;s dismissive comments took many in Moscow by surprise. The former finance minister Aleksei L. Kudrin, a close ally of Mr. Putin&rsquo;s for 20 years, said he thought the prime minister was underestimating the seriousness of the protesters&rsquo; complaints.        

&ldquo;I think that his attitude toward the protests, I am probably not in agreement with it, because hundreds of thousands of people would not have gone out, there is no need to provoke them,&rdquo; Mr. Kudrin told the RIA Novosti news agency.        
Michael Schwirtz contributed reporting.
