
BEIJING &mdash; Officials in Guangdong Province trying to end a five-day standoff between the police and angry villagers have vowed to temporarily halt questionable property sales and to investigate claims that the local government illegally confiscated farmland for private development, the state news media reported Thursday.        

But they have also threatened to punish leaders of the antigovernment clashes harshly, suggesting that Communist Party officials would maintain their hard line against grass-roots organizers in Wukan, a fishing village on the South China Sea whose residents have been protesting off and on since September.        

&ldquo;Such criminals guilty of vandalism and obstructing official conduct will be severely punished,&rdquo; Wu Zili, the acting mayor of Shanwei, a city near Wukan, was quoted as telling Chinese reporters on Wednesday.        

This week, Wukan residents drove out local officials after learning that one of their own, a 42-year-old butcher chosen to negotiate on their behalf, had died in police custody. Residents say the man, Xue Jinbo, died at the hands of interrogators. The authorities say that Mr. Xue died from cardiac arrest a day after confessing to his crimes.        

Since then, residents have used trees to block roads leading to the village, and the police have maintained an outer cordon that prevents food and other supplies from entering.        

Given the vehemence of those who believe Mr. Xue was murdered, it is unclear whether the government&rsquo;s latest offer to investigate their complaints over land will calm tensions. In an audio recording made by a Hong Kong journalist that has been circulating online, Xue Jianwan, a 21-year-old teacher who is the eldest daughter of Mr. Xue, tearfully refuted the government&rsquo;s contention that her father had asthma and heart disease. &ldquo;They say they didn&rsquo;t torture him,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Then where do all the bruises come from?&rdquo;        

According to Ms. Xue, relatives who viewed her father&rsquo;s body on Sunday said it was covered in welts and his thumbs appeared to be broken. She said the authorities refused to release the body for burial until the villagers agreed to end their protests.        

On Thursday, thousands of residents continued to express their defiance by rallying in Wukan&rsquo;s main square and marching along its perimeter. They held aloft photographs of Mr. Xue, hailing him as a martyr, and demanded the right to elect their local officials beneath painted banners calling for justice. &ldquo;Save us,&rdquo; one banner read.        

The authorities have tried to win back public opinion through propaganda efforts that so far appear to have been unsuccessful. On Thursday, the government released a videotape of an interview with one of the four other village representatives arrested on the same day as Mr. Xue. The men have been charged with inciting a rampage by villagers in September that led to the destruction of $330,000 in public property, including overturned police vehicles and ransacked government buildings.        

In the recording, the man, Zhang Jiancheng, tries to console his tearful sister by assuring her that he has not been tortured and that the food is quite good. &ldquo;The villagers should trust the leaders to solve this problem,&rdquo; he said, his wrists cuffed in front of him.        
Mia Li contributed research.
