
Iran escalated its confrontation with the United States on Thursday over the captured American spy drone launched from Afghanistan, warning the Afghan government to order a halt to such surveillance flights.        

Any further flights would be regarded as a hostile act, the Iranian foreign minister, Ali Akbar Salehi, said in an interview with Iran&rsquo;s official Islamic Republic News Agency. His warning threatened to drag Afghanistan directly into the dispute over American aerial surveillance of Iran.        

There was no immediate response from the United States or Afghanistan to Mr. Salehi&rsquo;s admonition. But Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta, visiting with Afghanistan&rsquo;s president, Hamid Karzai, in Kabul on Wednesday, said that surveillance flights over Iran would continue despite the loss of the drone. Mr. Karzai was more circumspect, saying Afghanistan wanted &ldquo;the best of relations&rdquo; with all its neighbors.        

Iran has said it captured the drone &mdash; a sophisticated, batwinged RQ-170 model with radar-evading features &mdash; by way of an electronic attack on the aircraft&rsquo;s navigation system as it hovered over northern Iran on Dec. 4, causing it to land without damage.        

The drone was operated remotely by C.I.A. controllers in Afghanistan, in what American officials have acknowledged was part of a stepped-up effort to monitor suspected Iranian nuclear sites. The officials have dismissed Iran&rsquo;s explanation of how it came into possession of the aircraft as propaganda, and contend that it was lost through an unspecified technical malfunction. But they have offered no further details on what went wrong.        

&ldquo;We have called on the Afghan government to seriously pursue the case, and under no circumstances to let such events happen again, as such events will be regarded as unfriendly,&rdquo; Mr. Salehi said. He called the drone flight a &ldquo;hostile and aggressive act.&rdquo;        

Last week, Iranian television showed images of what it said was the captured drone, apparently intact, and called it an intelligence windfall that Iranian experts would reverse engineer.        

Iranian officials reacted with outrage and incredulity after President Obama said Monday that the United States had asked Iran to return the drone. &ldquo;That is a shameless demand raised by the U.S. president,&rdquo; Brig. Gen. Mohammad Hejazi, the deputy chief of staff of the Iranian military, was quoted by the semiofficial Fars News agency as saying. &ldquo;They raise such claims instead of apologizing to our Islamic establishment and people.&rdquo;        

The increased covert American intelligence operations reflect suspicions in the West and in Israel that the Iranian military is secretly working on a nuclear weapon, despite Iran&rsquo;s denials. The concerns grew last month with the release of an incriminating report about questionable aspects of Iran&rsquo;s nuclear program by the International Atomic Energy Agency, the proliferation monitor of the United Nations.        

The United States and European Union have tightened economic sanctions against Iran since then, and Congress is close to approving legislation that could severely penalize any foreign institution that does business with Iran&rsquo;s central bank. That could strangle Iran&rsquo;s oil sales by scaring off customers that do not want to risk retaliation from the United States. Oil exports account for most of Iran&rsquo;s earnings abroad.        

The impact of that legislation has particularly rattled Japan and South Korea, which are major buyers of Iranian oil. Japan&rsquo;s Nikkei business daily reported Wednesday that the Japanese were lobbying American officials to exempt Japan should that legislation become law. News reports from South Korea on Thursday said government officials there were doing the same.        

The Obama administration, which had urged Congress to make the legislation more flexible for fear that it would drive up oil prices and alienate American allies, essentially acknowledged on Thursday that the measure would become law. Victoria Nuland, a State Department spokeswoman, told reporters at a regular briefing in Washington that administration officials would work on ways to apply it &ldquo;in a manner that affects Iran but also protects the legitimate interests of America&rsquo;s friends and allies around the world.&rdquo;        
