
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; The armed insurgency against the government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria has become more organized in recent weeks, with defectors launching attacks that have become bolder and in some cases more sophisticated, according to activists and residents inside the country and in exile.        

The latest attack took place on Thursday at dawn, when military defectors killed at least 27 soldiers, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, in one of the largest attacks yet on troops loyal to the government.        

The observatory, which is based in London and has a network of informants inside Syria, said in a statement that clashes erupted in and around the city of Dara&rsquo;a, where the antigovernment uprising began in March.        

It said the attackers, armed with rifles and rocket-propelled grenades, hit two checkpoints in the countryside and a military base inside the city, suggesting a level of coordination that had not been seen there before.        

The Syrian Observatory did not specify the sources of the information, and it was unclear from the group&rsquo;s statement whether any of the attackers were killed. The government did not immediately react to news of the attack.        

It is difficult to confirm the details of defectors&rsquo; attacks &mdash; and the claims of success &mdash; because foreign reporters have rarely been allowed in the country since the uprising began, and even then, their movements are restricted.        

But residents in some cities where there has been fighting have confirmed that soldiers have died in recent weeks in fighting with defectors.        

And several defectors reached on Thursday by phone corroborated some of the activists&rsquo; accounts, indicating, for instance, that although they are still lightly armed &mdash; especially compared with the Syrian military &mdash; they have begun to slowly build their weapons caches, in part by pilfering small arms from soldiers they have killed.        

One opposition leader in exile, whose assertions could not be immediately confirmed, said that weapons were also being smuggled to Syria from Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq, and that defectors were now better armed and financed.        

The attacks in recent weeks have escalated around Dara&rsquo;a, in the south, and in Hama, a tense city in central Syria where vast protests gathered earlier this year before security forces retook the city in August.        

Discontent is greater in these areas, observers say, where a majority of the people are poor Sunni Muslims who have suffered under government neglect, a longstanding drought and a sense of disenfranchisement by a government dominated by Alawites, a heterodox Muslim sect to which Mr. Assad belongs.        

This week alone, the observatory reported four deadly attacks against government troops in Hama and Dara&rsquo;a Provinces, including an ambush on Wednesday that killed at least eight members of the security forces.        

&ldquo;Where else are we going to find government forces vulnerable?&rdquo; said Ammar al-Wawi, a former soldier reached by phone in an area near the Syrian-Turkish border. &ldquo;Confrontations will happen in hot spots and where there are protests, discontent and serious opposition to the regime.&rdquo;        

Mr. Wawi said he left the army in March, after the uprising started. He and some other fighters said their initial goal was to ambush and kill soldiers who were headed to crush protests. For months, the government has intermittently cracked down on restive cities, sending in tanks, killing civilians and making arrests, according to activists.        

Though the Free Syrian Army &mdash; a group of mainly army defectors whose commanders are based in Turkey &mdash; claimed to have staged most of the recent attacks, some activists and American officials disagree over the degree of coordination. Many of the attacks themselves often seem haphazard.        

Estimates of the numbers of defectors vary wildly. An Obama administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity, estimated their total at 1,000 to 3,500. The official said that armed civilians had apparently joined some of the defectors.        

Some activists have suggested that parts of Dara&rsquo;a and Hama Provinces have become so hostile that security forces are finding it difficult to enter them.        

A town near Dara&rsquo;a called Hirak has witnessed daily antigovernment protests in recent weeks, and residents there say that it has become off limits for security forces.        

An opposition activist who did not want to be identified said that about 800 fighters, mainly army defectors, were based there.        

&ldquo;The regime hasn&rsquo;t attacked once in recent weeks,&rdquo; said Anwar Fares, a human rights activist from Dara&rsquo;a. &ldquo;They have been attacked on the outskirts of the town several times, so they are now scared and stay away.&rdquo;        

Mr. Fares said an increasing number of Syrian civilians were joining the defectors, especially people who had lost family members in the government&rsquo;s crackdown.        
Anthony Shadid contributed reporting from Beirut, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
