
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; Officials from the United States and North Korea met in Beijing on Thursday to discuss the possible terms of resuming humanitarian aid shipments to the impoverished North.        

The meeting followed a series of appeals from United Nations and private American relief agencies for urgent aid for the most vulnerable of North Korea&rsquo;s population, especially its children and pregnant mothers, who they said suffered from life-threatening malnutrition.        

But Washington remains concerned that the Pyongyang regime might divert foreign aid to its military. Critics of North Korea also have argued that Washington must focus its relief resources on fighting a more severe food crisis in Africa, rather than helping North Korea, where the regime was accused of spending its resources in importing luxury goods for party elites and financing its nuclear weapons program.        

Glyn T. Davies, the American special representative on North Korea policy, told reporters in Beijing on Thursday that the talks were under way. Robert King, Washington&rsquo;s special envoy for North Korean human rights issues and senior American aid official Jon Brause were meeting with Ri Gun, a senior North Korean Foreign Ministry official.        

The talks were expected to focus on strict monitoring mechanisms.        

Victoria Nuland, a State Department spokeswoman in Washington, said that should the United States provide aid, the shipments would include vitamin supplements and high-protein biscuits for malnourished children to prevent the material from ending up &ldquo;on some leader&rsquo;s banquet table.&rdquo;        

She stressed that no quick decision was expected.        

&ldquo;We have said all along not only that we need to continue to assess need, but that were we to decide to go forward with this, we would need to have much more strict and clear monitoring systems in place,&rdquo; she said.        

The last American food handouts ended in March 2009, amid rising tensions between Washington and Pyongyang over the North&rsquo;s nuclear weapons and long-range missile programs. After American aid groups were expelled, North Korea test-launched a long-range rocket and conducted its second nuclear test. The United States rallied more international sanctions against the North.        

Washington is now exploring ways of drawing North Korea back to six-nation talks aimed at ending its nuclear weapons program, hoping that engaging Pyongyang in dialogue will help ease tensions on the divided Korean Peninsula. It wants North Korea to suspend its nuclear activities so the talks can begin, but the North has demanded that the talks must resume without conditions.        

American officials insisted there was no link between the food talks and the nuclear impasse. In recent weeks, however, Mercy Corps and four other American relief organizations operating in North Korea have charged that by delaying a decision on aid, Washington was playing politics with humanitarian help for children. Meanwhile, critics of food aid for the North made the same accusation, saying that Washington must have the courage to say no to the North Korean regime.        

After a trip to North Korea in October, Valerie Amos, the United Nations&rsquo; top relief coordinator, called for urgent relief for children. After an assessment trip to the North last month, the World Food Program and the Food and Agriculture Organization said that North Korea&rsquo;s harvests this autumn were expected to increase by 8.5 percent compared with a year ago, but that it still needed urgent aid.        

Foe years, North Korea has suffered chronic food shortages. The problem has been compounded by North Korea&rsquo;s continued nuclear weapons program and its military provocations against South Korea, which have helped curtail donor contributions.        

Rising global food prices also contributed to the problem.        
