
TOKYO &mdash; Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda of Japan has declared an end to the world&rsquo;s worst nuclear crisis since Chernobyl, saying technicians have regained control of reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant.        

&ldquo;Today, we have reached a great milestone,&rdquo; Mr. Noda said in a televised address to the nation. &ldquo;The reactors are stable, which should resolve one big cause of concern for us all.&rdquo;        

The declaration, nine months after a calamitous earthquake and tsunami set off a huge radiation leak, could set the stage for the return of more evacuees to affected areas.        

But even before Mr. Noda&rsquo;s announcement, some experts called the news premature, an attempt to quell continuing public anger over the accident and paper over remaining threats to the plant. The experts argue that the devastated plant remains vulnerable to large aftershocks, which could knock out the jury-rigged cooling system that helped workers bring the reactors into a relatively stable state known as a &ldquo;cold shutdown.&rdquo;        

They also say the milestone of a cold shutdown, necessary before dismantling can begin, means less than usual because the nuclear fuel at three of the plant&rsquo;s reactors has melted and some of it has apparently escaped the reactor vessels. That means that removing the fuel from the reactors, always a delicate process, will be much harder and more time-consuming.        

Cold shutdown &ldquo;is a term that has been trotted out to give the impression we are reaching some sort of closure,&rdquo; said Hiroaki Koide, assistant professor at the Research Reactor Institute at Kyoto University and a prominent critic of nuclear power. &ldquo;We still face a long battle of epic proportions, and by the time it is really over, most of us will be long dead.&rdquo;        

The government says dismantling the plant will take at least four decades.        

Some experts even say that the restart of fission cannot be ruled out, but the Tokyo Electric Power Company, which runs the plant, has said any fission is not likely to be self-sustaining.        

Although having the plant in a more stable state is good news, for many of the people of Fukushima &mdash; and even elsewhere in Japan &mdash;  the crisis is far from over. More than 90,000 people remain displaced from the evacuation zone around the plant, and as the government begins lifting evacuation orders for some communities, many are refusing to return home.        

&ldquo;This does not ring true for us at all,&rdquo; said Hirofumi Onuma, 52, deputy principal of a high school in Minamisoma, a city that like many places near the plant is contaminated, but not badly enough that the government has called for it to be abandoned. After a desperate cleanup effort in the city, the school was declared safe and reopened at the end of October. Still, only 350 of the 705 students have returned.        

&ldquo;The plant is like a black box, and we don&rsquo;t know what is really happening,&rdquo; Mr. Onuma said. &ldquo;I feel no relief.&rdquo;        

People outside the most affected area remain worried about the country&rsquo;s food supply.        

Radioactive cesium, which could increase the risk of cancer, has been detected in a wide range of food products, including beef, tea leaves, mushrooms, baby formula and rice, the nation&rsquo;s staple.        

Prime Minister Noda, who came to power after his predecessor resigned amid public discontent over the crisis, has been trying hard to help the country return to a noncrisis footing. He is trying, for instance, to speed up the restarting of reactors around the country.        

Only 8 of the nation&rsquo;s 54 reactors are operating, as local communities resist the restarting of reactors closed for maintenance or inspection since the March disaster.        

Even as he tried to move the country forward, however, Mr. Noda acknowledged on Friday that much work needed to be done. &ldquo;Not all of our battles are over,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;but we will fight to the end.&rdquo;        
Yasuko Kamiizumi contributed reporting.
