
MOSCOW &mdash; A prominent journalist from Russia&rsquo;s violence-plagued North Caucasus region was shot to death late Thursday as he left his newspaper, adding to a rising toll of journalists and human rights workers killed in the region in recent years.        

The journalist, Khadzhimurad Kamalov, 46, was the founder of Chernovik, a popular muckraking newspaper that covered delicate issues like police abuse, corruption and Islamic extremism in Dagestan, a mostly Muslim region neighboring Chechnya.        

Mr. Kamalov had stepped outside the offices of Chernovik, in the provincial capital, Makhachkala, just before midnight when a gunman opened fire with a pistol, according to police reports.        

&ldquo;When the killer shot him, Khadzhimurad fell, and the killer started firing more,&rdquo; said Biyakai Magomedov, the newspaper&rsquo;s editor in chief, who witnessed the shooting. &ldquo;He covered his head with his arms, apparently to protect it,&rdquo; he said on Russia&rsquo;s NTV television. &ldquo;Khadzhimurad was such a brave man that even while injured he was able to grab the man by his foot.&rdquo;        

The police said they were searching for the gunman, who fled. Mr. Kamalov suffered multiple gunshot wounds and died on the way to the hospital.        

Those who knew Mr. Kamalov and his work said his death came as little surprise. The newspaper&rsquo;s efforts to uncover official corruption, particularly within the police, earned him many influential enemies, people familiar with the newspaper said. He was also accused of being sympathetic to Islamic radicals after interviews with militant leaders were published in Chernovik.        

In 2009, his name appeared on a list of people suspected of being militants and their accomplices, accused of responsibility for the deaths of police officers and civilians in insurgent violence in Dagestan, according to Caucasian Knot, an online news agency that covers the North Caucasus. The anonymous authors of the list vowed to &ldquo;destroy these jackals.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kamalov had always denied involvement with extremists.        

&ldquo;Chernovik wrote about everyone and everything,&rdquo; Yulia Latynina, a prominent investigative journalist, said on Ekho Moskvy radio. &ldquo;In a region where they kill you for any word, this is, unfortunately, not surprising.&rdquo;        

In New York, the Committee to Protect Journalists condemned the killing, calling it &ldquo;a lethal blow to press freedom.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The assassination of Khadzhimurad Kamalov is a massive loss for independent journalism in the North Caucasus, Russia&rsquo;s most dangerous place for reporters,&rdquo; Nina Ognianova, the organization&rsquo;s coordinator for Europe and Central Asia, said in a statement.        

The North Caucasus is the scene of a long-simmering Islamist insurgency. Journalists and rights workers often become entangled in the conflict, making them frequent targets of violence. The dangers are compounded by the failure of officials to investigate such crimes adequately, said Tanya Lokshina, an expert on the North Caucasus from Human Rights Watch.        

&ldquo;It goes without saying that the ambiance of utter impunity for killing journalists and public activists in the North Caucasus played a tremendous role here,&rdquo; Ms. Lokshina said, speaking of Mr. Kamalov&rsquo;s killing. &ldquo;Whoever did this knew for certain that he would not be punished.&rdquo;        

Mr. Magomedov, Chernovik&rsquo;s editor in chief, said there was a clear message in the killing.        

&ldquo;I think this murder was deliberately carried out outside our office to scare us,&rdquo; he said.        
