
CAIRO &mdash; President Hosni Mubarak appeared increasingly isolated on Friday, as hundreds of thousands of protesters returned to Tahrir Square and the Obama administration and some members of the Egyptian military and civilian elite pursued plans to nudge him from power.        

More Photos &#x00bb;


The country&rsquo;s newly named vice president, Omar Suleiman, and other top military leaders were discussing steps to limit Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s decision-making authority and possibly remove him from the presidential palace in Cairo &mdash; though not to strip him of his presidency immediately, Egyptian and American officials said. A transitional government headed by Mr. Suleiman would then negotiate with opposition figures to amend Egypt&rsquo;s Constitution and begin a process of democratic changes.        

Administration officials said that among the ideas that had been discussed were suggesting to Mr. Mubarak that he move to his home at Sharm el Sheik, the seaside resort, or that he embark on one of his annual medical leaves to Germany for an extended checkup. Such steps would provide him with a graceful exit and effectively remove him as the central political player, going partway toward addressing a central demand of protesters on the streets of Cairo.        

Meanwhile, Mr. Suleiman and top military officers are being encouraged to have detailed discussions with opposition groups, conversations that would ultimately include how to open up the political system, establish term limits for the president and enshrine some key democratic principles ahead of elections scheduled for September.        

&ldquo;None of this can happen if Mubarak is at the center of the process,&rdquo; said one senior administration official. &ldquo;But it doesn&rsquo;t necessarily require the president to leave office right now.&rdquo;        

Opposition leaders, however, have insisted that they will not negotiate with Mr. Suleiman until Mr. Mubarak is out of office. They have been counting on the impact of his resignation, should it occur, to ensure that senior Egyptian officials do not try to derail the movement toward a constitutional democracy.        

At a news conference with Prime Minister Stephen Harper of Canada, President Obama said he believed that the Egyptian president had already made a &ldquo;psychological break&rdquo; from his hold on office by announcing that he would not run again. Mr. Obama again stopped short of declaring that Mr. Mubarak should leave office sooner, but he set out a series of steps that the Egyptian government must meet to assure an &ldquo;orderly transition&rdquo; that seemed to all but require that the Egyptian leader step out of the way, if not resign.        

Mr. Mubarak said in an interview Thursday with ABC that he was eager to step down, but that if he did, &ldquo;Egypt would sink into chaos.&rdquo;        

Leaders of the country&rsquo;s opposition movements are already warning of the risk of another military-backed president for life if the military elite currently negotiating a transition from Mr. Mubarak were to block broader change.        

But several groups of prominent intellectuals and political analysts are pushing plans to endorse an initial transfer of power to Mr. Suleiman, who already appears to be governing in Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s place, they said.        

&ldquo;The reality on the ground is that the vice president is the one managing the situation and what we want to do is legalize it,&rdquo; said Wahid Abdel Neguid, the deputy director of the Al Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies and one of the figures working on the plans. &ldquo;Given the current situation, the president really can&rsquo;t do anything, not here and not abroad, given the amount of pressure that is on him.&rdquo;        

The groups putting forward the proposal include Nabil Fahmy, former Egyptian ambassador to the United States; Naguib Sawiris, one of the most prominent businessmen in Egypt; Ahmed Kamal Aboul Magd, a lawyer and influential Islamic thinker; and Ahmed Zewail, a Nobel Prize-winning chemist. One group met Friday at the office of Amr Moussa, the head of the Arab League and perhaps the most popular political figure in Egypt.        

Mr. Suleiman, a former military officer, appears to share power with two close allies, Field Marshal Mohamed Tantawi, the defense minister, and Ahmed Shafiq, the prime minister, a retired general who previously ran the country&rsquo;s national airline, said Abdel Moneim Qattou, a retired Army general close to all three.        

But the three find themselves squeezed between their loyalties to Mr. Mubarak on one side and the military on the other, Mr. Qattou said. They have been unwilling to push Mr. Mubarak out, he said. But they are also unwilling or unable to deploy the military against the protesters &mdash; a move that would cut deeply against its self-image and prestige.        

&ldquo;The three of them are military men,&rdquo; Mr. Qattou said. &ldquo;They know each other very well and they are together trying to find a way out of this crisis. They want to do this without spilling blood and without hurting the dignity of Egypt or Mubarak while fulfilling the demands of the masses.&rdquo;        
David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Cairo, and David E. Sanger from Washington. Kareem Fahim, Mona El-Naggar and Liam Stack contributed reporting from Cairo.
