
BUENOS AIRES        

WITH his scruffy beard, tattooed arms and a pack of cigarettes in his shirt pocket, James Peck, a painter of windswept landscapes inspired by the English master J.M.W. Turner, would seem to fit in nicely with the bohemian expatriates who routinely wash into this city&rsquo;s bars and cafes.        

But Mr. Peck &mdash; who is heralded as a hero by some in Buenos Aires, his new home, and denounced as a traitor by others in the Falkland Islands, where he was born and raised &mdash; is anything but the average foreign wanderer making his way to Argentina.        

Stepping into one of South America&rsquo;s fiercest territorial disputes, Mr. Peck is the first person from the Falklands to obtain Argentine citizenship since the 1982 war between Argentina and Britain over the archipelago. The 11-week conflict claimed more than 900 lives and left Britain in control of the islands.        

Mr. Peck, appearing at a ceremony here in June with President Cristina Fern&aacute;ndez de Kirchner to receive his identity card, found himself thrust into the increasingly tense diplomatic sparring over the Falklands, which have recently attracted big investments in oil drilling, fisheries and tourism, reviving some of the old animosity.        

Just this month, Britain was angered by reports of Argentine patrol vessels&rsquo; intercepting Spanish fishing boats in waters disputed by the two countries. Meanwhile, British plans for a marine protection zone near the Falklands elicited a dismissive response from Argentine military officials here.        

The tussle reached the highest levels of government this year. Prime Minister David Cameron reaffirmed Britain&rsquo;s control of the islands in June, shortly after Mrs. Kirchner gave Mr. Peck his citizenship and received Ban Ki-moon, the secretary general of the United Nations, to discuss Argentina&rsquo;s claim to the Falkland Islands, which are called the Malvinas here.        

&ldquo;As long as the Falkland Islands want to be sovereign British territory, they should remain sovereign British territory,&rdquo; Mr. Cameron said. &ldquo;Full stop: end of story.&rdquo;        

An irate Mrs. Kirchner responded by calling Britain a &ldquo;crude colonial power in decline&rdquo; and accusing Mr. Cameron of &ldquo;mediocrity bordering on stupidity.&rdquo;        

More recently, in November, retired British admirals excoriated a decision to scrap Britain&rsquo;s only aircraft carrier, contending that the move &ldquo;practically invited&rdquo; Argentina to invade the &ldquo;newly valuable Falkland Islands and their oil fields.&rdquo;        

Britain maintains about 1,000 military personnel on the islands, and next year, the 30th anniversary of Argentina&rsquo;s defeat in the war, Prince William is scheduled to be deployed to the Falklands as a helicopter rescue pilot, a move condemned by the authorities here as a &ldquo;provocative act.&rdquo;        

ENTER Mr. Peck, 43, who at first glance seems an unlikely figure to be caught up in such heated emotions. Like many of the 3,000 other kelpers, as Falklanders are often called because of the seaweed found on the islands, he is a descendant of 19th-century British immigrants.        

His father, Terry, was a police officer and hero in the resistance to Argentina&rsquo;s invasion on April 2, 1982, carrying out espionage in the weeks that followed for British forces and fighting alongside a parachute regiment in the battle of Mount Longdon.        

Mr. Peck was just 13 at the time of the war, but after turning 18, he said in an interview over a Quilmes beer at a cafe here, he served in the Falkland Islands Defense Force, a volunteer unit where &ldquo;you learn to use a gun and all things like that.&rdquo;        

He traded guns for paintbrushes when he left to study art in London. His time away gave him new insights into his home, placing focus on linguistic details that, he said, spoke more to the nuances in the archipelago&rsquo;s history than the jingoistic accounts of the war from both sides.        

He realized that &ldquo;che,&rdquo; a term of affection that kelpers use and which Mr. Peck used to address his mother, must have come from Argentina, where it appears in everyday speech. And he surmised that another term, &ldquo;the Camp,&rdquo; used to describe the archipelago&rsquo;s barren expanses, is derived from the Spanish word &ldquo;campo,&rdquo; for countryside.        

In fact, ties between the Falklands and Argentina, which has claimed sovereignty over the islands since 1833, when Britain reestablished its rule of the archipelago, have not always been so tense.        

Sheep farmers used to alternate between southern Patagonia and the Falklands. And well into the 20th century, some Falklands families would send their children to schools in Buenos Aires, like St. Andrew&rsquo;s Scots School, that cater to Argentina&rsquo;s large English-speaking community.        

Mr. Peck said his first trips here in the 1990s tasted like &ldquo;forbidden fruit.&rdquo; He came to show his paintings, some of which deal with the war and its psychological scars. He met an Argentine woman and a romance ensued. They married and had two boys, who are now 9 and 5.        
Charles Newbery contributing reporting.
