
LIMA, Peru &mdash; A court here is allowing Lori Berenson, the paroled American who spent more than 15 years in Peruvian prisons on a terrorism conviction, to travel to the United States for the first time.        

She had requested permission to travel earlier this year, but the request was initially rejected. An appeals court granted her permission to visit the United States for the holidays, beginning as early as Friday and lasting through Jan. 11, according to the official decree. Ms. Berenson will travel to New York with her son, Salvador.        

&ldquo;We are all thrilled that she will be here in New York for the holiday season,&rdquo; her mother, Rhoda Berenson, said in an e-mail. &ldquo;Lori has said she will comply with the requirement to return to Peru to fulfill the conditions of her parole.&rdquo;        

Ms. Berenson is one of the most politically polarizing figures in Peru, a society that has suffered from a history of terrorism since the 1980s. Once this travel permit ends, Ms. Berenson will be required to report back to various legal authorities in Peru, including the Criminal Court, the Provincial Criminal Court and the National Penitentiary.        

&ldquo;If she doesn&rsquo;t return by Jan. 11, her penitentiary benefits will be revoked, and she will be imprisoned until the culmination of her sentence, but the magistrates are certain there is no flight risk involved,&rdquo; a judiciary spokesman in Lima said Friday by telephone.        

According to the permit, she will stay at her parents&rsquo; home in New York City.        

Marcos Ibazeta, who was the president of the Tribunal Court that tried Ms. Berenson&rsquo;s case, said: &ldquo;She could have left a long time ago, but she didn&rsquo;t. I don&rsquo;t think she plans to stay in the United States now that she is out of prison.&rdquo;        

Ms. Berenson was accused of collaborating with a terrorist group in a plan to assault the Peruvian Congress in November 1995, but the attack never occurred. There was no proof of her being a formal member or leader of the group, but she was convicted of being a collaborator.        

According to testimony during the trial, Ms. Berenson voluntarily helped with logistics and information and used the house she had rented as a base for the operatives. She was arrested when riding a bus in Lima. She has stated that she had never participated in any violent actions.        

During her imprisonment, she married An&iacute;bal Apari S&aacute;nchez, who had been convicted for being a member of the group and was granted conjugal visits during his parole. Their son, Salvador, is now 2 years old. Mr. Apari serves as her lawyer, but was unavailable for comment.        

Ms. Berenson is out on parole, but is technically still serving a 20-year sentence, which is due to be completed on Nov. 29, 2015. A fine of just over $37,000 had also been imposed as reparations, but it was overturned by the Inter-American Human Rights Commission. Instead, the commission mandated in 2005 that her parents be paid $30,000 for expenses, according to Peru&rsquo;s Ministry of Justice.        
