
PARIS &mdash; The French government said Friday that yet another effort to find the wreckage of an Air France jet that crashed in the mid-Atlantic more than 18 months ago would begin next month.        

The effort, which is expected to begin about March 18, will follow three previous attempts that were jointly financed by the government, Air France and Airbus, the manufacturer of the plane, an A330-200.        

Jean-Paul Troadec, head of the French Bureau of Investigations and Analyses, told reporters that the new search would cover about 3,900 square miles around the plane&rsquo;s last known position, more than 600 miles off the northern coast of Brazil.        

A team of investigators and about a dozen specialists from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts will use three remote-controlled minisubmarines fitted with advanced sonar equipment and ultra-high-resolution cameras to scan the seabed for signs of the plane.        

Air France and Airbus are expected to foot the $12.5 million bill for the new search, which could extend until early July. The two companies have already spent more than $27 million to find the plane.        

All 228 passengers and crew members were killed when Flight 447 went down on June 1, 2009, in heavy thunderstorms en route to Paris from Rio de Janeiro. Searches of roughly 2,800 square miles of seabed have yielded more than 600 pieces of floating debris and 51 bodies, but the flight recorders and the bulk of the wreckage have not been found.        

Investigators have said that without the recorders they may never determine the cause of the crash.        

So far the main source of information about what happened has been messages sent automatically from the plane to a maintenance base, which indicated a malfunction of the plane&rsquo;s airspeed sensors.        

David Gallo, director of special projects at Woods Hole, said on Friday that the equipment that would be used was a state-of-the-art version of what was used to find the remains of the Titanic in 1985.        

&ldquo;We are employing the most advanced robotics that exist in the world today,&rdquo; Mr. Gallo said.  &ldquo;I have confidence that if the aircraft is in this area, we will be able to identify it.&rdquo;        
