
LIMA, Peru &mdash; Lori Berenson, the New Yorker paroled last year after serving more than 15 years in prison here on a terrorism conviction, was blocked from leaving the country for what was to have been her first visit home since her arrest, she said Saturday.        

A Peruvian court had granted Ms. Berenson permission to visit her family in New York City for the holidays, but when she and her young son arrived at the airport on Friday night, they were turned away by immigration authorities.        

&ldquo;They said I needed a document for immigration and I didn&rsquo;t have it,&rdquo; Ms. Berenson said, &ldquo;so they wouldn&rsquo;t let me leave the country.&rdquo;        

It was unclear what document the immigration authorities wanted. Ms. Berenson said she had all of the documents required for travel.        

Peru&rsquo;s antiterrorism prosecutor, Julio Galindo, had filed a complaint late Friday to the court that had granted Ms. Berenson permission to travel, arguing that it violated the law. Ms. Berenson was freed on parole last year but had been required to remain in Peru until her 20-year sentence, for collaborating with a terrorist group in 1995, ends in 2015.        

A spokesman for the Judiciary Department, however, said the prosecutor&rsquo;s complaint should not have prevented her from leaving the country.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t have anything to do with it,&rdquo; said Guillermo Gonzales, a department spokesman. &ldquo;As far as the judiciary is concerned, she was allowed to leave the country.&rdquo;        

Local news media, meanwhile, said that Ms. Berenson had arrived late to the airport, and simply missed her flight. But witnesses said she was at the airport hours before the flight was to leave.        

Ms. Berenson&rsquo;s lawyer, An&iacute;bal Apari S&aacute;nchez, told The Associated Press that the government had made a political decision to halt her departure, which he called &ldquo;an abuse of authority.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Administratively, you can&rsquo;t block a court order,&rdquo; he said.        

Rhoda and Mark Berenson, who were waiting at their New York City apartment for their 42-year-old daughter and her 2-year-old son, declined to comment on Saturday morning.        

Ms. Berenson was arrested on a bus in Lima in 1995, just hours before Peruvian authorities raided a home she was renting. Inside, they found 8,000 rounds of ammunition, 3,000 sticks of dynamite, and more than a dozen members of the T&uacute;pac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, a rebel group that the government said was preparing to launch an attack on the Congress.        

Ms. Berenson was convicted of collaborating with the rebels, providing a safe house and helping with logistics, and sentenced to 20 years in prison. She has said that she did not know about their violent plans.        

While in prison, Ms. Berenson married Mr. Apari, a member of the rebel group, and the couple had a son, Salvador. They have since separated but Mr. Apari serves as Ms. Berenson&rsquo;s lawyer.        

Ms. Berenson remains a polarizing figure in Peru, which struggled violently with rebel groups for 20 years, in a conflict that took 70,000 lives.        

On Thursday, an appeals court granted Ms. Berenson permission to visit her parents in New York City, leaving as early as Friday, on the condition that she return to Peru by Jan. 11. If she did not return by then, she would be required to finish her sentence in prison, a Judiciary spokesman said.        
Andrea Zarate reported from Lima, and Elizabeth A. Harris from New York. Anne Barnard contributed reporting from New York.
