
Henry Lafont, a French pilot who took part in a harrowing aerial escape from North Africa to fight for the honor of France after its capitulation to Hitler and who became the last surviving French veteran of the Battle of Britain, died on Dec. 2 in Tr&eacute;muson, in the Brittany region of France. He was 91.        

His death was announced by the French Embassy in Washington.        

When France fell to the Germans in June 1940, and a collaborationist government based in Vichy was being formed, Mr. Lafont, a noncommissioned officer, was stationed in Oran in Algeria, then a French colony. Shortly after midnight on June 30, Mr. Lafont and five fellow servicemen, several of them pilots, convinced an airfield sentry that they were on a patrol, then stole a twin-engine, six-passenger transport plane that they knew carried fuel and set off to link up with British forces in Gibraltar.        

What they did not know made for an unnerving flight.        

&ldquo;The engines labored and the aircraft did not gather enough speed for a normal takeoff,&rdquo; Mr. Lafont wrote a half-century later in Icare, a French aviation magazine.        

The pilot, Ren&eacute; Mouchotte, managed to lift off but struggled to keep the plane in the air.        

&ldquo;We hedge-hopped over the salt lake on the edge of the airfield,&rdquo; Mr. Lafont recalled. &ldquo;Ren&eacute; struggled to reach the speed required to gain height. We realized that our aircraft had been sabotaged. The controls for varying the pitch of the propellers were not working.&rdquo;        

That plane was among those that had been tampered with by the French authorities collaborating with the Germans to avert just such an escape.        

But the airmen made it to Gibraltar, navigating with the aid of a school atlas they had brought aboard, and they arrived in Britain by sea in mid-July. As the French Embassy told it in announcing Mr. Lafont&rsquo;s death, they were among &ldquo;the very first to join General de Gaulle in London.&rdquo;        

De Gaulle, who would become leader of the Free French forces in exile, had made a broadcast on the BBC in June 1940 calling on Frenchmen to join him in a crusade to defeat Hitler&rsquo;s Germany.        

Mr. Lafont and his fellow French aviators in the Battle of Britain &mdash; there were 13 by most accounts &mdash; flew with the Royal Air Force as it beat back the German Air Force during the summer and fall of 1940, foiling Hitler&rsquo;s plans to invade Britain. Mr. Lafont flew Hawker Hurricane fighters out of southern England with the 615 Squadron.        

Interviewed for the French magazine Aviasport in 2002, he described combat as &ldquo;a succession of endless alerts, takeoffs in three minutes to try to intercept an enemy&rdquo; who often had superior positioning.        

Mr. Lafont later trained dozens of French pilots arriving in Britain.        

Many of the French in the Battle of Britain, among them Mr. Mouchotte, were killed during the war. Mr. Lafont went on to fly numerous fighter missions over Libya and Europe. In 1941 he shot down two German fighters, one of them having downed his squadron commander and the other having bombed a convoy in the English Channel. He suffered shrapnel wounds when his plane was downed in Libya in the spring of 1942.        

Born Henri Gaston Lucien Lafont in Cahors, France, on Aug. 10, 1920, he became intrigued by aviation while attending an air show as a youngster and joined the French Air Force in 1938. He anglicized his first name during World War II.        

Remaining in the French Air Force after the war, Mr. Lafont served on the staff of NATO and in the Algerian conflict. He retired as a colonel in 1966. He was the director of the prominent Paris air show at Le Bourget from 1967 to 1984.        

He is survived by two sons and a daughter.        

Mr. Lafont was a member of France&rsquo;s two highest orders, as a Commander of the Legion of Honor and a Companion of the Liberation. His book &ldquo;Aviateurs de la Libert&eacute;&rdquo; (2002) memorialized all the French airmen who died in World War II.        

In recalling his wartime service, Mr. Lafont spoke of the lessons learned by the French and British. As he told the British newspaper The Independent in 2003, &ldquo;Although I saw enough of war to want to avoid war at all times, I also remember in the &rsquo;30s we wanted to avoid war with Hitler so desperately, we ended up fighting him too late.&rdquo;        
