
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; NATO&rsquo;s seven-month air campaign in Libya, hailed by the alliance and many Libyans for blunting a lethal crackdown by Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi and helping to push him from power, came with an unrecognized toll: scores of civilian casualties the alliance has long refused to acknowledge or investigate.        

By NATO&rsquo;s telling during the war, and in statements since sorties ended on Oct. 31, the alliance-led operation was nearly flawless &mdash; a model air war that used high technology, meticulous planning and restraint to protect civilians from Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s troops, which was the alliance&rsquo;s mandate.        

&ldquo;We have carried out this operation very carefully, without confirmed civilian casualties,&rdquo; the secretary general of NATO, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, said in November.        

But an on-the-ground examination by The New York Times of airstrike sites across Libya &mdash; including interviews with survivors, doctors and witnesses, and the collection of munitions remnants, medical reports, death certificates and photographs &mdash; found credible accounts of dozens of civilians killed by NATO in many distinct attacks. The victims, including at least 29 women or children, often had been asleep in homes when the ordnance hit.        

In all, at least 40 civilians, and perhaps more than 70, were killed by NATO at these sites, available evidence suggests. While that total is not high compared with other conflicts in which Western powers have relied heavily on air power, and less than the exaggerated accounts circulated by the Qaddafi government, it is also not a complete accounting. Survivors and doctors working for the anti-Qaddafi interim authorities point to dozens more civilians wounded in these and other strikes, and they referred reporters to other sites where civilian casualties were suspected.        

Two weeks after being provided a 27-page memorandum from The Times containing extensive details of nine separate attacks in which evidence indicated that allied planes had killed or wounded unintended victims, NATO modified its stance.        

&ldquo;From what you have gathered on the ground, it appears that innocent civilians may have been killed or injured, despite all the care and precision,&rdquo; said Oana Lungescu, a spokeswoman for NATO headquarters in Brussels. &ldquo;We deeply regret any loss of life.&rdquo;        

She added that NATO was in regular contact with the new Libyan government and that &ldquo;we stand ready to work with the Libyan authorities to do what they feel is right.&rdquo;        

NATO, however, deferred the responsibility of initiating any inquiry to Libya&rsquo;s interim authorities, whose survival and climb to power were made possible largely by the airstrike campaign. So far, Libyan leaders have expressed no interest in examining NATO&rsquo;s mistakes.        

The failure to thoroughly assess the civilian toll reduces the chances that allied forces, which are relying ever more heavily on air power rather than risking ground troops in overseas conflicts, will examine their Libyan experience to minimize collateral deaths elsewhere. Allied commanders have been ordered to submit a lessons-learned report to NATO headquarters in February. NATO&rsquo;s incuriosity about the many lethal accidents raises questions about how thorough that review will be.        

NATO&rsquo;s experience in Libya also reveals an attitude that initially prevailed in Afghanistan. There, NATO forces, led by the United States, tightened the rules of engagement for airstrikes and insisted on better targeting to reduce civilian deaths only after repeatedly ignoring or disputing accounts of airstrikes that left many civilians dead.        

In Libya, NATO&rsquo;s inattention to its unintended victims has also left many wounded civilians with little aid in the aftermath of the country&rsquo;s still-chaotic change in leadership.        

These victims include a boy blasted by debris in his face and right eye, a woman whose left leg was amputated, another whose foot and leg wounds left her disabled, a North Korean doctor whose left foot was crushed and his wife, who suffered a fractured skull.        
C. J. Chivers reported from Libya, and Eric Schmitt from Washington, Brussels and Naples, Italy.
