
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Presidents from Thomas Jefferson to Barack Obama have waged war on these shores. Given such volatile relations, it is little wonder that no American defense secretary had ever set foot here.        

But on Saturday, Leon E. Panetta became the first defense secretary to visit Tripoli. He arrived to assess the progress and challenges facing a postrevolutionary government struggling to control the disparate rebel bands that ousted Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi with the support of NATO attacks from the air and sea.        

&ldquo;I have come here to pay tribute to the courage and determination of the Libyan people,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta said as he stood next to Prime Minister Abdel Rahim el-Keeb. &ldquo;They bravely came together. They rose up against an oppressive regime. They fought, and many died, to chart a better future for themselves and for their children.&rdquo;        

Mr. Panetta said he was &ldquo;looking forward to building a close partnership with the Libyan government,&rdquo; and he pledged that the United States &ldquo;stands ready to offer security assistance cooperation once the government identifies its needs.&rdquo;        

But he also listed challenges facing the new government, including &ldquo;bringing together all of the revolutionary forces that fought from west to east, securing weapons stockpiles, confronting terrorism, professionalizing the army and police, and developing the institutions of a free and representative government.&rdquo;        

In response, the prime minister said his nascent government understood the seriousness of integrating militia bands into official security services or disbanding them.        

The militias have emerged as major power brokers in postwar Libya. Many of the most influential portfolios in Mr. Keeb&rsquo;s government, including the Defense and Interior Ministries, have been awarded to representatives of powerful militias from places like Misurata and Zintan.        

The groups are especially troublesome in the capital, which has been occupied by a patchwork of heavily armed bands from across the country since Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s forces fled the city in August. The government has asked out-of-town militias to leave the capital by Tuesday, but the most powerful ones have shown few signs of complying with that demand.        

Hundreds of armed men backed by pickup trucks mounted with heavy weapons, like antiaircraft guns or rocket launchers, have staked out territory across Tripoli.        

Skirmishes between them are common, and tensions have already emerged between militia commanders and figures in the transitional government. Last weekend, fighters from the Zintan militia clashed with soldiers from the fledgling army loyal to Gen. Khalifa Hifter.        

In the last several days, Zintan fighters have shot and wounded one of General Hifter&rsquo;s sons and arrested another.        

In a somber tribute to past American conflicts in Libya and nearby seas, Mr. Panetta visited the cemetery that is home to remains of some of the 13 American sailors killed offshore on Sept. 4, 1804. Their mission was to sail the Intrepid into a pirate fleet anchored in Tripoli harbor, then detonate explosives packed on board to destroy as many of the buccaneer vessels as possible.        

The charges aboard the Intrepid detonated prematurely; all 13 American sailors were killed before they reached their targets.        

When their bodies washed ashore the next day, the American sailors were buried in a grave outside Tripoli. In the 1940s, the local government dug up the area and moved an unknown quantity of the remains to be interred in five tombs on a hill above a busy thoroughfare that traces Tripoli&rsquo;s harbor.        

Some descendants of the Intrepid crew have called for repatriating the remains, and Congress has requested that the Pentagon study the feasibility of doing so.        

But Mr. Panetta released a statement that indicated he found the cemetery, which at one time had fallen into disrepair, to be well tended.        

&ldquo;It is a sign of the great friendship between the American and Libyan people that, in spite of the differences that have marked our governments&rsquo; relations over the years, the Libyan people have maintained this cemetery with the respect and honor that it deserves,&rdquo; Mr. Panetta said in an official statement.        
