
Called the &ldquo;Dear Leader&rdquo; by his people, Kim Jong-il presided with an iron hand over a country he kept on the edge of starvation and collapse, fostering perhaps the last personality cult in the Communist world even as he banished citizens deemed disloyal to gulags or sent assassins after defectors.        
Go to Timeline

He came to power after the death in 1994 of his father, Kim Il-sung, North Korea&rsquo;s founder. His inheritance was an impoverished country with an uncertain place in a post-cold-war era. He played his one card, his nuclear weapons program, brilliantly, first defying efforts by the administration of George W. Bush to push his country over the brink, then exploiting America&rsquo;s distraction with the war in Iraq to harvest enough nuclear fuel from his main nuclear reactor at Yongbyon to produce the fuel for six to eight weapons.        

Throughout, he remained an unknowable figure. Everything about him was guesswork, from the exact date and place of his birth to the mythologized events of his rise in a country formed by the hasty division of the Korean Peninsula at the end of World War II.        

North Koreans heard about him only as their &ldquo;peerless leader&rdquo; and &ldquo;the great successor to the revolutionary cause.&rdquo; His portrait hangs beside that of his father, Kim Il-sung, in every North Korean household and building. Towers, banners and even rock faces across the country bear slogans praising him.        

Mr. Kim was a source of fascination inside the Central Intelligence Agency, which interviewed his mistresses, tried to track his whereabouts and psychoanalyzed his motives. And he was an object of parody in American culture.        

Short and round, he wore elevator shoes, oversize sunglasses and a bouffant hairdo &mdash; a Hollywood stereotype of the wacky post-cold-war dictator. Mr. Kim himself was fascinated by film. He orchestrated the kidnapping of an actress and a director, both of them South Koreans, in an effort to build a domestic movie industry. He was said to keep a personal library of 20,000 foreign films, including the complete James Bond series, his favorite. But he rarely saw the outside world, save from the windows of his luxury train, which occasionally took him to China.        

He was derided and denounced. President George W. Bush called him a &ldquo;pygmy&rdquo; and included his country in the &ldquo;axis of evil.&rdquo; Children&rsquo;s books in South Korea depicted him as a red devil with horns and fangs. Yet those who met him were surprised by his serious demeanor and his knowledge of events beyond the hermit kingdom he controlled.        

&ldquo;He was a very outspoken person,&rdquo; said Roh Moo-hyun, who as South Korea&rsquo;s president met Mr. Kim in Pyongyang in 2007. &ldquo;He was the most flexible man in North Korea.&rdquo;        

Wendy Sherman, now the No. 3 official in the State Department, who served as counselor to Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright and accompanied her to North Korea, said in 2008: &ldquo;He was smart, engaged, knowledgeable, self-confident, sort of the master-director of all he surveyed.&rdquo;        

Ms. Albright met Mr. Kim in October 2000 in what turned out to be a futile effort to strike a deal with North Korea over limiting its missile program before President Bill Clinton left office.        

&ldquo;There was no denying the dictatorial state that he ruled,&rdquo; Ms. Sherman said. &ldquo;There was no denying the freedoms that didn&rsquo;t exist. But at the time, there were a lot of questions in the U.S. about whether he was really in control, and we left with no doubt that he was.&rdquo;        

When Ms. Albright and Ms. Sherman sat down to talk through a 14-point list of concerns about North Korea&rsquo;s missile program, &ldquo;he didn&rsquo;t know the answers to every question, but he knew a lot more than most leaders would &mdash; and he was a conceptual thinker,&rdquo; Ms. Sherman added.        

A Deal With Washington        

President Bush said during his first term in office that he would never tolerate a nuclear North Korea, but as his presidency wound down, many of his aides believed he did exactly that.        

It was not until the spring of 2007 that Mr. Bush was told by the Israelis that North Korea was helping Syria build a nuclear reactor; before the Syrians or the North Koreans were confronted with that evidence, Israel sent bombers on a secret mission to destroy the Syrian plant. The North Koreans have never explained their role.        

By the time Mr. Bush left office, the administration had moved from four years of confrontation with the North to three years of halting negotiations. Led by Christopher R. Hill, a veteran American diplomat, the negotiations resulted in a deal that hawks hated: the United States agreed to supply North Korea with large amounts of fuel oil in return for the dismantlement of the aging Yongbyon plant, described by inspectors as a radioactive accident waiting to happen.        
Choe Sang-hun contributed reporting.
