
CAIRO &mdash; On the third day of clashes between security forces and protesters in the center of the capital, a new battle broke out Sunday between Egypt&rsquo;s state-run and independent media over whom to blame for the violence.        

What is at stake in the propaganda war is public support ahead of the looming contest between an elected Parliament and the ruling military council over who will control the transitional government and oversee the drafting of a new constitution.        

Human rights activists called the government&rsquo;s depiction of the protesters as hooligans an official campaign of distortion intended to cover up the military&rsquo;s violence and bolster its image.        

Election monitors also said the violence and confusion were casting a shadow over continuing parliamentary elections &mdash; the first since the ouster of Hosni Mubarak.        

The clashes began Friday morning when military police officers used clubs and electric prods to clear out a small sit-in left over from last month&rsquo;s protests against military rule; in response, thousands of demonstrators took to the streets.        

After two days of a crackdown that left hundreds wounded, a newly elected member of Parliament badly beaten and 10 civilians dead &mdash; most from gunshot wounds &mdash; Egyptian state television presented news on Sunday of a forensic report purporting to show that the bullets that caused the deaths were fired at close range. It was evidence, the presenters suggested, that the demonstrators who died had been killed by infiltrators in their ranks, not the security forces.        

State television also interviewed people who said that they were protesters who had been paid by liberal groups to attack the military, echoing propaganda from the last days of the Mubarak government.        

Later, after deprecating the protesters, state television reported that the top military officer, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, had paid a condolence call to their wounded.        

The new independent papers and satellite channels that have sprung up since Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s exit appeared to be covering a different country. They vented outrage at the extensive video footage of military abuses that emerged over the weekend: military police officers severely beating civilians, soldiers firing handguns toward crowds (though it was unclear if the ammunition was live) and others ripping the clothes and head scarves off prone women as they pummeled them.        

&ldquo;Liars,&rdquo; declared a front-page headline in the liberal newspaper Tahrir over a photograph of a soldier with his foot raised over the abdomen of a shirtless woman surrounded by troops in riot gear.        

Youssef el-Husseiny, a morning newscaster on the independent cable channel ONTV, appeared Sunday shorn of his mustache; mustaches are traditional symbols of manhood here, and he said he had shaved it in shame.        

&ldquo;How can we be men, if this is done to our girls?&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;If there is a man with a mustache out there, he should shave it.&rdquo;        

Independent journalists trying to film the military violence complained of harassment. An independent satellite channel broadcasting live images of the clashes was removed from the air twice in the last two days, once after it focused on a scene of soldiers beating a woman. Soldiers have also taken or smashed cameras. And on Saturday they raided an apartment overlooking Tahrir Square that has become a well-known hangout for journalists and activists filming or watching the events below, occupants said.        

Even some broadcasters from state television and radio expressed anger at state news coverage of the violence, using the Internet to urge listeners to call their shows to counter what they called a &ldquo;campaign of distortions.&rdquo; At least three radio announcers have been banned from the airwaves for criticizing the military council or its media management, said Ahmed Montaser, one of the state-radio dissidents.        

&ldquo;All the young radio broadcasters don&rsquo;t approve the policies of the senior officials, putting down a red line that they tell us we can&rsquo;t cross,&rdquo; he said.        

By Sunday the street fighting had become almost ritualized. Hundreds of protesters threw rocks and occasionally a firebomb across a barbed-wire barrier at rows of security officers and military police. The security forces there and on rooftops fired back with rocks and water hoses.        

Downtown streets were bisected in several places by stone walls and barbed wire barriers that the military had erected to keep protesters from security forces and government buildings.        

From Washington, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said she was &ldquo;deeply concerned&rdquo; about the violence and urged the prosecution of those responsible, &ldquo;including security forces.&rdquo;        
Mayy el-Sheik and Dina Saleh Amer contributed reporting.
