
BAGHDAD &mdash; The last convoy of American troops drove into Kuwait on Sunday morning, punctuating the end of the nearly nine-year war in Iraq.        

As an indication of the country the United States is leaving behind, for security reasons the last soldiers made no time for goodbyes to Iraqis with whom they had become acquainted. To keep details of the final trip secret from insurgents &mdash; or Iraqi security officers aligned with militias &mdash; interpreters for the last unit to leave the base called local tribal sheiks and government leaders on Saturday morning and conveyed that business would go on as usual, not letting on that all the Americans would soon be gone.        

The crossing brought a close to a final troop withdrawal drawn out over weeks of ceremonies in Baghdad and around Iraq, including a formal if muted flag-folding ceremony on Thursday, as well as visits by Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta, and a trip to Washington by Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki.        

The last troop movement out of Iraq, which included about 110 vehicles and 500 soldiers, began in darkness. Around 2:30 a.m., the convoy snaked out of Contingency Operating Base Adder, near the southern city of Nasiriya, and headed toward the border.        

As dawn approached on Sunday, the last trucks began to cross the border into Kuwait at an outpost lighted by floodlights and secured by barbed wire.        

&ldquo;I just can&rsquo;t wait to call my wife and kids and let them know I am safe,&rdquo; said Sgt. First Class Rodolfo Ruiz just before his armored vehicle crossed over the border. &ldquo;I am really feeling it now.&rdquo;        

Shortly after enterng Kuwait, Sergeant Ruiz told the men in his vehicle: &ldquo;Hey, guys, you made it.&rdquo;        

Then, he ordered the vehicles in his convoy not to flash their lights or honk their horns.        

Many troops wondered how the Iraqis, whom they had worked closely with and trained over the past year, would react when they awakened on Sunday to find that the remaining American troops on the base had left without saying anything.        

&ldquo;The Iraqis are going to wake up in the morning, and nobody will be there,&rdquo; said a soldier who identified himself only as Specialist Joseph. He said he had emigrated to the United States from Iraq in 2009 and enlisted a year later, and refused to give his full name because he worried for his family&rsquo;s safety.        

The reaction among Iraqis was muted, as it had been for weeks as the Americans packed up. Live images of the last convoy arriving in Kuwait were not shown on local television, as they were around the world. Some Iraqis were unaware on Sunday that the last of the American soldiers &mdash; aside from a vestigial force at the embassy &mdash; had left.        

&ldquo;I just heard from you that they&rsquo;ve withdrawn,&rdquo; Mustafa Younis, an auto mechanic in Mosul, said to a reporter. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve been waiting for this day since 2003. When they invaded us, we carried our machine guns and went out to fight them. We decided to do suicide operations against them. They committed many crimes, and we lost a lot of things because of them.&rdquo;        

Some celebrated even before the final departure. On Saturday evening, Ahmed Haider, a teacher in the Khadimiya district of Baghdad, took his family out to a restaurant for a meal of pizza and sandwiches to mark the occasion.        

&ldquo;I feel so happy,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;This is the real happiness for all Iraqis, and I do not know why people are not making a big deal of it.&rdquo;        

Of course, many Iraqis fear what comes next, and the withdrawal came against the backdrop of political crisis in Baghdad. A large group of mostly Sunni lawmakers announced a boycott of Parliament on Saturday in protest of a wave of arrests by the Shiite-dominated government that swept up a number of their aides and security guards.        

Several guards who work for Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi, a top Sunni leader, have been arrested, and the government is said to be preparing a case against Mr. Hashimi on terrorism charges.        

Fearing that insurgents would try to attack the last Americans leaving the country, the military treated all convoys like combat missions.        
Duraid Adnan contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an employee of The New York Times from Mosul.
