
TOKYO &mdash; It was a sumo bout like any other: two wrestlers grappled at each other at the ring&rsquo;s edge, before one sent his opponent tumbling to the dirt in a move known as the over-arm throw.        

But a text message exchange between the two wrestlers the previous day suggests that the match was rigged &mdash; part of a raft of evidence examined by the police that points to widespread match-fixing in Japan&rsquo;s time-honored sport, prompting a public outcry.        

&ldquo;Please hit hard at the face-off, then go with the flow,&rdquo; one of the wrestlers, Kiyoseumi, texted on the afternoon of May 10, according to a transcript of the messages leaked to local news media and published this week by the daily newspaper Mainichi.        

&ldquo;Understood,&rdquo; Kasuganishiki, his opponent in the following day&rsquo;s match, quickly replied. &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll go with the flow and put up at least a little resistance.&rdquo;        

Stage-managed bouts may be a staple of American professional wrestling, but sumo is Japan&rsquo;s national sport, in a different league from World Wrestling Entertainment, many Japanese would say. Though allegations of match-fixing have accompanied sumo for decades, no wrestler has ever been caught orchestrating a match.        

The police recently found text messages on confiscated cellphones that link as many as 13 wrestlers in match-fixing schemes, Japan&rsquo;s sumo association said this week. Two wrestlers and a coach have admitted to fixing bouts.        

&ldquo;It is as if the heavens and the earth have been turned upside down,&rdquo; said Hanaregoma, chairman of the Japan Sumo Association, who in the sumo tradition uses only one name. &ldquo;I am very sorry.&rdquo;        

The scandal has outraged a public that considers sumo &mdash; which traces its origins to rituals of Japan&rsquo;s indigenous religion of Shinto &mdash; a venerable tradition. Wrestlers, their hair in samurai-style topknots, have been seen not just as athletes, but as upholders of a stoic work ethic and noble public behavior.        

But a recent spate of scandals has bred widespread disillusionment with sumo. Last year, several wrestlers were arrested and accused of betting illegally on baseball games, with the country&rsquo;s yakuza gangsters as go-betweens.        

In 2009, a sumo trainer was sentenced to six years in prison in the hazing death of a young wrestler, and since August 2008, four wrestlers have been banned from the sport amid accusations of marijuana use.        

In addition, the sport&rsquo;s fan base is dwindling as young Japanese migrate to sports like soccer and baseball.        

Earlier this week, two television networks said they were withdrawing their sponsorship of competitions before the next major tournament in March. Japan&rsquo;s public broadcaster, NHK, indicated that it might cancel live coverage of that tournament.        

Prime Minister Naoto Kan said he, too, was angered by the scandal. &ldquo;If it is true, it is a very serious betrayal of the people,&rdquo; Mr. Kan said.        

For some, the outcomes of sumo matches have long been suspect. In their 2005 book, &ldquo;Freakonomics,&rdquo; Steven D. Levitt and Stephen J. Dubner said statistical analysis suggested that match-fixing was rampant in the sport.        

In a sumo tournament, wrestlers in top divisions fight 15 matches and are demoted to lower ranks if they do not win at least 8 of them. The authors studied outcomes of the final match, particularly when wrestlers who had seven victories and seven losses, and therefore needed an eighth victory to avoid demotion, were pitted against wrestlers who had already won eight bouts.        

They found that in these bouts, the wrestler with only seven victories beat his opponent 80 percent of the time. Based on these statistics, the authors concluded that wrestlers who had already avoided demotion by winning eight bouts routinely colluded with those who had 7-7 records and let them win, presumably in the hope that the favor would be returned in the future.        

Kiyoseumi and Kasuganishiki occupy the Juryo division of sumo, below the top-ranked players. But some critics, including journalists who have long covered the sport, say lower-ranked Juryo wrestlers could be equally or even more prone to rigging bouts because demotion from Juryo would cast them back into a near amateur sumo league.        

Compared with Juryo wrestlers whose monthly pay can amount to more than one million yen (about $12,200), those who are demoted to lower rungs receive almost no salary, the critics  say.        
(Page 2 of 2)
They say that in the chummy world of sumo, where young wrestlers train alongside one another from an early age, the big difference in salaries between the various leagues creates a strong incentive for collusion and match-fixing.        

Kiyoseumi, the wrestler who won the suspicious bout, had been on the brink of demotion in the May tournament after a disastrous showing at a previous meet in March.        

The two wrestlers who have so far admitted to fixing bouts, Chiyohakuho and Enatsukasa, were in the Juryo league.        

According to transcripts of the text messages, the wrestlers appear to have charged one another thousands of dollars per match to fix bouts. In other cases, they seemed to trade victories and losses, with no money involved.        

Fans have long complained of matches in which one wrestler seemed obviously to put up no fight at all, leading the sumo association in 1972 to establish fines for wrestlers who engaged in what it called &ldquo;deliberately spiritless sumo.&rdquo; (The association stopped short of accusing wrestlers of match-fixing, however.)        

In 2007, the magazine Shukan Gendai accused Asashoryu, the Mongolian former grand champion, of paying his opponents to let him win tournaments. Asashoryu denied the allegation, and the sumo association sued the magazine&rsquo;s publisher, Kodansha. In 2009, a local court ordered Kodansha to pay the association damages, saying no evidence supported the allegation.        

Now, government officials have said sumo may lose its status as a national sport, a status that has given it government backing, tax exemptions and guaranteed coverage by NHK.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think the nation would support the tournament unless serious action is taken,&rdquo; Kan Suzuki, the deputy education and sports minister, said Thursday. The sumo association said it had begun its own investigation.        

But some sumo fans said match-fixing was all part of the game. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s been going on from the old days,&rdquo; Shintaro Ishihara, 78, Tokyo&rsquo;s governor, told reporters Friday. &ldquo;We should just let them trick us into enjoying it,&rdquo; he said, adding, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s just like Kabuki theater.&rdquo;        
