
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; Kim Jong-il, the North Korean leader who realized his family&rsquo;s dream of turning his starving, isolated country into a nuclear-weapons power even as it sank further into despotism, died on Saturday of a heart attack while traveling on his train, according to an announcement Monday by the country&rsquo;s state-run media.        
Go to Timeline

Word of Kim&rsquo;s death sent shock waves through North Korea&rsquo;s Asia neighbors and reverberated around the world, reflecting the unpredictable outcome of an abrupt leadership change in one of the most opaque and repressive countries. North Korea is technically still at war with South Korea and the United States after nearly 60 years and has few friends besides China.        

South Korea immediately put its armed forces on a high state of alert, and the South Korean news agency Yonhap reported that North Korea tested an unspecified number of short-range missiles on Monday morning. The news agency said the tests were conducted before the announcement of Mr. Kim&rsquo;s death. The Defense Ministry in Seoul said it could not comment on the report.        

The North had kept news of the death of its leader secret for roughly two days, perhaps a sign that the leadership was struggling to position itself for what many believe could be a particularly perilous transition.        

A few hours after the announcement, the ruling Workers&rsquo; Party and other state institutions released a joint statement suggesting Mr. Kim&rsquo;s chosen successor, his youngest son, Kim Jong-un, was in charge.        

The statement called the son "the great successor to the revolution" and "the eminent leader of the military and the people." It was the first time North Korea referred to the son as "leader" since his ailing father pulled him out of obscurity in September last year and made him a four-star general and vice chairman of the Central Military Commission of the Workers&rsquo; Party.        

The Workers&rsquo; Party said that &ldquo;Under the leadership of our comrade Kim Jong-un, we have to turn sadness into strength and courage, and overcome today&rsquo;s difficulties.&rdquo;        

K.C.N.A., the official news agency, said North Korean soldiers and citizens were swearing allegiance to Kim Jong-un. People on the streets of Pyongyang broke into tears as they learned of Mr. Kim&rsquo;s death, The Associated Press reported from Pyongyang.&nbsp;        

Kim Jong-un is believed to be in his late 20s and his youth and relative inexperience could make him vulnerable to power struggles; some analysts have questioned the depth of the military&rsquo;s support for him.        

Kim Jong-il&rsquo;s death came after a long illness, dating to 2008, that American intelligence agencies believed involved some form of a stroke. The North has indicated he was 69 years old, but scholars have said he could have been a year older.        

In a statement read by a tearful television announcer that was repeated by other state-run media, North Korea said Kim Jong-il had died of a heart attack while on his train, as he was conducting an &ldquo;onsite guidance tour&rdquo; in an unspecified part of the country. The statement said:        

&ldquo;We took every emergency measure we could, but the great leader passed away.&rdquo; His death ended 17 years of rule over the isolated, paranoid country that his father, Kim Il-sung, founded.        

American and Asian officials were on alert for any signs that the country, which has almost inexplicably avoided collapse in recent decades, could begin to fracture.        

South Korea put its military on alert, boosting surveillance along the 155-mile border, one of the world&rsquo;s most heavily armed frontiers, to detect any unusual signs from the North Korean military. American and South Korean officials have expressed concern that any power struggle could lead some factions in the North to lash out &mdash; as they did in 2010, attacking a South Korean island and, according to South Korean intelligence, sinking a warship. Fifty South Koreans died in the two separate episodes.        

Under Kim Jong-il&rsquo;s rule, the North accomplished the single milestone that his father had dreamed about, exploding two crude nuclear devices, one in 2006 and another in 2009, just months after President Obama took office. But while the tests &mdash; the first was a fizzle &mdash; may have given the country a measure of protection against an American invasion, which Mr. Kim and his military leaders long feared, they also deepened his isolation.        

The 2009 test killed any discussion inside the Obama White House of reaching out to the North Korean leadership, especially after Mr. Kim largely abandoned agreements he reached with the George W. Bush administration to denuclearize. Former Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates seemed to summarize the Obama administration&rsquo;s attitude toward the North when he declared that the United States would not provide aid to the country in return for its making new commitments to give up nuclear weapons.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want to buy the same horse twice,&rdquo; he said on repeated occasions. Only in recent months have the two sides had any significant contact, mostly over food aid.        

North Korea is estimated to have enough fuel to make at least eight nuclear weapons.        
Choe Sang-Hun reported from Seoul, South Korea, and David E. Sanger from Washington. Mark Landler contributed reporting from Washington.
