
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; A tense showdown between Pakistan&rsquo;s powerful army and its besieged civilian government brought President Asif Ali Zardari hurrying back from Dubai early on Monday, after weeks of growing concerns by his supporters that the military has been moving to strengthen its role in the country&rsquo;s governance.        

Pushed by the army, a Pakistani Supreme Court hearing set to begin on Monday will investigate whether Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s government was behind an unsigned memorandum that surfaced in October, purportedly asking the Obama administration&rsquo;s help to curb the military&rsquo;s influence and avert a possible coup in the wake of the American raid that killed Osama bin Laden in May.        

The case has brought tensions between Pakistan&rsquo;s military and its civilian leaders to perhaps its highest pitch since Mr. Zardari was elected three years ago. And it may also complicate America&rsquo;s efforts to bring its relationship with Pakistan out of crisis after the Bin Laden raid and American airstrikes last month that killed 26 on the Pakistani side of the border with Afghanistan. That roiling period of dispute has also strengthened the military&rsquo;s hand in the country&rsquo;s affairs.        

&ldquo;The military and civilian leadership are on a collision course,&rdquo; said Talat Masood, a political analyst and retired lieutenant general.        

Soon after the memo became public, the army demanded that the government investigate allegations that the memo was orchestrated by Husain Haqqani, then Pakistan&rsquo;s ambassador to the United States and a close aide to Mr. Zardari &mdash; a charge Mr. Haqqani denied as he was recalled from his post. Opposition lawmakers quickly joined the chorus calling for action, and message records appearing to implicate the ambassador were leaked to the news media.        

The civilian government denies having anything to do with the memo and warned that Parliament, the media, the civil society and the international community would not tolerate a military dictatorship in Pakistan. But in a filing to the Supreme Court last week, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, the Pakistani Army chief, asked the court to investigate the controversial memo and its origins fully, saying it &ldquo;unsuccessfully attempted to lower the morale of the Pakistan Army.&rdquo;        

Adding to the political drama has been the absence of Mr. Zardari, 56, who unexpectedly left the country on Dec. 6 for medical treatment and was recuperating at his home in Dubai from what his doctor called strokelike symptoms. Associates of Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s said he returned to Karachi to confront the allegations and possible efforts to deem him physically or mentally unfit to keep his job. Some Pakistani analysts also questioned whether civilian officials had secretly cut a deal to concede to the military broader influence over the nation&rsquo;s affairs beyond foreign and national security policy.        

Beginning Monday, the Supreme Court will hear arguments from lawyers from all sides and could decide to dismiss the matter if it finds no merit. More likely, however, is that the court will appoint a special commission to investigate what the news media here have dubbed Memogate, a process that could last weeks or months, inflicting more political pain on Mr. Zardari.        

The Pakistani military&rsquo;s frayed relationship with the United States may also be contributing to the shift between the military and the civilian government here, giving the generals a freer hand to expand their role in running Pakistan&rsquo;s affairs beyond foreign and national security policy, even if from behind the scenes.        

&ldquo;The military sees the NATO airstrike as an opportunity to effect a comeback from the loss of face from the Bin Laden raid,&rdquo; said Ali Dayan Hasan, Pakistan director for Human Rights Watch in Lahore. &ldquo;But they&rsquo;re also tapping into genuine public anger and resentment against the Americans, and that&rsquo;s shrinking the space the Zardari government has to operate in and expanding the influence the military already has.&rdquo;        

The conflicting positions before the Supreme Court have laid bare deep civilian-military tensions that have stewed since Mr. Zardari took office in September 2008, an accidental ascent for a man known more as a wheeler-dealer than a leader. After the assassination of his wife, Benazir Bhutto, in December 2007, the Bush administration threw its reluctant support behind Mr. Zardari and his pledge to be a willing partner in combating terrorism.        

It was not long before Mr. Zardari was on the outs with the military, as revealed in diplomatic cables made public last year by WikiLeaks, the antisecrecy organization.        

Mr. Zardari, who spent 11 years in prison on ultimately unproved corruption charges, feared for his position and possibly his life. In one cable, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. told Prime Minister Gordon Brown of Britain in March 2009 that Mr. Zardari had told him that the &ldquo;ISI director and Kayani will take me out.&rdquo; The ISI is the Inter-Services Intelligence directorate, the country&rsquo;s powerful spy agency.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s suspicions were not groundless. In another cable, General Kayani told the United States ambassador at the time, Anne W. Patterson, that he &ldquo;might, however reluctantly,&rdquo; pressure Mr. Zardari to resign and presumably leave Pakistan.        

Over its 64-year history Pakistan has had several army coups and meddling by the military behind the scenes to engineer pliant governments, often with the support of the judiciary.        

But most Pakistani analysts and Western diplomats said in the past week that a military coup now was unlikely. The generals, frustrated as they are with what they view as a corrupt, incompetent civilian administration, have no appetite for taking over the country at a time of a plunging economy, severe energy shortages and rising extremism, these officials said. After an unusual three-hour meeting here on Friday night with General Kayani, Pakistan&rsquo;s prime minister, Yousaf Raza Gilani, dismissed reports of a standoff with the generals. But analysts and some government officials said that the split between the military and the civilian government was likely to widen in the coming days.        

&ldquo;Two different positions are taken by the army and the civilian government,&rdquo; said one government official, who was not authorized to speak publicly about the dispute. &ldquo;Both can&rsquo;t be right or wrong at the same time. The confrontation is now at a very acute level.&rdquo;        

The dispute has caused a media frenzy. On Friday, Express, a popular Urdu daily newspaper, led its Web site with an article whose headline blazed: &ldquo;Army and Government Face to Face.&rdquo;        

The military has already managed to oust Mr. Haqqani, who was forced to resign as ambassador on Nov. 22 after accusations by a Pakistani-American businessman, Mansoor Ijaz, that Mr. Haqqani had masterminded the memo, a charge that he stoutly denies. Adm. Mike Mullen, then chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has acknowledged receiving the memo but said he ignored it as not credible.        

The Pakistani newspaper Dawn said Friday in an editorial: &ldquo;Mr. Zardari needs to return to Pakistan to try and calm nerves and quell speculation that refuses to die down. Like it or not, the reality of Pakistan is that threats to the democratic process do lurk in the shadows.&rdquo;        

Some Pakistani and Western officials said last week that if Mr. Zardari returned, it could be only for a cameo appearance before Dec. 27, the fourth anniversary of the death of Ms. Bhutto, the two-time former prime minister, in a gun and bomb attack in the city of Rawalpindi, near Islamabad.        

After that, Mr. Zardari would probably leave for a long &mdash; perhaps permanent &mdash; convalescence in London or Dubai, the officials said. By early Monday, neither Mr. Zardari nor his aides had signaled how long he would stay.        

&ldquo;The president is, thankfully, fit and healthy, and that is why he has returned,&rdquo; Shazia Marri, information minister for Sindh Province, of which Karachi is the capital, told Reuters. &ldquo;However, his activities over the next few days will depend on what the doctors advise.&rdquo;        
