
BAGHDAD &mdash; A day after the United States withdrew its last combat troops, Iraq faced a dangerous political crisis Monday as the Shiite-dominated government ordered the arrest of the Sunni vice president, accusing him of running a death squad that assassinated police officers and government officials.        

The sensational charges drew a worried response from Washington and brought Iraq&rsquo;s tenuous partnership government to the edge of collapse. A major Sunni-backed political coalition said its ministers would walk off their jobs, leaving adrift agencies that handle Iraq&rsquo;s finances, schools and agriculture.        

The accusations against Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi also underlined fears that Iraq&rsquo;s leaders may now be using the very institutions America has spent millions of dollars trying to strengthen &mdash; the police, the courts, the media &mdash; as a cudgel to batter their political enemies and consolidate power.        

On Monday night, Mr. Hashimi was in the northern semiautonomous region of Kurdistan, beyond the reach of security forces controlled by Baghdad. It was unclear when &mdash; or if &mdash; he would return to Baghdad.        

In Washington, where officials have been quietly celebrating the end of the war, Obama administration officials sounded alarmed about the arrest order for Mr. Hashimi. &ldquo;We are talking to all of the parties and expressed our concern regarding these developments,&rdquo; said Tommy Vietor, the National Security Council spokesman. &ldquo;We are urging all sides to work to resolve differences peacefully and through dialogue, in a manner consistent with the rule of law and the democratic political process.&rdquo;        

The breakdown in relations between Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki and Mr. Hashimi and his Iraqiya Party arrived at an inopportune moment for the administration, coming so close to the troop withdrawal. American officials have spent years trying to urge Iraq&rsquo;s Shiite-dominated government to work with the country&rsquo;s Sunni minority, and are wary of having things fall apart now.        

Mr. Obama said last week, in remarks welcoming troops back to Fort Bragg, N.C., that Iraq&rsquo;s future would now be &ldquo;in the hands of the Iraqi people.&rdquo; But having removed its combat troops, it was unclear whether the United States retained enough influence to limit sectarian tensions that some analysts say could drag the country back into the chaos and violence of past years and even split it along geographical lines.        

The government made its case against Mr. Hashimi in a half-hour television broadcast that was as aggressively promoted as a prime-time special. In grainy video confessions, three men said they had committed murders on Mr. Hashimi&rsquo;s behalf. They said they had blown up cars, attacked convoys with silenced pistols and were rewarded with envelopes containing $3,000 in American bills.        

To government critics, the charges seemed to be part of a wide-reaching consolidation of power by Mr. Maliki. Amid the anxiety stirred by the American departure and unrest in neighboring Syria, Mr. Maliki, a Shiite, has tightened his grip on this violent and divided nation by marginalizing, intimidating or arresting his political rivals, many of whom are part of Iraq&rsquo;s Sunni minority.        

Hundreds of people have been swept up over the last two months in arrests aimed at former members of Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s outlawed Baath Party. In recent weeks, security forces also arrested at least 30 people connected to a former prime minister, Ayad Allawi, a secular Shiite and caustic critic of Mr. Maliki, according to Mr. Allawi&rsquo;s office. And on Sunday, Mr. Maliki asked Parliament to issue a vote of no confidence in his own deputy, Saleh al-Mutlaq, a Sunni prone to hyperbole who had compared Mr. Maliki to a dictator in an interview.        

&ldquo;Any leading Sunni politician seems now to be a target of this campaign by Maliki,&rdquo; said Reidar Visser, an expert on Iraqi politics. &ldquo;It seems that every Sunni Muslim or secularist is in danger of being labeled either a Baathist or a terrorist.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hashimi has not often been described as either. Sometimes abrasive and always self-interested, he was one of the first Sunni leaders to embrace the political process after the American invasion, and lost three siblings to terrorist attacks during the height of the sectarian war.        

&ldquo;He was someone who tried to be conciliatory with the Shiite Islamists at a time when others did not do so,&rdquo; Mr. Visser said. &ldquo;Now, Maliki is going after him.&rdquo;        
Zaid Thaker contributed reporting from Baghdad, and Helene Cooper from Washington.
