
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Pakistan&rsquo;s Supreme Court on Monday put off a decision on whether to investigate a controversial memo in which a Pakistani diplomat purportedly sought American help to constrain the Pakistani military. The court called on the government here to provide more details in the case and set the next hearing for Thursday.        

Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, the army chief, and Lt. Gen. Ahmad Shuja Pasha, the head of the top military spy service, have urged the court to investigate the origins of the memo, which set off a political storm here since October, when it was first reported.        

The Pakistani ambassador to the United States was ousted over the memo and frictions have risen sharply between the military and President Asif Ali Zardari, who returned early Monday from Dubai. He spent nearly two weeks there for what was officially described as treatment for cardiovascular problems.        

The memo, whose authenticity has not been verified but which has been published in Pakistani newspapers, asked top American military officials for help in preventing a coup in Pakistan in exchange for help with the war on militants and an array of other diplomatic and security considerations. It was reportedly sent in May, after the American operation that killed Osama bin Laden.        

Western officials had debated whether Mr. Zardari would return in the midst of such political tumult. One interpreted his relatively surprising return as serving more than one purpose. &ldquo;He calculated that he wanted to reassert himself, and say I&rsquo;m in charge here, as much as for internal party reasons as for addressing the Memogate issue,&rdquo; an American official said.        

Mr. Zardari remained in the southern port city of Karachi, and held meetings with several party officials at Bilawal House, his private residence, according to his spokesman. Government officials declined to comment on when he planned to travel to Islamabad, the capital.        

But another Western official underscored the damage to Mr. Zardari&rsquo;s legitimacy. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re looking at a very compromised president,&rdquo; said the official, whose country&rsquo;s protocol did not allow him to speak publicly on the matter. &ldquo;What matters is what the military believes.&rdquo;        

During the Monday session of the nine-member Supreme Court, Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry remarked that a statement submitted by General Kayani, included the assertion that the memo &ldquo;unsuccessfully attempted to lower the morale of the Pakistan Army.&rdquo;        

The tensions between the military and Mr. Zardari were also evident from a statement that the military released Monday, that addressed reports portraying Dec. 16 telephone conversation between Mr. Zardari and General Kayani as a sign of a thaw between the two sides.        

Inter-Services Public Relations, the media wing of the military, said in a statement that General Kayani had only inquired about the health of Mr. Zardari, and the conversation only took place because Mr. Zardari had called Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani as he was meeting with the army chief. The conversation &ldquo;lasted approximately one minute,&rdquo; and focused on the health of the president,&rdquo; the statement said. &ldquo;Attributing anything more to this telephonic conversation is unfounded and unnecessary.&rdquo;        
