
MOSCOW &mdash; Hundreds of people took to the streets in western Kazakhstan on Monday in defiance of a bloody police crackdown on striking oil workers that has caused dozens of casualties in the Central Asian nation.        

The protest in the city of Aktau on the Caspian Sea followed three days of clashes between the police and striking workers in several cities in the region. The authorities have put the death toll from those clashes at 14, though witnesses and human rights workers have said the number of dead could be many times higher. Scores more have reportedly been injured.        

Apparently in an effort to ease tensions, Kazakhstan&rsquo;s prime minister on Monday announced a government commission to investigate the violence and address the grievances of the striking workers, the Russian news agency, Interfax, reported.        

The clashes began on Friday in the city of Zhanaozen, not far from Aktau. For reasons that are unclear, the police opened fire on oil workers who had been holding a continuous strike in a central square for six months apparently over a wage dispute. Officials said 13 people were killed. Then on Saturday, the violence spread to the nearby city of Shetpe, where the police opened fire after several hundred protesters blocked railroad tracks. One person was killed and dozens were wounded, the authorities said.        

The workers in Zhanaozen appear to have grown angry when officials began installing holiday decorations for a government-sponsored children&rsquo;s party, which they felt was a ruse to remove them from the square, witnesses said. Officials said the police were forced to open fire after they came under attack by &ldquo;hooligans,&rdquo; some armed with stones and gasoline bombs.        

In Aktau on Monday, several hundred people faced down cordons of police officers who were carrying shields and armed with automatic weapons. The protest was largely peaceful, with no reports of casualties or arrests.        

Aizhangul Amirova, an activist in Aktau with the People&rsquo;s Front, a Kazakh opposition group, said by telephone that the protesters were demanding that authorities lift a block on phone and Internet service in Zhanaozen and draw down troops sent to the region.        

A lack of information coming out of Zhanaozen, where officials have declared a state of emergency, was preventing an independent assessment of the violence there, Ms. Amirova said, and fueling tensions in the region.        

In Aktau, she said, &ldquo;protesters are worried that there could be the kinds of provocations that sparked the bloodshed in Zhanaozen.&rdquo;        

According to news agencies reporting from Aktau, several protesters held signs bearing the slogan &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t Shoot the People.&rdquo;        
