
BAGHDAD &mdash; Ali al-Subiahi returned from his family&rsquo;s self-imposed exile in the United States to reclaim a sense of himself in a new Iraq.        

At 26, he runs a string of private schools in Baghdad, bankrolled by his earnings as an interpreter for the United States military. He has adapted, showing what he considers an American entrepreneurial flair, advertising for his schools on blast walls left from the bloodiest days of the war.        

As an American citizen, and a former military employee, he remains fearful for his life. But as an Iraqi, and a Muslim, he finds living here easier than in his family&rsquo;s new home in Lincoln, Neb., where strip clubs, liquor stores and churches are part of the nearby suburban landscape.        

&ldquo;Besides security, life is simpler over here,&rdquo; he said as he sat surrounded by textbooks in one of his schools in Dora, a neighborhood that only a few years ago was a sectarian battleground. &ldquo;I understand people better.&rdquo;        

The Subiahi family fled Saddam Hussein&rsquo;s Iraq in 1999 when his father became a wanted man for opposing the government. Family members later cheered their adopted country&rsquo;s invasion of their homeland. Then, like other Americans, they watched, helpless, as a war that was supposed to be short and triumphal dragged on.        

Over time, their future dimmed, the victim of America&rsquo;s increasing wariness of its Muslims and economic shocks that punished immigrants and nonimmigrants alike.        

Now, with the departure of the last group of American soldiers from Iraq, the watershed moment for the United States is becoming an emotional turning point for the family as well.        

Mr. Subiahi&rsquo;s youngest brother, a teenager, cannot imagine leaving the United States; an increasingly devout sister is not sure she can stay. Two other siblings are waffling.        

Their mother is in Iraq, at least for now, to help set up Mr. Subiahi&rsquo;s schools, which are financing the family home in Nebraska.        

His father will not budge.        

&ldquo;I am American,&rdquo; he said recently. &ldquo;Our religion says that your home is where you are welcomed.&rdquo;        

Ali al-Subiahi&rsquo;s school in Dora is in a clean and well-kept villa just up the road from a police checkpoint. The neighborhood was once home to a large Christian population, but most Christians left during the sectarian bloodletting that peaked in 2006 and 2007.        

He said he originally came back to Iraq, in 2004, for money; he could earn nearly $10,000 a month as an interpreter.        

But the longer he remained, the more he wanted to make a difference. And, he said, his horizons were more limited in the United States.        

A high school graduate, he felt his options were working at McDonald&rsquo;s or following the path of many an immigrant and starting a business. He and his brother-in-law tried running a small grocery, but they said they gave up because taxes were too high to make a profit.        

&ldquo;I lost faith in the States as far as opening a small business,&rdquo; said Mr. Subiahi, who gave a blistering critique of America&rsquo;s financial priorities. &ldquo;They take care of the really poor people who can&rsquo;t afford bread or who don&rsquo;t want to work, or they take care of the wealthy people.&rdquo;        

Gesturing toward his mother, Haifaa, he said she could find only menial work in the United States, even though she had been a school principal in Iraq. &ldquo;In one country, you work as a cafeteria worker, and in one country, you are a school principal,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Where would you rather be?&rdquo;        

That is not to say returning has been easy.        

The war claimed the lives of eight members of his extended family, casualties of a civil war whose premise &mdash; identification by sect &mdash; was a concept the family had not dwelled on before. Mr. Subiahi did not even know his background until he was asked on the application to be an interpreter. (His father is Shiite; his mother is Sunni.)        

He can&rsquo;t even go out at night for a pack of cigarettes without worrying his mother, who knows that many Iraqi interpreters for the United States have been targeted as traitors.        

She greets his every return with the same words: &ldquo;Thank God you are back.&rdquo;        

The family home in Lincoln is a comfortable suburban house with a brick front and cream-colored shutters, a world away from Iraq&rsquo;s disrepair.        
Omar al-Jawoshy contributed reporting.
