
BERLIN &mdash; By nightfall on Monday some 45 reporters had paid a visit to the law firm of Redeker Sellner Dahs here to examine copies of private financial documents belonging to President Christian Wulff, a paper trail made public by his legal team in a bid to save his reputation and his job.        

A three-year-old home loan Mr. Wulff received from a friend and had since repaid erupted last week into what the German news media are calling the &ldquo;loan affair.&rdquo; As calls for the president&rsquo;s resignation have grown louder, the scandal has even pushed the sovereign debt crisis off the front pages for the first time in months.        

For Chancellor Angela Merkel, the growing controversy is an unwelcome distraction as she tries to hold together her coalition through the difficult task of patching together a deal to save the euro.        

The office of the president is a largely ceremonial one in Germany, far less powerful than the chancellor&rsquo;s. But the head of state is viewed as a moral compass for the nation, making the holder of the office particularly vulnerable to accusations of impropriety. The cover of the influential newsweekly Der Spiegel featured a photograph of Mr. Wulff and the words &ldquo;Der falsche Pr&auml;sident,&rdquo; an ambiguous phrase that could mean &ldquo;the wrong president&rdquo; but also &ldquo;the deceitful president.&rdquo;        

On a trip to visit German troops stationed in Kosovo, Mrs. Merkel defended Mr. Wulff, a fellow Christian Democrat and her candidate for the office. &ldquo;The president is doing a great job,&rdquo; Mrs. Merkel told reporters. &ldquo;He has my complete trust.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Merkel already watched as Mr. Wulff&rsquo;s predecessor, Horst K&ouml;hler, abruptly resigned last year after public criticism over comments he made about the German military&rsquo;s role in protecting the country&rsquo;s economic interests. Mr. Wulff was elected in a difficult and politically embarrassing vote that took three rounds in the special assembly, after delegates from her coalition withheld their approval.        

Personnel issues continued to be problematic for Mrs. Merkel this year. Her defense minister stepped down after it was discovered that he had plagiarized portions of his dissertation, and the party&rsquo;s top candidate in Schleswig-Holstein quit after an affair with a much younger woman became public.        

&ldquo;This is the last thing Mrs. Merkel needs,&rdquo; said Wolfgang Seibel, professor of politics and public administration at the University of Konstanz. &ldquo;If Wulff were forced to step down it would hurt her domestically and abroad, showing that like Italy and Greece, German politics are unstable.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Merkel said she thought that it was &ldquo;right and important&rdquo; that Mr. Wulff personally clarify the situation, and that &ldquo;today certain documents can be examined,&rdquo; referring to the six identical binders of partly redacted documents lying on a conference table in an office building here overlooking Leipziger Platz.        

The documents confirm that in 2008, while he was minister president of the state of Lower Saxony, Mr. Wulff borrowed 500,000 euros, or around $650,000, from a friend named Edith Geerkens to buy a house. The trouble began after a vacation he and his family took with Ms. Geerkens and her husband, Egon, a wealthy businessman.        

Opposition politicians from the state assembly sent an official request asking whether Mr. Wulff had any business ties to Mr. Geerkens. He replied that he had none, omitting any mention of the loan from Ms. Geerkens. When news of the loan surfaced last week Mr. Wulff was accused of misleading the state Parliament. Speculation grew that the loan had indeed come from Mr. Geerkens and that the president was lying about potentially unethical business dealings.        

To head off additional questions, Mr. Wulff&rsquo;s representatives also issued a news release describing the times between 2003 and 2010 when Mr. Wulff and his family enjoyed the hospitality of wealthy friends in Spain, Italy and the United States.        

Walter Scheel, 92, who was president from 1974 to 1979, told the daily Bild on Sunday that he was &ldquo;concerned about the office of the presidency.&rdquo; Erwin Lotter, a member of Parliament from Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s coalition partner Free Democrats, called for Mr. Wulff to resign.        

According to Mr. Seibel, the public already had the impression that Mr. Wulff had tried to &ldquo;sweep the details under the carpet,&rdquo; but that he would likely have to be caught in an outright lie to have to step down. &ldquo;Until then the chancellor needs him, so she will continue to support him,&rdquo; Mr. Seibel said.        
