
MANILA &mdash; As the death toll from flash floods over the weekend soared to more than 900 on Monday, officials in the southern Philippines turned their attention to the survivors and the threat of disease in crowded evacuation centers.        

&ldquo;Water has not been restored to many areas, and people are not well sheltered,&rdquo; Gwendolyn T. Pang, the secretary general of the Philippine Red Cross, said by telephone. &ldquo;The risk now is to the health of the survivors.&rdquo;        

About 45,000 people affected by the floods that ripped through the southern Philippines on Friday night were packed into crowded evacuation centers, which health officials worried could become breeding grounds for cholera, typhoid, respiratory infections and other communicable illnesses. They are organizing vaccinations to try to stem the infections.        

&ldquo;The situation in the evacuation center is very difficult,&rdquo; said Stella Cabilogan, 33, whose house in the southern city of Cagayan de Oro was severely damaged. &ldquo;There is no water or sanitation there. It&rsquo;s very easy to get sick.&rdquo;        

She moved with her two children to her brother&rsquo;s house instead. But tens of thousands had no such option.        

The death toll from the flash floods, produced by tropical storm Washi, rose to 927, the government reported Monday. Officials said the number could still rise because bodies were still being recovered from the ocean.        

Estimates of the missing varied widely, with the Red Cross putting the number in the hundreds and the government&rsquo;s national disaster council saying that fewer than 100 people were still unaccounted for.        

In the two hardest-hit cities, Cagayan de Oro and Iligan, funeral parlors overflowed, giving some areas an overwhelming stench of death and prompting health concerns among residents. Officials in Iligan announced plans on Monday for a mass burial, but the health authorities in Manila strongly opposed the idea, saying that the dead, particularly those in mortuaries, did not pose a health risk to the living.        

&ldquo;There is no rush to bury the dead,&rdquo; Dr. Eric Tayag, a spokesman for the Department of Health in Manila, told a local television station on Monday. &ldquo;They will not spread diseases. We should focus on those who survived.&rdquo;        

He said he was more concerned about disease at the evacuation centers.        

Ms. Pang of the Red Cross said her staff and volunteers were also seeing psychological effects from the flooding.        

&ldquo;People in the area are still panicked and worried, so we are assisting with psychosocial coping,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;Some people are now afraid of the rain. Every time it rains, they ask to be rescued.&rdquo;        
