
Iran&rsquo;s veneer of stoicism toward the Western sanctions that have disrupted its economy showed some new strains on Monday, as the deputy oil minister acknowledged a decline in domestic petroleum production because of dwindling foreign investment, and four-year-old talks between the Iranians and Poland&rsquo;s biggest natural gas developer collapsed.        

The Iranians also suffered an embarrassment after prematurely announcing that a Russian oil company had committed $1 billion to help revive a dormant oil field in Iran&rsquo;s southwest. Hours later, the Russian company, Tatneft, denied on its Web site that a deal had been signed. And there were signals that Saudi Arabia, which Iran had confidently predicted last week would not increase oil production to compensate for any Iranian shortfall caused by the sanctions, was becoming increasingly irritated with Iran.        

Together, the developments portrayed Iran, with the world&rsquo;s fourth-largest oil reserves and second-largest natural gas reserves, as struggling more than it had admitted from the effects of the Western sanctions, despite its official denunciations of them as desperate measures doomed to fail or backfire.        

The sanctions, imposed to pressure Iran into ending its suspect nuclear program, were strengthened last month, with the possibility of more onerous restrictions on Iran&rsquo;s central bank and oil industry looming from the United States and the European Union. Under a measure that is likely to be signed into law by President Obama, foreign entities that do business with Iran&rsquo;s central bank, the conduit for Iran&rsquo;s oil revenue, could face severe penalties if they do business in the United States.        

Iran&rsquo;s deputy oil minister, Ahmad Qalebani, appeared to have made an unusual disclosure about the effects of sanctions in an article reported by the official Iranian Students&rsquo; News Agency, which quoted him as saying Iran&rsquo;s crude oil production in 2011 had declined from the year before. He said the decline was &ldquo;due to lack of investment in oil field development.&rdquo;        

Iran produced about 4 million barrels a day of oil in 2010 and is producing about 3.5 million barrels this year.        

Mr. Qalebani&rsquo;s disclosure followed recent warnings by other Iranian officials that the effects of sanctions had become more acute. The foreign minister, Ali Akbar Salehi, was quoted by the official Islamic Republic News Agency as saying, &ldquo;We cannot pretend the sanctions are not having an effect.&rdquo; The governor of Iran&rsquo;s central bank, Mahmoud Bahmani, told reporters in Iran last week that the country must act as if it were &ldquo;under siege,&rdquo; Agence France-Presse reported.        

The collapsed talks on a deal with Polskie Gornictwo Naftowe i Gazownictwo, a leading developer and distributor of natural gas, involved the Lavan natural gas field in the Persian Gulf, one of Iran&rsquo;s largest deposits. Iran&rsquo;s semiofficial Mehr News Agency said the Polish company would be replaced by a consortium of Iranian companies. It was unclear precisely why the talks failed, but the withdrawal of the Polish company clearly reflected the new pressures on foreign companies not to engage in commitments with Iran.        

Even Russia, which has strongly opposed the Western sanctions against Iran, appeared to be backtracking on a deal after Iranian news agencies said Tatneft had signed a $1 billion agreement to develop the Zagheh field in southern Iran. The company said in a statement that it had &ldquo;not entered into any agreements, contracts&rdquo; and had &ldquo;not accepted any other undertakings relating to oil and gas projects in Iran.&rdquo;        

Additional pressure aimed at Iran came from Saudi Arabia, Iran&rsquo;s wary neighbor and oil-producing rival. Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s King Abdullah, in remarks clearly aimed at Iran, told a meeting of the Gulf Cooperation Council, a six-member group of Arab oil producers, &ldquo;No doubt you all know that we are targeted in our safety and security.&rdquo;        
Artin Afkhami contributed reporting.
