
TOKYO &mdash; The death of Kim Jong-il, the hermetic North Korea leader, threw the rest of Asia into deep anxiety Monday and reverberated across the Pacific. Friends and enemies of the nuclear-armed country fretted over whether it was now facing an unpredictable power struggle &mdash; even as the official North Korean press proclaimed that Mr. Kim&rsquo;s cherubic-faced youngest son was his successor.        
Go to Timeline

The son, Kim Jong-un, is such an unknown that the world did not even know what he looked like until last year. Believed to be in his 20s, he faces enormous uncertainty over his ability to retain power in one of the most opaque and repressive nations &mdash; the last bastion of hard-line Communism.        

Even if he can, questions loom about Kim Jong-un&rsquo;s ability to manage North Korea&rsquo;s ravaged economy, with its chronic shortages and deprivations, to avoid a complete collapse.        

&ldquo;Kim Jong-un&rsquo;s first priority will be regime survival,&rdquo; said Chang Yong-seok, senior researcher at the Institute for Peace and Unification Studies at Seoul National University in South Korea.        

The North Korean announcement that Kim Jong-il, 69, had died of a heart attack while on a train trip Saturday &mdash; an unexplained 48-hour delay that only further unnerved North Korea&rsquo;s neighbors &mdash; sent South Korea scrambling into a high state of military alert. South Korea&rsquo;s stock market tumbled 3.4 percent. The leaders of South Korea, Japan and the United States all conferred urgently, reflecting both the surprise of Mr. Kim&rsquo;s death and the possibility of belligerent behavior from paranoid Pyongyang officials.        

In Washington, the Obama administration, emphasizing the need for stability on the Korean Peninsula, delayed any decisions on the resumption of food aid or a new round of bilateral talks with the North Koreans. Victoria Nuland, a State Department spokeswoman, told reporters, &ldquo;We need to see where they are and where they go as they move through their transition period.&rdquo;        

Even China, North Korea&rsquo;s most important ally and benefactor, appeared caught off guard by Mr. Kim&rsquo;s demise. Chinese leaders had been hoping that he would live at least a few more years to more solidly cement the succession of his son. On Monday, China was moving quickly to deepen its influence over senior officials in North Korea and particularly with those in the military, according to Chinese and foreign former government officials and analysts.        

For now, the reclusive leadership is offering few clues as to what, if any, changes the death of the dictator could bring. It did, however, send a strong signal that at least for now, the powerful military and other parts of the nation&rsquo;s small, privileged ruling elite would go along with the Kim family&rsquo;s ambitions to extend its rule to a third generation.        

Within hours of the announcement of Mr. Kim&rsquo;s death, North Korea&rsquo;s ruling Workers Party released a statement calling on the nation to unite &ldquo;under the leadership of our comrade Kim Jong-un.&rdquo;        

The younger Mr. Kim was also named head of the committee overseeing his father&rsquo;s funeral, set for Dec. 28 &mdash; a move that some analysts interpreted as evidence that the transfer of power to the son was proceeding smoothly so far. Analysts said they expected the funeral to be an elaborate public display, not only of reverence for the deceased leader, but also of national unity behind the new one.        

&ldquo;The first test of the new leadership will be its handling of the death itself,&rdquo; said John Delury, a professor of international studies at Yonsei University in Seoul.        

Some analysts said Kim Jong-il had used the three years after his stroke in 2008 to build support for this untested son. They also said that members of North Korea&rsquo;s ruling class might also recognize that, at least for now, they have no choice but to accept the succession: Mr. Kim&rsquo;s two older sons are seen as lazy playboys, while any move to reject the family could undermine the legitimacy of the entire leadership.        

&ldquo;Kim Jong-il used the years after his stroke to build a consensus among the elite that his son would be the face of North Korea after he was gone,&rdquo; said Kim Yeon-su, a professor of North Korean studies at the National Defense University in Seoul. He added that this was an easy face to sell: with plump cheeks, short-cropped hair and a hard gaze, Kim Jong-un looks strikingly similar to his grandfather Kim Il-sung, the founder of North Korea, still revered as a god.        

What happens after the funeral, however, is fraught with uncertainty.        

Nobody outside North Korea knows whether the military will accept the Kim succession. The only precedent is the last transition, when Kim Jong-il took over after the 1994 death of his father, Kim Il-sung, and uncertainty over his true authority lasted years. In that case, the son observed a three-year period of traditional mourning before formally taking control, reflecting the government&rsquo;s odd mixing of ancient Confucian monarchy with a 20th-century Stalinist personality cult.        
Su-hyun Lee contributed reporting from Seoul, South Korea; Mark Landler from Washington; and Edward Wong from Beijing.
