
BAGHDAD &mdash; Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq said Friday that he would cut his salary in half, apparently in an effort to defuse growing dissatisfaction among Iraqis about the lack of government services.        

Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s announcement came as protests against governments continued in many Arab countries. A spokesman for Mr. Maliki said that he had been discussing a decrease in his pay since he was elected to a second four-year term after Iraq formed a new government in December.        

There have been scattered protests over the last six months throughout Iraq about the lack of electricity, the long delay in forming a new government and concerns that Mr. Maliki was amassing too much power. The demonstrations have been smaller and less angry than those in Tunisia and Egypt, but the general unrest in the region has raised concerns among government officials about the potential for a similar uprising among Iraqis.        

&ldquo;He was discussing reducing the salaries of high-ranking government officials compared to the rest of the people who work for the government,&rdquo; said the prime minister&rsquo;s spokesman, Ali al-Moussawi. &ldquo;He believes there is a big difference and it should be reduced.&rdquo;        

Mr. Maliki has declined several times to say how much he earns, although it is believed to be about $350,000 a year. The reduction will be in effect for the rest of his term, which is expected to end in 2014.        

Government officials had expected a large group of protesters calling for democratic reforms to take to the streets of Baghdad on Friday. However, only about 1,000 protesters marched on Mutanabi Street, the intellectual center of the city.        

One protester held a sign saying that there would be an outbreak of unrest in Iraq if the government restricted freedoms and failed to provide better services.        

It was cold this week in Iraq, and there was a shortage of fuel to heat houses. People lined up for hours at fuel stations. Mr. Maliki, who leads the State of Law bloc in Parliament, asked the country&rsquo;s president and two vice presidents to also reduce their salaries, Mr. Moussawi said. They have not agreed to do so, he said, although President Jalal Talabani told Mr. Maliki that he thought all senior officials should reduce their salaries.        

The chief adviser for the Iraqiya coalition, which is led by Ayad Allawi, a secular Shiite and a former interim prime minister, and which includes many Sunni parties, said that Mr. Maliki needed to do much more to show the Iraqi people that he was serious about improving government services.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s certainly a good initiative, but what matters to the Iraqis is not reducing Maliki&rsquo;s salary but fighting corruption,&rdquo; said the adviser, Hani Ashur. &ldquo;There are 100 corrupt officials working for the government who have been identified by the country&rsquo;s integrity commission and he has taken no action.&rdquo;        

On Tuesday, Human Rights Watch released a report asserting that security forces controlled by Mr. Maliki continued to hold and torture people in secret jails.        

The news that Mr. Maliki would reduce his salary was announced amid coverage of the turmoil in Cairo in a breaking news alert on the Afaaq television station, which is owned by his party. The television station reported that the money that he would have drawn as salary would be returned to the country&rsquo;s budget.        
