
MADRID &mdash; Mariano Rajoy, the new conservative prime minister of Spain, pledged on Monday to reduce the size of the country&rsquo;s public sector, clean up its troubled banks and introduce corporate tax breaks to get Spain&rsquo;s budget deficit down and revive investment.        

&ldquo;Those who think that Spain will not be capable of making the necessary reforms to be successful in the Europe of the euro are totally wrong,&rdquo; Mr. Rajoy said in his first formal address to Parliament since his center-right Popular Party routed the Socialists from power in the Nov. 20 general election.        

Still, he gave credence to concerns that Spain was slipping back into recession. &ldquo;The outlook couldn&rsquo;t be darker&rdquo; for Spain&rsquo;s economy, he said, adding that it was being &ldquo;left behind&rdquo; while some of its partners in the European Union grew.        

&ldquo;Expectations for the coming two quarters aren&rsquo;t good at all,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Rajoy did not say specifically how he planned to cut 16.5 billion euros ($21.5 billion) from the 2012 budget, the estimated amount it must save to keep its budget deficit under 6 percent of gross domestic product, the ceiling set by an agreement between the previous government and the European Union. Most economists consider it impossible for Spain to meet the 6 percent target this year.        

Mr. Rajoy said he would pursue &ldquo;cuts in every aspect of expenditure,&rdquo; with one exception: He said he was willing to raise pensions. He said that he would freeze public hiring, and that he had no &ldquo;intention to raise taxes.&rdquo;        

Mr. Rajoy kept a low profile after the election, which ended almost eight years of Socialist government under Prime Minister Jos&eacute; Luis Rodr&iacute;guez Zapatero, who did not seek re-election. The Socialists&rsquo; political fortunes suffered along with the economy, once booming but now beset by a burst real estate bubble, anemic growth and heavy debts, just as some other euro zone nations are.        

Mr. Rajoy is scheduled to be formally elected prime minister by lawmakers on Tuesday and to be presented to King Juan Carlos I on Wednesday, when he will name his cabinet.        

On Monday, Mr. Rajoy said more details on his austerity plans would be released after a cabinet meeting on Dec. 30, when the new government should have a clearer idea of whether Spain would meet the 6 percent deficit target. Every percentage point above the target, he has said, will demand another 10 billion euros in spending cuts, or about $13 billion.        

Mr. Rajoy told Parliament on Monday that a second wave of consolidation was needed to clean up the country&rsquo;s banking industry, and that banks would be forced by his government to sell more of the properties they hold and to be more conservative in valuing assets like real estate.        

Daragh Quinn, an analyst at Nomura in London, called Mr. Rajoy&rsquo;s plan for the banks &ldquo;a step in the right direction, as it looks to address losses that have already been incurred, although not acknowledged.&rdquo; His firm estimates that altogether, Spanish banks have at least $62 billion in losses not yet reflected in their books. One of the first legislative moves the new government plans to make is to amend the Constitution to limit the size of future deficits, as the Socialists have already agreed to do. Mr. Rajoy also promised more changes in the country&rsquo;s labor laws to fight unemployment, which at 21 percent is double the European average.        

Austerity measures in other troubled euro zone countries like Greece and Italy have been met with angry street demonstrations. In Italy on Monday, thousands of government workers staged strikes and demonstrated to protest tax and pension changes that labor leaders said put an unfair burden on the working class.        
