
LONDON &mdash; The CNN talk show host Piers Morgan declared on Tuesday that as the editor in chief of two British tabloids from 1994 to 2004, he knew no one who hacked phones or paid police officers for information.        

Sometimes annoyed, sometimes combative, often terse in testimony that he delivered by video link from Los Angeles, Mr. Morgan told a British investigation into news media practices that &ldquo;ethical considerations were interwoven into my work&rdquo; at both papers, The News of the World and The Daily Mirror.        

The investigation, called the Leveson inquiry, was set up in the wake of last summer&rsquo;s phone hacking scandal, which led to the closing of Rupert Murdoch&rsquo;s News of the World tabloid and to a raft of arrests. Witnesses have included public figures describing their misery at the hands of the tabloids and journalists describing the sometimes outrageous and illegal methods they used to get their stories.        

Other witnesses have testified that phone hacking was rife at The Mirror while Mr. Morgan was its editor, from 1995 to 2004; a lawyer for the inquiry said that the police had evidence that the practice went on. But Mr. Morgan repeatedly testified that it did not, and that he knew nothing about it. Nor did he admit that anything he did at The Mirror was ethically wrong. He stuck to these positions even when presented with statements apparently to the contrary that he himself had made in interviews and in his tell-all 2005 memoir, &ldquo;The Insider.&rdquo;        

For instance, Robert Jay, a lawyer for the inquiry, confronted Mr. Morgan with an interview he gave to The Press Gazette in 2007. In the interview, Mr. Morgan said that Clive Goodman, the News of the World royal reporter jailed for phone hacking, was &ldquo;a convenient fall guy&rdquo; for a practice &ldquo;that everyone knows was going on at almost every paper in Fleet Street for years.&rdquo;        

In another interview that year, Mr. Morgan was quoted as saying that &ldquo;it was pretty well known&rdquo; that reporters could hack phones by using standard access codes.        

Explaining these away, Mr. Morgan said that he was merely repeating widespread tales from the &ldquo;Fleet Street rumor mill&rdquo; that hacking &ldquo;went a lot further&rdquo; than Mr. Goodman&rsquo;s case. &ldquo;I wasn&rsquo;t aware it was widely prevalent in any specific form,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Morgan is not a universally popular figure among British journalists, some of whom resent his success in surmounting his tabloid roots to find media stardom in the United States. Here in Britain, he was known for being cheeky, outrageous, not always very serious, willing to try any stunt to get a story, sparring with celebrities, strong-arming politicians to give him better access &mdash; all qualities he lays out in &ldquo;The Insider,&rdquo; whose subtitle is &ldquo;The Private Diaries of a Scandalous Decade.&rdquo; His testimony was important because so far, no documentary evidence has come into the public domain linking newspapers other than those owned by Rupert Murdoch with phone hacking.        

In a separate development, News International, the British newspaper arm of Mr. Murdoch&rsquo;s News Corporation, announced on Tuesday that it had settled seven more legal claims brought by people whose voice mail was illegally intercepted by The News of the World. These included James Hewitt, a former army officer who had an affair with Diana, Princess of Wales, and Paul Dadge, a man caught up in the 2005 terrorist bombings in London.        

But the main focus of the day was on Mr. Morgan. In other testimony, he said that printing articles based on material from garbage cans was no more unethical than the practice by nontabloid newspapers of &ldquo;taking the discarded remains&rdquo; from stories the tabloids paid for and using them &ldquo;without having to pay.&rdquo; Nor does he believe that relying on garbage-based documents for articles is necessarily so terrible, he said.        

&ldquo;If you throw rubbish into the street, I wonder how unethical it is if that appears in the newspaper,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I mean, it&rsquo;s rubbish, isn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;        
Ravi Somaiya and Alan Cowell contributed reporting from London, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
