
CAIRO &mdash; Several thousand women demanding the end of military rule marched through downtown Cairo on Tuesday evening in an extraordinary expression of anger over images of soldiers beating, stripping and kicking female demonstrators in Tahrir Square.        

&ldquo;Drag me, strip me, my brothers&rsquo; blood will cover me!&rdquo; they chanted. &ldquo;Where is the field marshal?&rdquo; they demanded of the top military officer, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi. &ldquo;The girls of Egypt are here.&rdquo;        

Historians called the event the biggest women&rsquo;s demonstration in modern Egyptian history, the most significant since a 1919 march against British colonialism inaugurated women&rsquo;s activism here, and a rarity in the Arab world. It also added a new and unexpected wave of protesters opposing the ruling military council&rsquo;s efforts to retain power and its tactics for suppressing public discontent.        

The protest&rsquo;s scale stunned even feminists here. In Egypt&rsquo;s stiffly patriarchal culture, previous attempts to organize women&rsquo;s events in Tahrir Square during this year&rsquo;s protests almost always fizzled or, in one case in March, ended in the physical harassment of a small group of women by a larger crowd of men.        

&ldquo;It was amazing the number of women that came out from all over the place,&rdquo; said Zeinab Abul-Magd, a historian who has studied women&rsquo;s activism here. &ldquo;I expected fewer than 300.&rdquo;        

The march abruptly pushed women to the center of Egyptian political life after they had been left out almost completely. Although women stood at the forefront of the initial revolt that ousted President Hosni Mubarak 10 months ago, few had prominent roles in the various revolutionary coalitions formed in the uprising&rsquo;s aftermath. Almost no women have won seats in the early rounds of parliamentary elections. And the continuing demonstrations against military rule have often degenerated into battles in which young men and the security police hurl rocks at each other.        

On the fifth day of clashes that have killed at least 14 people, many women in the march said they hoped their demonstration would undercut the military council&rsquo;s efforts to portray demonstrators as little more than hooligans, vandals and arsonists. &ldquo;This will show those who stay home that we are not thugs,&rdquo; said Fadwa Khaled, 25, a computer engineer.        

The women&rsquo;s demand for a voice in political life appeared to run counter to the recent election victories of conservative Islamists. But the march was hardly dominated by secular liberals. It contained a broad spectrum of Egyptian women, including homemakers demonstrating for the first time and young mothers carrying babies, with a majority in traditional Muslim head scarves and a few in face-covering veils. And their chants mixed calls for women&rsquo;s empowerment with others demanding more &ldquo;gallantry&rdquo; from Egyptian men.        

Their voice was evidently heard at military headquarters. Even before the march broke up, the ruling generals reversed themselevs to offer an apology to women for unspecified &ldquo;violations.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces expresses its utmost sorrow for the great women of Egypt, for the violations that took place during the recent events,&rdquo; the council said in a statement. &ldquo;It stresses its great appreciation for the women of Egypt.&rdquo;        

The statement asserted that the council had already taken &ldquo;all the legal actions to hold whoever is responsible accountable.&rdquo; But it gave no indication that anyone in the military has been publicly investigated or charged for any misconduct, and the statement also reprised the council&rsquo;s recent attempt to pin blame for the clashes on the protestors themselves. The generals urged calm &ldquo;until we can reveal the infiltrating and paid agents of thuggery that aim at destruction, sabotage and damaging the revolution and the great Egyptian youth.&rdquo;        

Egypt&rsquo;s military rulers came under fire from international human rights groups soon after they took power in February for performing invasive, pseudo-medical &ldquo;virginity tests&rdquo; on several women detained after a protest in March. But in Egypt&rsquo;s conservative culture, few of the women subjected to that humiliation have come forward to criticize the generals publicly.        

The spark for the march on Tuesday came over the weekend, when hundreds of military police officers in riot gear repeatedly stormed Tahrir Square, indiscriminately beating anyone they could catch. Videos showed more than one instance in which officers grabbed and stripped female demonstrators, tearing off their Muslim head scarves. And in the most infamous case caught on video, a half-dozen soldiers beat a supine woman with batons and ripped off her abaya to reveal a blue bra. Then one of them kicked her in the chest.        
Mayy el-Sheik contributed reporting.
