
JERUSALEM &mdash; Israel announced on Friday a package of steps meant to develop infrastructure and encourage economic growth in the Palestinian territories, in what appeared to be an effort to mollify the Western-backed Palestinian Authority leadership and allay international criticism in the absence of peace talks.        

The prime minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, said that the gestures were meant &ldquo;first of all to enhance stability&rdquo; by improving the Palestinian quality of life, in a reference to the mass protests rocking Egypt, Israel&rsquo;s neighbor and longtime peace partner, and other parts of the Arab world.        

But officials said that the measures had been under discussion for months and that the timing of the announcement probably had more to do with the meeting scheduled for Saturday of the so-called quartet of Middle East peacemakers, consisting of the United States, the United Nations, the European Union and Russia.        

The foreign ministers of the quartet and the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, were due to meet on the sidelines of the Munich Security Conference to talk about the deadlock in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process.        

The Israeli package was negotiated with Tony Blair, the quartet&rsquo;s special envoy, who presented it jointly with Mr. Netanyahu here on Friday.        

&ldquo;Even against the background of events in the region,&rdquo; Mr. Blair said in a statement, &ldquo;and the absence of direct political negotiations, it is important we continue to do all we can to improve the conditions and living standards of the Palestinian people. Indeed it is now especially important.&rdquo;        

Several of the proposed steps relate to Gaza, where the authority&rsquo;s rival, the Islamic militant group Hamas, holds sway. But Israel said that the beneficiaries of the improved infrastructure there would be the Gaza population, the Palestinian Authority and Israel itself.        

Significantly, Israel has agreed to begin discussions on the development of a Palestinian Authority gas field adjacent to an Israeli gas field off the coast of Gaza, which need to be developed simultaneously. Future revenues from the Palestinian field will go to the authority, Mr. Netanyahu said.        

Israel also agreed in principle to allow the development of electricity, sanitation and water projects in Gaza, including the introduction of desalination plants, with the intention of making Gaza &ldquo;independent of Israeli infrastructure,&rdquo; Mr. Netanyahu said. Israel unilaterally withdrew from Gaza in 2005.        

In addition, Israel is supposed to approve additional construction projects and new procedures for the controlled entry of construction materials into Gaza.        

Among the proposals for the West Bank, Israel said that it would speed up the building process for schools and health clinics in Israeli-controlled areas and that it approved in principle the extension of the Palestinian Authority&rsquo;s security presence to seven towns in areas under Israeli security control, a longstanding authority demand.        

Israel also said it encouraged projects for the improvement of infrastructure in Arab neighborhoods of Israeli-annexed East Jerusalem. The Palestinians and most countries of the world do not recognize Israeli sovereignty in East Jerusalem, which the Palestinians claim as the capital of a future state.        

The measures were announced before they had been formally presented to the Palestinian Authority, and there was no immediate response from the Palestinian side. Many details still have to be fleshed out in discussions over the next few months, and sounding a note of caution, Mr. Blair said, &ldquo;Obviously, agreement to all this is not the same as implementation.&rdquo; He added that &ldquo;none of this is a substitute for a credible political process.&rdquo;        

Short-lived negotiations stalled in September after a 10-month Israeli moratorium on building new homes in Jewish settlements in the West Bank expired.        

The Palestinians say they will not resume negotiations without an additional settlement freeze and clear terms of reference for the talks. Israeli officials have proposed offering alternative gestures and incentives as a way of coaxing the Palestinians back into negotiations. But there was no suggestion in the Netanyahu or Blair statements made Friday, or in a document outlining the new measures that was provided to The New York Times, that their implementation was conditional on a resumption of talks.        

Mideast Unrest Appraised        

PARIS &mdash; Unrest sweeping Egypt and other parts of the Middle East reflects a deep desire for political change and is likely to have a positive effect on regional stability in the long run, Salam Fayyad, prime minister of the Palestinian Authority, said Friday.        

The protests, spreading from Tunisia and Algeria to Egypt and Yemen, are  &ldquo;an expression of a desire for positive change, for inclusiveness, for enfranchisement &mdash; something which is not in abundance,&rdquo; Mr. Fayyad said at the Acad&eacute;mie Diplomatique Internationale in Paris.  &ldquo;I view it as a predominantly political phenomenon &mdash; not a revolt by the angry, not a form of protest against the poor living conditions,&rdquo; he said of the disparate movements pushing autocratic regimes for accountability, democracy and the rule of law.        

Mr. Fayyad was speaking at the end of a visit to Paris, during which he met President Nicolas Sarkozy and Prime Minister Fran&ccedil;ois Fillon.        
