
SYDNEY, Australia &mdash; A political standoff in Papua New Guinea that left the country with two prime ministers and cabinets for more than a week appeared effectively over on Tuesday, after the governor general reversed course and threw his weight behind the government of Peter O&rsquo;Neill.        

The move by the governor general, Michael Ogio, who represents the country&rsquo;s head of state, Queen Elizabeth II of Britain, and is chosen by Parliament, seemed to end any lingering hope for the ousted prime minister, Sir Michael Somare, the country&rsquo;s first post-independence leader. Just last week, Mr. Ogio backed a Supreme Court decision that had declared Mr. O&rsquo;Neill&rsquo;s government illegitimate.        

The position of governor general in Papua New Guinea is largely ceremonial, but its functions include the ability to give formal assent to the appointment of a new prime minister.        

In a letter to Parliament on Monday, Mr. Ogio blamed bad legal advice for his decision to reinstate Mr. Somare, 75.        

In August, several months after he had gone to Singapore to get medical treatment for a heart problem, Mr. Somare was replaced by Mr. O&rsquo;Neill as prime minister.        

When Mr. Somare finally returned in September, he fought for reinstatement, while Mr. O&rsquo;Neill&rsquo;s government drafted legislation to retroactively authorize Mr. Somare&rsquo;s ouster.        

&ldquo;Any decision to swear in the Somare government in law is wrong and invalid,&rdquo; Mr. Ogio said in his letter on Monday, The Associated Press reported. &ldquo;I recognize the election of Peter O&rsquo;Neill as prime minister.&rdquo;        

Mr. Somare refused to concede defeat. &ldquo;The Supreme Court has taken a decision and installed my government back in office,&rdquo; he said in an interview on Tuesday with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re trying to get our politics sorted out here. We&rsquo;ve made an attempt to talk to Peter O&rsquo;Neill, but so far we have not got any response.&rdquo;        

Mr. Somare now faces the prospect of an ignominious end to his career. He led Papua New Guinea to independence from Australian colonial rule, but has also recently been hampered by accusations of corruption and heavy-handedness.        

A country of seven million people, north of Australia and east of Indonesia, Papua New Guinea has a history of political violence, including a decade-long civil war involving the mineral-rich island of Bougainville. The election in 2002 that brought Mr. Somare to power was marred by violence in which more than a dozen people were killed.        

At the height of the crisis last week, the country had the spectacle of two rival prime ministers and cabinets, two police commissioners and even two governors general, each claiming the right to govern. The military declined to intervene, and police officers were deployed in the streets of the capital, Port Moresby, bracing for civil unrest, which ultimately did not materialize.        

Mr. O&rsquo;Neill&rsquo;s supporters had suspended Mr. Ogio as governor general. His change of position, which had support from the Commonwealth, led to his reinstatement on Monday. The Supreme Court, whose rulings on the matter were largely ignored, has emerged as perhaps the biggest loser after Mr. Somare.        

&ldquo;Parliament is the place where we make governments and where we change governments,&rdquo; Mr. O&rsquo;Neill said. &ldquo;Now that the crisis is over, I urge all parties to work together so that we can prepare for the fair and free elections in 2012.&rdquo;        
