
WUKAN, China &mdash; Senior officials from the coastal Guangdong Province in southern China met on Wednesday morning with a leader of the protesters who have taken control of this fishing village, ratcheting up efforts to resolve an incendiary dispute over secret land sales that forced the village&rsquo;s administrators to flee 10 days ago.        



The provincial officials agreed to the meeting after residents here threatened to march on Wednesday morning to government offices in the nearby city of Lufeng. Villagers said late Tuesday that they would postpone the march to see what kinds of concessions, if any, provincial officials were willing to offer.        

In the meeting, which lasted for more than an hour outside Wukan, two senior provincial officials spoke to Lin Zuluan, 65, one of the villagers&rsquo; main representatives. Mr. Lin said after the meeting that the officials had agreed to three conditions set by the protesters, including freeing several villagers who had been detained, though the issue of the land sales remained unresolved.        

&ldquo;I was satisfied with how the meeting went,&rdquo; Mr. Lin said. &ldquo;Now they&rsquo;ve opened up a new channel of communication, and it will help to build a closer relationship between the two sides.&rdquo;        

Mr. Lin said he would talk with other village leaders in the afternoon to discuss the next step, though a protest march to Lufeng was &ldquo;very unlikely.&rdquo;        

The provincial officials left immediately after the meeting and were not available for comment.        

The meeting was the first with province-level officials, and it contrasted sharply with the denunciations and threats of arrest that have defined the official response to the protests since the standoff began.        

The negotiations were led by the deputy chief of the provincial Communist Party committee, Zhu Mingguo, and the party secretary of the administrative region of Shanwei, Zheng Yanxiong. Mr. Zhu is a top lieutenant to the provincial party secretary, Wang Yang, one of China&rsquo;s most prominent political leaders and an unspoken candidate for a spot on China&rsquo;s ruling body, the standing committee of the Politburo, when membership in the body, which now has nine seats, turns over next year.        

The abrupt shift of negotiations to provincial leaders, after days of fruitless talks with officials of local governments, suggested that Mr. Wang was taking charge and hoping to broker a peaceful settlement of a crisis whose outcome could weigh heavily on his political future.        

In midmorning, as officials began arriving outside the village, hundreds of residents lined the roadside. Dozens held up a red banner that welcomed the officials &ldquo;to come to Lufeng to resolve the Wukan incident.&rdquo;        

Inside Wukan, in a council meeting hall, bags of rice were piled high in a corner to dole out to poorer families. Since party officials abandoned the area days ago, security forces have turned back many food trucks outside the village. Some residents say the authorities intend to starve the villagers until they submit, yet they profess their devotion to the Communist Party and speak of how the central government will soon come to their aid.        

On the main road connecting Lufeng to Wukan, there was no sign of a police presence on Tuesday night. A police checkpoint that had been erected at one bridge outside Lufeng several days ago was no longer there. But on the outskirts of Wukan, villagers still manned barricades that are meant to keep back security forces. When foreign journalists traveling from Lufeng approached them near midnight, several villagers took the journalists into the heart of Wukan on the backs of motorcycles.        

Mr. Lin said the greatest concern of the villagers was their land: they charge that the village government and Lufeng authorities illegally sold the village&rsquo;s collectively owned farm and forest land to developers without their consent, and that money from the sales is unaccounted for. Mr. Lin said the issue would need to be discussed in further talks with officials.        

The anger of the last week involved a second but equally explosive issue: the death of a 42-year-old villager, Xue Jinbo, who was among 12 people chosen by villagers to negotiate a settlement to the land dispute.        
Edward Wong reported from Wukan, and Michael Wines from Beijing. Li Bibo and Mia Li contributed research from Beijing.
