
ISTANBUL &mdash; The police detained at least 38 people, many of them journalists, in dawn raids across Turkey on Tuesday as part of an investigation into a network accused of being the political wing of an outlawed Kurdish separatist rebel group.        

The operation, in Istanbul, Izmir, Diyarbakir and four other cities, followed the arrests of hundreds of pro-Kurdish political activists, including elected mayors and leading academics, suspected of having links to the separatist group, the Kurdistan Workers&rsquo; Party. The group, known as the P.K.K., has been conducting an armed struggle for autonomy in the southeast that has claimed more than 40,000 lives since 1984.        

Critics question the government&rsquo;s true motives because those arrested have included prominent journalists, intellectuals and academics who have expressed general support for the rights of Kurds, a long-oppressed minority here. The government&rsquo;s new spate of arrests comes amid concerns that the United States&rsquo; withdrawal from Iraq could create a security vacuum that could destabilize the region and embolden the Kurdish rebels, who carry out attacks on Turkey from their bases in the Iraqi north.        

Turkish officials said that Ankara&rsquo;s strong stance against the government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria and its crackdown against protesters was also stoking fears that Damascus &mdash; backed by its ally Iran &mdash; could allow the P.K.K. to carry out attacks against Turkey from Syrian territory.        

Turkey already has about 67 reporters in jail, according to the Turkish Freedom for Journalists Platform, an extraordinary number. Turkey says they are not in jail for their journalism. Human rights groups have criticized the government of abusing its power by using the country&rsquo;s security apparatus to jail those who dare to challenge its policies.        

Initial reports indicated that the arrests focused not only on pro-Kurdish media figures but also those from mainstream media that occasionally work with them.        

On Tuesday, several hundred demonstrators gathered in the center of Istanbul, holding signs saying &ldquo;Freedom for Journalists&rdquo; and &ldquo;We Are All Kurds.&rdquo;        

Hasip Kaplan, deputy chairman of the pro-Kurdish Peace and Democracy Party, called the arrests an unlawful clampdown by the ruling Justice and Development Party against government opponents. &ldquo;These operations are neither legal nor lawful,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;They are entirely political and lack any legitimacy whatsoever.&rdquo;        

Johann Bihr of Reporters Without Borders, an advocacy group based in Paris, said in a statement that &ldquo;the Kurdish issue will not be solved by attempts to suppress dissident views in the name of combating terrorism.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The authorities must stop trying to criminalize journalism, including politically committed journalism,&rdquo; Mr. Bihr said.        

The government has made a range of moves to improve relations with Kurds, including starting a Kurdish public television channel and introducing private Kurdish-language courses. But many Kurdish activists say they will not be satisfied without a new constitution to enshrine minority rights for the nearly 15 million Kurds living in Turkey.        

In November, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan apologized for the killing of scores of Kurds at the end of the 1930s. Mr. Erdogan&rsquo;s apology referred to a previously classified state document that certified that 13,800 Kurds were killed in airstrikes and land strikes in the eastern province of Dersim &mdash; or Tunceli as the town was later renamed &mdash; from 1936 to 1939.        

The detentions on Tuesday included around 30 journalists, among them Mustafa Ozer, a photographer working for Agence France-Presse, said Alper Turgut, representing the Turkish journalists union, according to the semiofficial Anatolian News Agency.        

The French news agency&rsquo;s office in Ankara said Mr. Ozer&rsquo;s house had been raided and he had been taken away by the police. More than 10 journalists from the pro-Kurdish Dicle news agency were also arrested, the state-run Anatolian news agency said. A lawyer for Dicle told The Associated Press that the police had entered the agency&rsquo;s offices and that they were copying documents and hard drives.        

In Diyarbakir, the capital of Turkey&rsquo;s predominantly Kurdish southeast, the police detained at least six people and raided 10 houses and offices belonging to Dicle staff members, officials said. More than 150 pro-Kurdish activists remain in jail facing charges of collaborating with the P.K.K. in an alternative structure called the Union of Kurdistan Communities, or K.C.K., that challenges the authority of the central Turkish government. Many are on trial in Diyarbakir, where a large courtroom has been specially built.        

After an escalation of P.K.K. violence in recent months &mdash; including the killing of 13 soldiers in July &mdash; the government in November ordered an intense military air and artillery operation against the group&rsquo;s bases in northern Iraq, even as it was still urging a peaceful resolution to the Kurdish conflict.        
