
BAGHDAD &mdash; As Iraq&rsquo;s Sunni vice president on Tuesday angrily rebutted the government&rsquo;s accusations that he had been running death squads, many people in Iraq&rsquo;s Sunni minority dismissed the charges as politically motivated, underscoring how deeply alienated they have become from the Shiite-led government.        

Coming just a day after the United States military withdrew from Iraq, the government&rsquo;s decision to issue an arrest warrant for the vice president, Tariq al-Hashimi, raised alarms in Washington and other capitals. But for average Sunnis here, it was just another in a series of moves to marginalize them.        

&ldquo;All the Sunnis feel neglected now,&rdquo; said Kais al-Obaidi, an accountant at a shawarma restaurant in the Sunni neighborhood of Adhamiya. &ldquo;We feel we are the second level of people now.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;It&rsquo;s clear what&rsquo;s happening here. They are sending a message to the Sunnis &mdash; that we control you.&rdquo;        

On Tuesday, Mr. Hashimi vehemently denied the government&rsquo;s accusations, saying that security forces controlled by Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki pressured the guards into false confessions.        

In a nationally televised news conference, Mr. Hashimi blamed Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s government for using the country&rsquo;s security forces to persecute political opponents, particularly Sunnis.        

&ldquo;The accusations have not been proven, so the accused is innocent until proven guilty,&rdquo; Mr. Hashimi said at the news conference in Erbil, in the Kurdish region in northern Iraq, where he is beyond the reach of the government&rsquo;s security forces. &ldquo;I swear by God I didn&rsquo;t do this disobedience against Iraqi blood, and I would never do this.&rdquo;        

Standing in front of an Iraqi flag, Mr. Hashimi questioned why Mr. Maliki had waited until the day after the American military withdrew its troops from Iraq to publicly lay out the charges.        

Some Sunnis who were interviewed in Baghdad viewed the political crisis as a coordinated effort on the part of the government to sideline them from power. Many were angry at what they perceived as a justice system that unfairly singles out Sunnis and treats Shiites less severely.        

&ldquo;It isn&rsquo;t only Hashimi who is bad,&rdquo; said Nouri al-Deen, a Sunni who works as an auto mechanic in Yarmouk, another Sunni neighborhood. Echoing a common refrain among Iraqis, Mr. Deen said that virtually all of their political leaders were corrupt and had their own militias, and he specifically mentioned the anti-American Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr and his Mahdi militia.        

&ldquo;Why are they only targeting Hashimi?&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Why don&rsquo;t they target Sadr or the Mahdi Army?&rdquo;        

Given Iraq&rsquo;s history of sectarian warfare and a culture of settling grievances by blood, the political tensions raise the specter of violence. But since the accusations surfaced over the weekend, there has been no noticeable increase in attacks.        

Nevertheless, Western diplomats scrambled to tamp down the bad feelings. The United States ambassador, James F. Jeffrey, returned to Iraq and met with many high-ranking Iraqi leaders. By the end of Tuesday, some leaders, including the speaker of the Parliament, Osama al-Nujaifi, a Sunni, were calling for the Sunni and Shiite leaders to meet to broker a truce.        

&ldquo;Is it an existential threat to Iraq&rsquo;s political system? At this stage, we think not,&rdquo; said a Western diplomat in Baghdad who requested anonymity so as to preserve his contacts with high-level Iraqis. &ldquo;The sensible, experienced politicians that we have spoken to see this for what it is &mdash; a highly charged moment in politics that can be resolved through dialogue and political will.&rdquo;        

At the news conference, Mr. Hashimi, a close ally of the Americans, criticized President Obama for having ordered the withdrawal of American combat forces by the end of 2011.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m surprised by the statement of President Obama when he said that the United States had left a democratic Iraq,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Is that the reality of Iraq? I&rsquo;m sad. Either the American president is deceived or he is overlooking the facts existing here. Today my house is surrounded with tanks. I&rsquo;d ask him, what democracy are you talking about, President Obama?&rdquo;        

Almost as significant as what Mr. Hashimi said was where he said it: in Erbil, the capital of the semiautonomous northern region of Kurdistan, where Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s security forces cannot easily act on the warrant issued Monday to arrest him.        

Mr. Hashimi, who is barred by the government from traveling outside the country, said he would not return to Baghdad, effectively making him an internal exile. The case against him, he said, should be transferred to Kurdistan, where he could face a fair trial.        

As Mr. Hashimi&rsquo;s news conference was broadcast on several Iraqi television channels, the state-run channel replayed the confessions from his guards at least twice.        

Baghdad security officials unveiled the charges a day earlier, playing the videotaped confessions from three men who said they had worked as Mr. Hashimi&rsquo;s bodyguards and had been ordered by him to commit murders. The men claimed to have used roadside bombs and silencer-equipped pistols to kill Iraqi government officials and security officers. Mr. Hashimi, they said, rewarded them with money.        

Security officials promised to play more confessions from other Hashimi bodyguards among the 10 they arrested over the past week.        
Yasir Ghazi and Zaid Thaker contributed reporting.
