
HONG KONG &mdash; Health workers here began slaughtering more than 17,000 chickens on Wednesday after a carcass infected with bird flu was found at a poultry market, government officials said. It was the first large-scale culling in three years.        

The cull was part of a series of precautionary steps being taken after the chicken carcass was found to have a &ldquo;highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza virus,&rdquo; York Chow, Hong Kong&rsquo;s secretary for food and health, said in a statement. Hong Kong officials also raised the territory&rsquo;s bird flu alert to &ldquo;serious,&rdquo; increasing monitoring for influenza at hospitals and closed the market where the carcass was discovered until Jan. 12.        

Hong Kong officials were still determining whether the carcass was imported or came from a local source.        

The government also suspended the sale and import of live poultry for 21 days, Dr. Chow said. The measures come on the eve of the annual &ldquo;dongzhi&rdquo; festival in Hong Kong that is held on the winter solstice. During the holiday, the territory&rsquo;s poultry and fish markets do a brisk business as families gather for reunions.        

&ldquo;I understand that it will cause inconvenience to the public, and the poultry trade will also encounter losses,&rdquo; Dr. Chow said. &ldquo;However, to safeguard public health, we need to adopt decisive and effective measures to prevent and control the spread of the virus.&rdquo;        

Hong Kong experienced the world&rsquo;s first major outbreak of avian flu among humans in 1997, when six people died, and the government responded by slaughtering all chickens, ducks and geese across the territory, a total of 1.4 million birds. That outbreak was linked to chickens and classified as H5N1.        

The H5N1 virus passes easily among birds and becomes more active during cooler periods of the year, said K.Y. Yuen, chairman of the microbiology department at the University of Hong Kong. Between 10 and 20 dead wild birds are found across Hong Kong each year containing the H5N1 virus. They typically are migrating across the territory, Mr. Yuen said.        

Noting Hong Kong&rsquo;s previous experiences battling H5N1 and the SARS crisis in 2003 that killed 299 residents, Mr. Yuen said the territory has among the most stringent inspection standards at its poultry markets. All live birds that are not sold at markets must be slaughtered, he said.        

&ldquo;We have to be very cautious,&rdquo; he said, noting that the H5N1 virus has a mortality rate approaching 60 percent in humans. &ldquo;But there is no need for panic.&rdquo;        

The last large poultry culling in Hong Kong took place in 2008. Hong Kong&rsquo;s last recorded case of bird flu in humans was in November of last year, when a 59-year-old woman who traveled to mainland China was hospitalized with H5N1 after returning to the territory.        

The H5N1 virus has been widespread in poultry populations across Asia since 2003, leading to the slaughter of tens of millions of birds.        

The World Health Organization says 573 people have been infected worldwide with H5N1 since 2003, resulting in 336 deaths.        
Tim Lambourne contributed research.
