
BAGHDAD &mdash; Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq threatened on Wednesday to abandon an American-backed power-sharing government created a year ago, throwing a fragile democracy into further turmoil just after the departure of American troops and potentially tarnishing what has been cast as a major foreign policy achievement for President Obama.        

In a nearly 90-minute news conference broadcast on tape-delay, Mr. Maliki defied his rivals and pushed back on all fronts in Iraq&rsquo;s deepening political crisis, threatening to release investigatory files that he claimed implicated his opponents in terrorism.        

He also threatened the Kurds, valuable allies with close ties to the Americans, warning that there would be &ldquo;problems&rdquo; if they protected Vice President Tariq al-Hashimi, who fled to the semiautonomous Kurdish region in recent days to escape an arrest warrant on charges that he ran a death squad responsible for assassinations and bombings.        

The escalating political crisis underscores the divisions among Iraq&rsquo;s three main factions &mdash; Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds &mdash; that were largely papered over while the American military maintained a presence here. The crisis also lays bare the myriad problems left behind with the final departure of American troops: sectarianism, a judiciary that the populace views as beholden to one man and a political culture with no space for compromise.        

And it highlights the waning American influence on events here, after a war that lasted nearly nine years. For Mr. Obama, the political dysfunction represents an embarrassing turn of events, coming so soon after the troops left. This month, he met with Mr. Maliki in Washington and praised Iraq&rsquo;s internal affairs, calling the country &ldquo;sovereign, self-reliant and democratic.&rdquo;        

The crisis has also come at an inopportune time: Many on the extensive American Embassy staff here have gone home for the holidays. Ambassador James F. Jeffrey, who left the country after a ceremony last week to mark the end of the war, cut short his trip to rush back to Baghdad, and was meeting with senior Iraqi leaders, as was David H. Petraeus, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency and former military commander in Iraq, who arrived on Tuesday, an American official said.        

If the crisis continues to intensify, the Obama administration is likely to draw new criticism for failing to negotiate an extension of the American troop presence in Iraq. While an agreement negotiated by the administration of President George W. Bush called for a final departure at the end of 2011, both countries spent the summer trying to negotiate an extension &mdash; something that military leaders and many analysts argued was needed to secure Iraq&rsquo;s fragile democracy and protect the gains achieved in a war that cost nearly 4,500 American lives and close to $1 trillion.        

&ldquo;This is an absolutely critical moment,&rdquo; said Kenneth M. Pollack of the Saban Center for Middle East Policy at the Brookings Institution and an advocate for a continuing American troop presence. &ldquo;It is critical for the White House&rsquo;s Iraq policy. The underlying theme of their Iraq policy is that Iraq is a success and it is relatively stable and it does not need American troops to continue the move forward. This crisis is a clear and unmistakable challenge to both of those premises.&rdquo;        

In the coming days, America&rsquo;s ability to shape outcomes in Iraq, already flagging in the period leading up to the troop withdrawal, will be sharply tested. The largest American Embassy in the world is here. The United States is spending nearly $1 billion a year to train Iraq&rsquo;s police, and is spending billions more arming Iraq&rsquo;s military with tanks, fighter jets and other weapons.        

Even with all combat troops departed, 157 military personnel remain in the country, overseeing military sales to Iraq that amount to $10 billion in weapons contracts, $3 billion of which is paid by the United States.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m a glass-half-full guy, so I&rsquo;m not looking at the doomsday possibility,&rdquo; said Lt. Gen. Robert L. Caslen, who heads the embassy&rsquo;s Office of Security Cooperation. He added that &ldquo;there is more common sense in the government and more ability of our international community to help coach the Iraqis to make wise decisions on how they govern.&rdquo;        

Yet the huge weapons sales and enormous diplomatic mission still may not carry much weight when it comes to the hard task of reconciling Iraq&rsquo;s divisive sectarian politics.        

&ldquo;Trying to include all the major elements in one government was always a prescription for paralysis, or at least food fights,&rdquo; Christopher R. Hill, the ambassador here last year, said by telephone.        

He added, &ldquo;This Shia-Sunni divide is big and it&rsquo;s never gone away and it&rsquo;s going to take generations to go away. There&rsquo;s a lot of hostility there. It&rsquo;s up to us to try to be helpful to try to get Maliki to try to do the right thing.&rdquo;        
Reporting was contributed by Jack Healy, Michael S. Schmidt, Yasir Ghazi and Omar al-Jawoshy.
