
PARIS &mdash; An ethnic Serb accused of being the shadowy smuggler behind recent border clashes in northern Kosovo was arrested in central Serbia late Tuesday, a day after Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany warned Serbia that it must reach a peace agreement with Kosovo to join the European Union.        

Serbia failed to win official European Union candidate status at the European summit meeting this month largely because of German opposition.        

The suspect, Zvonko Veselinovic, was charged with arms smuggling. A powerful figure in Mitrovica, a Serbian enclave in Kosovo, Mr. Veselinovic portrayed himself as a businessman and a Serb patriot. But Western diplomats and customs authorities said he was an oil smuggler who was threatened by customs controls imposed by Kosovo, and that he was a central organizer in erecting barricades in Mitrovica that became the front lines of struggle between ethnic Serbs and ethnic Albanians over the summer and into the fall.        

On the surface, it appeared that the blockades grew out of tensions between the factions. But the authorities said Mr. Veselinovic had forged ties with less powerful oil smugglers on the Albanian side. Most recently, Serbian news reports said that Mr. Veselinovic was on the payroll of a Kosovar postal and telecommunications company, PTK, with a contract to install antennas in the north. Last year, handmade bombs exploded at antennas in northern Kosovo belonging to a corporate rival, IPKO, attacks that have never been resolved.        

Eulex, the European Union peacekeeping mission in Kosovo, issued a warrant for Mr. Veselinovic&rsquo;s arrest on smuggling and tax evasion charges this year. But international forces had been reluctant to confront Mr. Veselinovic for fear of inciting further violence in the Serb enclave.        

The German authorities had steadily increased the pressure to arrest him. Last week, Maj. Gen. Erhard Drews, a German who is the commander of NATO&rsquo;s peacekeeping efforts in Kosovo, said international forces had videos of Mr. Veselinovic and his brother, Zarko, directing clashes with armed troops who were trying to dismantle the Mitrovica barricades.        

General Drews also said that Mr. Veselinovic had been wounded in the neck by a rubber bullet during a clash that hurt about 30 peacekeepers.        

On Monday, Mrs. Merkel made a direct reference to the standoff at the barricades during a visit to the Kosovar capital, Pristina, where she met briefly with Prime Minister Hashim Thaci. &ldquo;We made it clear in direct talks with Serbia what we want: The need to come to a regulation of the traffic of goods, which is currently not possible because of the barricades,&rdquo; she said.        

Mr. Veselinovic and his brother were apprehended the next day on Mount Kopaonik in Serbia by Serbian intelligence agents.        
