
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Syrian rights activists and opposition groups said on Wednesday that forces loyal to President Bashar al-Assad had killed at least 160 defecting soldiers, civilians and antigovernment activists over the last three days in northwestern Syria. If confirmed, the killings would constitute one of the worst spasms of violence in the nine-month-old uprising.        

The killings, which the activists and opposition groups said had taken place near the city of Idlib in the Turkish border region, were reported a day before observers from the Arab League are to visit Syria for the first time to monitor pledges by Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government to withdraw its troops from besieged areas.        

Some activists said Mr. Assad&rsquo;s forces had intensified a campaign of deadly violence and intimidation partly because the impending arrival of the monitors may prevent such action in coming days. &ldquo;I fear the security forces may be trying to crush this thing before the monitors get in,&rdquo; said Murhaf Jouejati, a member of the Syrian National Council, an opposition group.        

The Syrian government, which has sought to characterize the anti-Assad uprising as a Western-backed insurrection by terrorist gangs and thugs, did not comment on the reports of the killings. But the official Syrian Arab News Agency said on its Web site that the Syrian authorities in the cities of Idlib, Homs and Dara&rsquo;a had &ldquo;stormed dens of armed terrorist groups, arresting tens of wanted men who committed crimes of killing&rdquo; and who &ldquo;attacked and sabotaged private and public properties.&rdquo;        

The agency said that &ldquo;a number of the terrorists have been killed and others wounded&rdquo; and that &ldquo;big quantities of weapons, ammunitions, explosives and night goggles in addition to modern communication sets have been seized.&rdquo;        

The conflicting accounts were impossible to corroborate because of restrictions on press access in Syria, where, according to a United Nations estimate, more than 5,000 people have been killed since March. It was also difficult to determine whether any of the deaths were the result of clashes between armed members of the opposition and the security forces. But in a statement, the secretary general of the Arab League, Nabil al-Araby, suggested that the reports by the antigovernment activists were credible, expressing concern about them and urging the Syrian government to &ldquo;protect civilians.&rdquo;        

The Obama administration, which has become increasingly critical of Mr. Assad and has urged him to leave power, also gave credence to the new opposition reports of killings. In a statement, the White House said it was &ldquo;deeply disturbed&rdquo; by the reports. &ldquo;While Syrian security forces have also taken casualties, the overwhelming majority of the violence and loss of life in Syria stems from the actions of the Assad regime, and we call on all parties to put an end to violence,&rdquo; the statement said.        

Activists said the Syrian military, using helicopters, tanks and artillery, continued the assaults on Wednesday.        

The 22-member Arab League, long seen as an almost perfunctory body, surprised the Syrian government more than three weeks ago by condemning Mr. Assad&rsquo;s repression of the political opposition movement and threatening harsh economic sanctions. Since then, Mr. Assad has stalled for time and agreed only a few days ago to allow Arab League monitors to visit.        

Some of his opponents have voiced strong doubts about the observer mission, saying the government would find ways to keep monitors from sites of violence.        

In a development possibly related to the visit, Iran&rsquo;s official news media reported Wednesday that five Iranian engineers working on a power project in central Syria had been kidnapped by &ldquo;unknown armed men,&rdquo; presumably opponents of Mr. Assad. Iran is one of the few remaining allies of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government.        

Meanwhile, the sharpening sectarian divisions in Syria have played out in a series of deadly revenge attacks. In a sign of the divided loyalties, thousands of government supporters demonstrated on Wednesday in Damascus, the capital, where a statue honoring Syrian soldiers was unveiled. The demonstrators waved the flags of Lebanon, Russia and Iran.        

Many said they were Alawites, members of a heterodox Muslim sect who fill the top ranks of the government. Tensions between the Alawite minority and the Sunni majority have flared in cities like Homs, where random killings have contributed to fears of a civil war.        

An Alawite demonstrator who would give only his first name, Haidar, said that his father was a Syrian Army officer and that the country was in the midst of a battle for its existence. &ldquo;All Syrian nationalists should stand with the president,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There is no time for political talks when enemies are attacking us with all their dirty means.&rdquo;        

The reports of the killings near Idlib, coming from antigovernment activists, opposition groups overseas and human rights groups, were based on telephone contacts with networks of informants inside Syria. Some were reached on satellite phones or Turkish cellphones.        

The killings were said to have started on Monday, when government troops reportedly shot 60 to 70 soldiers who were trying to defect outside a military base in the Jebel Zawiyah area. On Tuesday, more than a hundred people were killed near the village of Kafr Oweid, an antigovernment activist in Idlib said.        

Rights activists said they had collected the names of at least 56 people killed in the violence. They included an imam, Ahmed al-Dhaher, whose severed head was said to have been hung in the entrance to his mosque, according to Mr. Jouejati of the Syrian National Council, who said he had spoken to witnesses by satellite phone. Scores of people were detained, and hundreds of families were hiding in the mountains, activists said.        

On Wednesday, an unspecified number of civilians were killed or wounded in the village of Khan Sheikhoun, said an antigovernment activist in Idlib who gave his name as Abu Omar. &ldquo;The army should kill all of us to stop the anti-Assad uprising,&rdquo; he said.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria, and Rick Gladstone from New York.
