
NEW DELHI &mdash; India&rsquo;s government introduced long-awaited legislation on Thursday to create an independent, anticorruption agency, provoking a loud outcry from opposition parties and some civil society activists who attacked the measure from all directions.        

India&rsquo;s national government, led by the Congress Party, has spent the past year mired in ugly corruption scandals or stumbling from self-inflicted political miscues. The pressure for creating the anticorruption agency, known as a Lokpal, was driven by nationwide protests this summer led by the campaigner Anna Hazare.        

A political showdown now looms over the Lokpal issue, possibly determining whether the Congress Party can reverse its sagging political fortunes midway through the government&rsquo;s five-year term. Critical elections scheduled for early next year in five states will be closely watched as a barometer of the public mood.        

&ldquo;Legislation cannot be made on the street or through agitation,&rdquo; said Pranab Mukherjee, the government&rsquo;s powerful finance minister, as he introduced the bill in the lower house of Parliament. He argued that the government bill reflected the &ldquo;sense of the House.&rdquo;        

But the shape of the Lokpal legislation has been contested and negotiated for months. Even before Thursday, Mr. Hazare had made it clear that he considered the government&rsquo;s bill to have been watered down too much. In particular, Mr. Hazare was upset that the Central Bureau of Investigation, which investigates corruption cases, was not placed under the direction of the Lokpal but remained under the control of Parliament.        

&ldquo;This bill will not end corruption,&rdquo; Mr. Hazare said during a televised appearance. &ldquo;This bill is very weak.&rdquo;        

This summer, after staging a 12-day hunger strike that drew huge crowds, Mr. Hazare forced the government to agree to place bureaucrats under an anticorruption agency, to create a citizen&rsquo;s charter to expedite public corruption grievances and to establish state-level anticorruption agencies. The public campaign effectively forced the government to put the Lokpal issue at the top of its legislative agenda.        

But Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s dissatisfaction with the final result of the legislation is expected to lead to more demonstrations in coming days. He has vowed to organize protests, beginning on Dec. 27, and has threatened a civil disobedience campaign in which his supporters would voluntarily go to jail.        

Often, government leaders have bent to many of Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s demands, but the Congress Party&rsquo;s president, Sonia Gandhi, appeared to draw a line in the sand on Wednesday. Trying to rally the party&rsquo;s members of Parliament, Mrs. Gandhi said the Congress Party would fight for passage of the government&rsquo;s Lokpal and not be dissuaded by critics or opposition leaders.        

Government leaders have extended the winter session until Dec. 29, so that lawmakers can debate the Lokpal bill next week.        

On Thursday, opposition leaders were quick to attack the bill.        

&ldquo;This bill is very disappointing,&rdquo; said Sushma Swaraj, leader of the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party in the lower house.        

Actually, under the government bill, several demands made by Mr. Hazare are included. For example, government leaders initially sought to exclude the office of the prime minister from the purview of the Lokpal; under the bill, the prime minister is included, with some caveats. The bill also states that members of the lower bureaucracy fall under the Lokpal&rsquo;s jurisdiction.        

Besides the contested status of the Central Bureau of Investigation, another point of dispute is the selection process for choosing the members of the Lokpal itself. The government bill says the selection committee will be appointed by the prime minister; the speaker of the lower house, the Lok Sabha; the leader of the opposition in the Lok Sabha; a member of the Indian Supreme Court and another &ldquo;eminent jurist.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hazare has objected, saying politicians would have too much sway over the selections.        

But some lawmakers were concerned that the Lokpal could be so powerful as to threaten the checks and balances of the country&rsquo;s democratic institutions &mdash; and the primacy of Parliament.        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
