
CAIRO &mdash; The prime minister named by Egypt&rsquo;s military rulers complained in a news conference on Thursday that other civilian political leaders had shunned him as though he were the agent of a foreign &ldquo;occupation.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Some of the senior colleagues in politics whom I completely respect, it has come to the point that when they ask to sit with the prime minister of Egypt, they ask to do it outside of the official building as if they&rsquo;re meeting the high commissioner of the occupation,&rdquo; Prime Minister Kamal el-Ganzouri said in a news conference, pleading for peace in the streets in order to stanch the economic damage to the Egyptian economy.        

Mr. Ganzouri was responding to the nearly two months of protests against military rule that were interrupted by about three weeks of peace as Egyptians voted in the early rounds of the first parliamentary elections since the ouster of Hosni Mubarak. After the military laid out a plan to hold on to significant power long after the election of a new Parliament, a new protest movement modeled on the one that brought down Mr. Mubarak has sprung up around Tahrir Square to demand a swift handover of power. And the Egyptian political elite &mdash; liberal and Islamist &mdash; has lined up squarely behind the protesters&rsquo; demands.        

The military, however, has responded with a brutal crackdown, reinforcing fears that they aim to keep power. Over the last week, the military police and security forces have beaten or wounded hundreds of demonstrators, humiliated women by ripping off their clothes, attacked doctors in field clinics, and killed at least 17 people. Most died of gunshot wounds. Their deaths follow the loss of at least 42 lives last month in prolonged street fighting with protesters.        

Mr. Ganzouri&rsquo;s news conference appeared to be part of an escalating propaganda war over the violence. Some activists believe that the public has grown increasingly impatient with them, in part because many Egyptians remain unaware of the scale of the crackdown and in part because they long for stability. Mr. Ganzouri said he regretted any loss of life, but he placed blame for the clashes exclusively on the protesters, who he said had danced as they set a historic archive on fire.        

He warned that over the past few months, $9 billion in investments had been withdrawn from Egypt&rsquo;s teetering economy. And he complained that foreign donors &mdash; including the Group of 8 industrialized nations &mdash; had failed to deliver on pledges of billions of dollars in financial aid to support Egypt&rsquo;s revolution.        

&ldquo;We are seeking to end violence and remove dull barriers so that the cycle of economy would move again and all tourists would feel safe for their lives,&rdquo; he said.        

Egypt&rsquo;s military rulers, meanwhile, issued a statement late Wednesday night warning without details that it had intelligence about &ldquo;the continuation of the plot aiming at thwarting and toppling the state through escalating protests and targeting vital facilities.&rdquo; Part of the plot, it said, was &ldquo;keeping the situation as it is in Tahrir Square for the longest possible time and escalating the events to implicate the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces every time it interferes.&rdquo; It urged &ldquo;honorable Egyptians&rdquo; to cooperate in thwarting the plots.        

From the other side, a coalition of activists and human rights groups began carrying out a campaign, dubbed &ldquo;Liars,&rdquo; to counter the military&rsquo;s characterizations. Concerned that many Egyptians get their news primarily from state-financed media organizations that have blamed the protesters while exonerating the military of any violence, the groups have begun setting up screens in the streets of Cairo and other cities to show images of military police beating and shooting protesters and throwing rocks and gasoline bombs.        

The images also include the military police beating and stripping a woman in a Muslim headscarf to reveal her blue bra, then kicking her.        

That image has circulated around the world in recent days and inspired a march by thousands of angry women in Cairo on Tuesday night.        
Mayy el-Sheikh contributed reporting.
