
WASHINGTON &mdash; As Iraqi and American officials struggled to contain the political crisis in Iraq, Iraq&rsquo;s Sunni vice president said on Thursday that the prospects for creating a genuine power-sharing arrangement with Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki were so dim that Iraqi political factions should search for another Shiite politician to serve as prime minister.        

&ldquo;After what happened, I think it will be very, very difficult &mdash; it might be impossible, in fact &mdash; to think about any sort of reconciliation,&rdquo; the vice president, Tariq al-Hashimi, said in a telephone interview from Sulaimaniya, in the Kurdish region of Iraq.        

Mr. Hashimi said that the National Alliance, the main Shiite parliamentary bloc, should have the right to nominate a prime minister to succeed Mr. Maliki, a Shiite, and said he would defer to their recommendation. &ldquo;Anybody who could replace al-Maliki would be welcomed,&rdquo; he said.        

On Monday, a day after the United States withdrew its last combat troops, Iraq&rsquo;s Shiite-dominated government ordered Mr. Hashimi&rsquo;s arrest, accusing him of running a death squad that assassinated police officers and government officials. Mr. Hashimi has angrily denied the accusations, and, like many people in the nation&rsquo;s Sunni minority, he has denounced the charges as an attempt by Mr. Maliki to silence his critics.        

Mr. Hashimi&rsquo;s remarks were the latest move in an escalating political contest, which has become a serious test for President Obama&rsquo;s assertion that American troops were leaving behind an Iraq that was stable and self-reliant.        

The political crisis, which has elevated a broad debate over whether Mr. Maliki has become autocratic, began when several of Mr. Hashimi&rsquo;s security guards were detained and accused of involvement in bombings and other terrorist attacks. Videotaped confessions were then broadcast on Iraqi television, followed by the issuing of a warrant for Mr. Hashimi&rsquo;s arrest. By then, he was in Kurdistan.        

In a nearly 40-minute interview, Mr. Hashimi said that he had not talked with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., who is overseeing the administration&rsquo;s relations with the Iraqi government. Ambassador James F. Jeffrey had called him, said Mr. Hashimi, who added that he had &ldquo;no clue&rdquo; about the results of recent talks between American officials and Mr. Maliki.        

Mr. Hashimi said that the Obama administration needed to take care in supplying arms and training to Iraq&rsquo;s security forces that its efforts do not inadvertently enhance Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s ability to suppress his opponents.        

There have been repeated reports that the prime minister has placed political loyalists in the intelligence services and the military. Mr. Hashimi said that the United States needed to help ensure that Iraq&rsquo;s officer corps was professional and not seeded with sectarian partisans.        

&ldquo;It will be risky, in fact, to sell high quality and technology armaments because at the end of the day, these armaments will be used as Saddam Hussein has used high-technology weaponry,&rdquo; he said.        

&ldquo;We have to ensure that our army is professional, patriotic and nonsectarian,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;When we are sure about that definitely we should go ahead with supplying weaponry and supplying advanced training programs.&rdquo;        

Discussing the accusations against him, Mr. Hashimi said that Mr. Maliki presented a folder three years ago to Jalal Talabani, the Iraqi president, with much of the supposed evidence against him. He said it had been deemed to include &ldquo;stories without any physical evidence.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Why now?&rdquo; he said, referring to the arrest warrant. &ldquo;Because the Americans are leaving the country and he is trying in fact to get rid of his political rivals. Simple as that.&rdquo;        

Obama administration officials have been trying for a long time to encourage Mr. Maliki to preside over an inclusive government that gives adequate representation and authority to Sunnis and Kurds. But the administration was also unable to foster an arrangement in which Mr. Maliki shared power for military and security policy with Ayad Allawi, the leader of the Iraqiya Party, a largely Sunni bloc of lawmakers that includes Mr. Hashimi.        

According to Mr. Hashimi, a &ldquo;serious and tangible remedy&rdquo; would be to replace Mr. Maliki. The potential successors he mentioned included Ibrahim Jaafari, Iraq&rsquo;s prime minister in 2005 and 2006. He left the post under pressure from Bush administration officials who viewed him as a poor manager and too sectarian.        

Mr. Hashimi also mentioned Adel Abdul Mahdi, a former vice president, as a possible successor. Mr. Abdul Mahdi has long been a favorite of some American officials, but he is generally thought to be too independent to garner much support from the Iranians, who have influence over the Shiite coalition. Mr. Hashimi also cited Ahmad Chalabi, who encouraged the United States to oust Mr. Hussein; Mr. Chalabi is close to Iran and regarded with deep suspicion by American officials.        

&ldquo;We will live with any other nominees,&rdquo; Mr. Hashimi said.        
