
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani lashed out against his country&rsquo;s powerful military on Thursday, warning of conspiracies against the civilian government. His accusations threw a spotlight on swirling rumors that the military might have plotted a coup after being humiliated by the American raid that killed Osama bin Laden.        

Mr. Gilani, usually a soft-spoken politician, complained Thursday that &ldquo;conspiracies are being hatched to pack up the elected government.&rdquo; Later, speaking on the floor of the National Assembly, he said that his government had supported the Pakistani military during several crises, including the Bin Laden case, but that the same generals had turned against the civilian government.        

&ldquo;They cannot be a state within a state,&rdquo; Mr. Gilani said. &ldquo;They are answerable to the Parliament.&rdquo;        

The rumors of a coup plot have been building for months, since an American businessman of Pakistani origin wrote an op-ed article for The Financial Times saying that a Pakistani diplomat asked him to deliver a memo to Adm. Mike Mullen, who was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the time, after Bin Laden was killed. He described the memo as saying that the civilian government sought help in preventing a possible coup, offering in exchange to dismantle part of the Inter-Services Intelligence spy agency.        

Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, the Pakistani Army chief, and Lt. Gen. Ahmad Shuja Pasha, the ISI chief, have insisted that the Supreme Court investigate the memo.        

The furor grew last week when the British newspaper The Independent published a blog post with more hints. The post quotes the same businessman, Mansoor Ijaz, as saying that American intelligence sources told him General Pasha traveled to the Persian Gulf after the Bin Laden raid to muster support for a coup in Pakistan. The ensuing media and political storm raised calls for General Pasha&rsquo;s resignation. Husain Haqqani, the former envoy to the United States who was accused of being behind the memo to Admiral Mullen, was forced to step down. Mr. Haqqani denies involvement, and denies accusations that he gave visas to hundreds of American spies.        

Mr. Gilani referred obliquely to those accusations on Thursday, saying he wanted to know what kind of visa Bin Laden had that allowed him to live in Pakistan for six years.        

&ldquo;We want to ask how he entered Pakistan,&rdquo; Mr. Gilani said, in a jab clearly aimed at General Pasha. &ldquo;Why was the security not taken care of?&rdquo;        

A petition seeking General Pasha&rsquo;s removal was filed this week with the Supreme Court, which is also weighing whether to open an investigation into the memo.        
