
ISTANBUL &mdash; Turkey halted diplomatic consultations and military dealings in a major rupture with France on Thursday after the lower house of the French Parliament approved legislation making it a crime to deny that the Turkish Army committed genocide against Armenians in the early 20th century.        

&ldquo;It is impossible for us to remain silent in face of this extremely intentional decision taken on false motives,&rdquo; Turkey&rsquo;s prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, said in a televised statement. &ldquo;We halt all kinds of political dialogue with France, cancel bilateral military functions and joint exercises as of now.&rdquo;        

The French bill requires a fine of 45,000 euros, or about $58,700, and a year in jail for &ldquo;those who have praised, denied or roughly and publicly downplayed genocidal crimes, crimes against humanity and war crimes.&rdquo; It is not expected to be considered by the upper house until after the new year.        

That Mr. Erdogan took such pronounced steps before the bill had become law underscores the obstacles facing Turkey&rsquo;s reach for a new international profile and its long-frustrated efforts to join the European Union.        

More than 15 countries have officially recognized the slaughter of about 1.5 million Armenians in the chaos surrounding World War I and the disintegration of the Ottoman Empire as genocide, and its denial is already a crime in Switzerland and Slovenia.        

Turkey acknowledges atrocities without any specific death toll, but says that they did not constitute systematic genocide. It argues that such a declaration should be a matter before an international committee of historians with access to state archives.        

Turkey&rsquo;s own penal code makes affirming the genocide a crime on the grounds that it is an insult to Turkish identity. In March, Orhan Pamuk, a Nobel Prize winner, was fined 7,000 lira, about $3,700, for his statement in a Swiss newspaper that &ldquo;we have killed 30,000 Kurds and 1 million Armenians.&rdquo;        

France&rsquo;s moves to outlaw denial of the Armenian genocide carry special weight, given the leading role Paris has played for the last six years in assessing Turkey&rsquo;s readiness to join the European Union.        

Television stations here followed the vote in live broadcasts from Paris, showing parliamentary debates in a barely filled hall and people protesting outside, waving Turkish flags behind security barriers. Another group of protesters gathered in front of the French Embassy in Ankara to lay a black wreath and chant slogans against France, according to NTV, a private television network.        

Turkish lawmakers joined to denounce the bill and called on France to investigate its own atrocities in Algeria and Rwanda. Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said the bill violated the spirit of the French Revolution and European principles like freedom of speech.        

Mr. Erdogan said he had recalled Turkey&rsquo;s ambassador and canceled the annually issued permission for French military planes to use Turkish airspace and French naval vessels to enter Turkish harbors. The move means that French military planes will need to apply for permission for each flight. Turkey also refused to cooperate with France in joint European Union projects or participate in a joint economic summit meeting scheduled to take place in Paris in January.        

Bernard Valero, the spokesman for the French Foreign Ministry, said that France &ldquo;deplored all the announcements&rdquo; made by Mr. Erdogan and regretted the recall of the Turkish ambassador from Paris, and he stressed the need for cooperation on a range of issues, including the unrest in Syria, the future of Afghanistan and Iran&rsquo;s nuclear aspirations.        

&ldquo;We need to handle this current period in a responsible, peaceful and level-headed way,&rdquo; Mr. Valero said. &ldquo;We will push for dialogue, not threat.&rdquo;        

Relations between Turkey and France began taking a turn for the worse after President Nicolas Sarkozy took office in 2007, and Turkish officials see political motives in his increasingly nationalist stance against Turkish accession to the European Union and his support for the genocide denial law, despite the fact that Mr. Sarkozy&rsquo;s opposition to full membership for Turkey is shared across the French political spectrum.        

&ldquo;These irrational steps by Sarkozy based on vote calculations will harm French-Turkish relations,&rdquo; Mr. Erdogan said.        
