
WASHINGTON &mdash; A United States military investigation has concluded that checks and balances devised to prevent cross-border mishaps with Pakistan failed to avert a deadly NATO airstrike last month in part because American officials did not trust Pakistan enough to give it detailed information about American troop locations in Afghanistan.        

A report by the inquiry concluded that mistakes by both American and Pakistani troops led to airstrikes against two Pakistani posts on the Afghan border that killed 26 Pakistani troops. But two crucial findings &mdash; that the Pakistanis fired first at a joint Afghan-American patrol and that they kept firing even after the Americans tried to warn them that they were shooting at allied troops &mdash; were likely to further anger Pakistan and plunge the already tattered relationship between the United States and Pakistan to new depths.        

In a statement and at a news conference here on Thursday, the Defense Department said that &ldquo;inadequate coordination by U.S. and Pakistani military officers&rdquo; and &ldquo;incorrect mapping information&rdquo; that NATO had provided to the Pakistani authorities capped a chain of errors that caused the debacle.        

&ldquo;This, coupled with other gaps in information about the activities and placement of units from both sides contributed to the tragic results,&rdquo; George Little, a Pentagon spokesman, told reporters.        

The episode, the worst in nearly a decade riddled with fatal cross-border blunders, underscored gaping flaws in a system established in recent years to avoid such mistakes. American officials acknowledged that the policy of not divulging to Pakistan the precise location of allied ground troops in Afghanistan &mdash; for fear Pakistan might jeopardize their operations &mdash; contributed to the accident and underscored what the chief investigator called an &ldquo;overarching lack of trust between the two sides.&rdquo;        

On Nov. 25, the same day the episode began, Gen. John Allen, the allied commander in Afghanistan, met in Islamabad with Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, the Pakistani Army chief, to try to improve border coordination procedures.        

Pakistan has insisted that its forces did nothing wrong, and that they did not fire the first shots. Rather, senior Pakistani military and civilian officials have accused the United States of intentionally striking the border posts, even after Pakistani officers called their counterparts to complain that their outposts were under allied attack.        

Maj. Gen. Athar Abbas, the Pakistani military spokesman, said in a text message on Thursday: &ldquo;The Pak Army does not agree with the findings of the US NATO inquiry as being reported in the media.&rdquo;        

In an important detail that was not disclosed at the Pentagon briefing but is likely to further aggravate relations with Islamabad, an American officer in Afghanistan said the joint patrol of 120 Afghan and American Special Operations soldiers, operating along the often poorly demarcated frontier between Afghanistan and Pakistan, had come under Pakistani fire as it was entering an Afghan village, endangering civilians as well as the soldiers. The American officer said he believed that the Pakistanis had used night-vision technology because their shooting was unusually accurate, even though there were no casualties.        

The Defense Department statement included an expression of regret, though it did not appear to go as far as the apology that Pakistani officials have demanded. &ldquo;For the loss of life, and for the lack of proper coordination between U.S. and Pakistani forces that contributed to those losses, we express our deepest regret,&rdquo; it said.        

A Pentagon spokesman, Capt. John Kirby, said the United States was prepared to make bereavement payments to families of the Pakistani soldiers who were killed. But a senior Pakistan security official in Islamabad said last week that Pakistan would refuse any &ldquo;blood money.&rdquo;        

Pentagon officials said Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Gen. James N. Mattis, head of the military&rsquo;s Central Command, called General Kayani on Wednesday to tell him that the inquiry was complete and to offer a briefing. It was unclear when that briefing would happen, American officials said.        

In a telephone briefing with reporters here, Brig. Gen. Stephen A. Clark of the Air Force, who conducted the inquiry, said that both sides made mistakes.        
Eric Schmitt reported from Washington, and Matthew Rosenberg from Kabul, Afghanistan. Salman Masood contributed reporting from Islamabad, Pakistan.
