
WUKAN, China &mdash; As journalists and bloggers began trickling into Wukan last week, residents decided to put to use a two-story house, once the home of a family that left for Hong Kong some time ago. They turned it into the de facto press center of this fishing village of 13,000.        

The outsiders had come to see how furious residents had transformed their village on China&rsquo;s southeast coast into a temporarily autonomous zone. Their anger focused on two issues: what they called illegal land sales by village officials, and the death on Dec. 11 of a village advocate while he was in police custody. The villagers chased out Communist Party officials, repelled an assault by police officers and barricaded all roads leading into Wukan with tree trunks. The two police stations in the village stood empty. So did the headquarters of the Communist Party committee.        

But the press center was a jumble of warm bodies and laptops and tangled wires, sprinkled with empty cans of Red Bull.        

On one wall of the living room was a portrait of God staring down from the heavens. Below that was a small wooden cross with a figure of Jesus. And below that, taped to the wall, was a white sheet of paper with a statement in Chinese and English. It beseeched reporters not to call the protest an &ldquo;uprising.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We are not a revolt,&rdquo; it said. &ldquo;We support the Communist Party. We love our country.&rdquo;        

Revolt or not, the protest over land sales here, which began months ago, was sustained in its final and most perilous phase by the villagers&rsquo; canny interactions with journalists from foreign and Hong Kong news organizations. Mainland Chinese news media were barred from reporting on Wukan, but dozens of reporters for foreign publications arrived here last week after being alerted to the protest by an article in the British newspaper, The Daily Telegraph. They slipped through a police cordon by traveling on motor rickshaws along winding dirt roads and, in one case, by hiring a boat to reach the harbor.        

The villagers threw open their doors. They now had the means to wage a propaganda war.        

The presence of international journalists may have kept the local authorities from sending in security forces after an initial assault failed. And the pressure of continuous news reports from Wukan no doubt helped spur the leader and party secretary of Guangdong Province, Wang Yang, to send senior officials here on Wednesday to negotiate with the protesters. After the meeting, village leaders said that they had obtained some concessions and they called a halt to the protest, even though the dispute over the land sales remained unresolved. They held additional talks with provincial officials on Thursday.        

In many other parts of China, villagers do not have the same firm grasp of the nuances of the news media. But Guangdong is China&rsquo;s wealthiest and most liberal province, and it has publications that are relatively freewheeling. More important, Cantonese speakers here gravitate to the uncensored news reports and cultural products of Hong Kong, on the province&rsquo;s southern edge.        

&ldquo;People in Guangdong are close to Hong Kong,&rdquo; Yuan Weishi, a historian, now retired, who taught at Sun Yat-sen University in Guangzhou, the provincial capital, said in a telephone interview. &ldquo;They watch Hong Kong TV, rarely China Central Television, and so have a better understanding of civil society and the rule of law.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Have you noticed how many Hong Kong reporters are in Wukan?&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;Being exposed to the Hong Kong media in their daily lives gives Guangdong people a better understanding of how the media works and what they can do.&rdquo;        

Many people in villages and small towns in Guangdong also become more sophisticated when they spend time working in the province&rsquo;s cities, where they are exposed to new ideas and forms of expression.        

&ldquo;Most of the people who find work elsewhere do so in more developed areas,&rdquo; Yang Semao, 44, one of the two men leading the Wukan protests, said Wednesday after a speaking at a final rally in the village square. &ldquo;They become more concerned about political and economic development.&rdquo;        

Mr. Yang spent a year and a half working as a manager at a company in Shenzhen, a thriving special economic zone north of Hong Kong, before returning to Wukan about six months ago. He said he paid attention to the Hong Kong news media. The other protest leader, Lin Zuluan, 65, worked for years as a merchant in Dongguan, another booming city.        

&ldquo;I want to be able to express my opinions to officials,&rdquo; he said in an interview in his home, which is next door to the temporary press center. &ldquo;I have that right. We all have that right.&rdquo;        

During the course of last week, Hong Kong reporters arrived here in force. Apple Daily, a b&ecirc;te noire of the Communist Party, sent seven people. There was also a gaggle of Western journalists and their Chinese researchers.        

Wireless Internet service was available, and in a kitchen on the first floor two women diced vegetables, fried noodles and boiled rice. Meals were served on a communal table in the front courtyard. On Wednesday, after the protest ended, the women served a relatively lavish dinner of steamed fish, tomato-and-egg soup and stir-fried fatty pork. (Supplies became more scarce during the police cordon, and the food was not always so abundant &mdash; sometimes it was congee, a kind of rice porridge, for breakfast, lunch and dinner.)        

Residents with motorbikes shuttled reporters through Wukan&rsquo;s labyrinthine alleyways and temple squares. No one asked for payment. That was the case, too, when an American reporter tried to buy toothpaste from a shop.        

Many journalists began departing on Wednesday night. Hours earlier, villagers had taken down white protest banners hanging around the square. A few fishermen walked to the harbor to check on their wooden skiffs, which for days had been bobbing unused in the inlet off the South China Sea.        

There was relief that the blockade of the village was ending, but also fear among some residents. What would happen, they wondered, once all the outsiders decamped and the spotlight shifted away from Wukan?        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid they might come and take people away,&rdquo; said Huang Rongrui, 40, a construction worker. &ldquo;The local government always says one thing, but does another.&rdquo;        
Shi Da contributed research from Wukan, and Mia Li contributed research from Beijing.
