
MOSCOW &mdash; The Kremlin&rsquo;s chief political strategist sought to soothe the discontent of street protesters on Friday, a day before a rally expected to draw a large crowd, saying in an interview that the government had already acquiesced to many of the protesters&rsquo; demands.        

&ldquo;The system has already changed,&rdquo; the strategist, Vladislav Y. Surkov, a former advertising man who has shaped the Kremlin&rsquo;s public messages for years, said in the interview published in the newspaper Izvestia.        

His comments continued what appears to be a two-pronged effort to defuse street protests with concessions, while simultaneously attacking the protesters&rsquo; already splintered leadership with accusations of foreign backing.        

With 40,000 people indicating on a Facebook forum that they intend to join the Saturday protest in Moscow, Mr. Surkov made a point of bowing to some criticism. He said the Russian government had grown &ldquo;deaf and stupid before your eyes.&rdquo;        

But he also insisted that calls for change had been heeded, pointing to Thursday&rsquo;s state of the nation address by President Dmitri A. Medvedev. Mr. Medvedev, who leaves office in a few months, recommended long-sought political reforms, including the restoration of direct elections for governors and the creation of an independent public television station for news. But he has long labored in the shadow of Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin, and few political analysts think his words carry much weight at this juncture.        

&ldquo;Tectonic structures in society are shifting, the social fabric is taking on a new quality,&rdquo; Mr. Surkov said. &ldquo;We are already in the future. And the future is not calm. But there&rsquo;s no need to be afraid.        

&ldquo;Turbulence, even strong, is not a catastrophe but a form of stability. All will be fine.&rdquo;        

In what appeared to be another effort to siphon off interest in the rally on Saturday, where the former Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev is expected to speak, the leader of Russia&rsquo;s Orthodox Church, Patriarch Kirill I, warned Russians not to trust social networking sites, where much of the protest organizing has been taking place. He said the sites were susceptible to manipulation.        

He denounced &ldquo;the naive confidence of a modern person in the information available on social networks along with moral disorientation,&rdquo; the Interfax news agency reported, although he did not mention the protest.        

Mr. Surkov, who is an amateur novelist and who also writes lyrics for rock music, is an architect of the Russian government&rsquo;s plans to counter street politics, a system of countermeasures that have been in the works here since the 2004 Orange Revolution in Ukraine alerted the Kremlin to the potential dangers. To his critics, he is a man who long ago moved on from advertising to propaganda, with particular influence among the Russian elite.        

In September, the billionaire Mikhail D. Prokhorov, now a presidential candidate, called Mr. Surkov the &ldquo;puppet master&rdquo; of Russian politics, while denouncing what he called Mr. Surkov&rsquo;s efforts at dialogue as a sham.        

In the interview on Friday, Mr. Surkov vilified those protesters who he said represented foreign-inspired interests, repeating a formulation many officials in Moscow have used to dismiss the unrest. &ldquo;The point is not these scoundrels,&rdquo; Mr. Surkov said. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s the absolutely real and natural protests. The best part of our society, or rather, the most productive part, is demanding respect for itself.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;People are saying, &lsquo;We exist, we have significance, we are the people,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Surkov said.        

But in an earlier interview, he characterized the protesters as &ldquo;annoyed urbanites.&rdquo;        

Some protesters saw Mr. Surkov&rsquo;s about-face as an attempt to co-opt the protest movement.        

Nikolai Troitsky, a liberal commentator, told Kommersant FM radio that &ldquo;Surkov is very principled in living by the precept of divide and rule.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;He wants to separate the protesters into parts while they have no leaders,&rdquo; Mr. Troitsky added.        
