
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Two powerful car bombs exploded outside government security offices in Damascus on Friday in what appeared to be the most brazen and deadly attack against President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s government since the start of the uprising in Syria in March.        

Officials said that at least 44 people, most of them civilians, were killed in the attack outside the State Security Directorate and a regional military office. They said that an initial investigation pointed to a suicide bombing by Al Qaeda, while also linking the attack to the nine-month-old uprising in Syria.        

The government&rsquo;s assertion set off a new round of recriminations with opposition groups, all of which denied any role in the bombings. Protest groups speculated that Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government might have staged the attack, which occurred during a high-profile visit to Damascus, the capital, by an Arab League delegation. The visitors were escorted to the scene to view the damage.        

Syria&rsquo;s state news agency said that two suicide bombers had carried out the attack in bomb-laden vehicles, one of which was a GMC truck. The &ldquo;modus operandi&rdquo; and the selections of the targets &mdash; crowded with civilians, the government said &mdash; indicated that the operation &ldquo;had the fingerprints of Al Qaeda all over.&rdquo;        

A government official said the attack clearly revealed the ruthless campaign of killing and sabotage by those opposed to Mr. Assad. &ldquo;We said it from the beginning, this is terrorism,&rdquo; said Fayssal Mekdad, the deputy foreign minister, The Associated Press reported. &ldquo;They are killing the army and civilians.&rdquo;        

A spokesman for a leading antigovernment militia, the Free Syrian Army, said the group, made up of army defectors, was not involved in the bombings. Defectors have attacked the security forces in the past and the group has claimed responsibility for attacks on government buildings, like one last month, when its fighters fired rocket-propelled grenades at the offices of the ruling Baath Party.        

&ldquo;The Syrian Army protects the people and the peaceful protesters,&rdquo; said the spokesman, Ammar al-Wawi, a former army colonel. &ldquo;It does not use car bombs. It never did before and it never will.&rdquo;        

In a sign of Syria&rsquo;s widening divisions, Mr. Assad&rsquo;s opponents quickly accused the government of playing a part in the deadly attack on its own heavily guarded installations, though they offered no proof for that claim.        

&ldquo;Why now, and who benefits from these two blasts?&rdquo; asked Samer, a 25-year-old antigovernment activist who lives near the State Security Directorate, in the Kfar Sousa neighborhood.        

Residents said the bombings, which came one after the other around 10:15 a.m., were heard miles away and were followed by gunfire. Video broadcast on Syrian television showed rescue workers carrying mangled bodies on blankets, bloody debris and a large hole in one of the buildings. The state news agency posted photographs of severed limbs and burned cars. Officials said the victims included a child living in an orphanage nearby.        

The Syrian government has often been reluctant to show images of attacks on the country. The display on Friday served as a counterpoint to a video posted by an opposition group on Thursday, where a camera lingered over the bloodied bodies of dozens of men said to have been killed by the security forces.        

Hours after the attack, security officers were still gathering bodies outside the State Security Directorate. A guard post at the entrance was destroyed, and windows hundreds of feet away were shattered.        

A resident of the neighborhood, an engineer who gave his name as Abu Bashar, said the windows in his living room shook.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re not like Homs,&rdquo; he said, referring to a city in central Syria that has been racked by sectarian violence. &ldquo;This whole explosions thing is new to us.&rdquo;        

Before the uprising, the Syrian government had been warning about the growing threats from extremist groups. A crackdown on Islamists gained pace after 2008, when officials blamed a radical group for a car bombing in Damascus that killed 17 people.        

Paul Salem, an analyst at the Carnegie Middle East Center in Beirut, said any number of groups could be responsible for the latest attack. &ldquo;The Syrian regime is getting weaker, and wolves of various kinds are circling. With the attacks in Baghdad, some are speculating about a larger Sunni network taking aim at both countries,&rdquo; he said, referring to blasts in the Iraqi capital on Thursday that killed more than 68 people.        

Some opposition activists have expressed their own concerns about the movement, including the strong influence of the Muslim Brotherhood and the direction of the uprising, as peaceful protests have given way to an armed insurrection in some areas. The activists fear that attacks on the security forces will play into the government&rsquo;s justifications for its harsh repression.        

The government, in talking about the uprising, makes no distinction between defectors, Islamists and peaceful protesters.        

More than 200 people have been killed in Syria in the last week. Human rights groups estimate that the death toll in the uprising has reached between 4,000 and 6,000.        

The violence peaked this week as the Arab League delegation arrived in Syria, to lay the groundwork for hundreds of observers to enter the country. The observers are supposed to keep Mr. Assad&rsquo;s government to its pledge to withdraw troops from residential neighborhoods and to release political prisoners.        

Antigovernment activists have raised strong doubts about the mission, citing concerns about its leadership and the lack of details about how it will work. They fear the government will easily thwart the observers, for instance, by moving political prisoners to military bases, which are off-limits to the monitors.        

The blasts did not stop protesters of all persuasions from taking to the streets on Friday. Video on Syrian television showed hundreds of Mr. Assad&rsquo;s supporters in Damascus, holding his picture and waving the Syrian flag as they condemned the bombings. In a nearby suburb, antigovernment protesters carried banners condemning the Arab League.        

A protester named Omar, 22, reacting to the news of the attacks, said: &ldquo;The only killer is the Assad regime. We didn&rsquo;t hear about Al Qaeda for nine months.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;If the Assad regime can&rsquo;t protect us, he should resign and let others run the country.&rdquo;        
Reporting was contributed by Hwaida Saad and an employee of The New York Times from Beirut, an employee of The New York Times from Damascus, Syria, and Robert F. Worth from Washington.
