
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Thousands of people attended funerals in Damascus on Saturday for the victims of two powerful bombs that exploded outside government security buildings the day before, as human rights activists reported a large-scale assault on a restive city by government troops.        

The bombings in the Syrian capital on Friday killed at least 44 people and wounded more than 160, in the worst attack on official installations since the beginning of the uprising in March.        

President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s government blamed both Al Qaeda and the antigovernment protest movement for the attacks, making no distinction between the two groups. His opponents have accused the government of staging the attack, perhaps to bolster its position during a visit by an Arab League delegation that Syria was facing Islamist militants, not peaceful protesters.        

No one has claimed responsibility for the bombings, and neither side has provided evidence for its claims. Given Syria&rsquo;s volatile and divided state, there was little hope that the mystery would be solved anytime soon.        

Angry mourners on Saturday carried coffins draped in the Syrian flag and chanted pro-Assad slogans, The Associated Press reported. At one service, an imam blamed a Syrian opposition figure for the killings.        

The attack occurred as Arab League representatives arrived to set up an observer mission to monitor promises by the government to stop its deadly repression of the uprising and release political prisoners. Their arrival was preceded by the deadliest violence in months: days before the bombings, human rights activists said that more than 160 people were killed as the security forces attacked army defectors in the Jebel al-Zawiyah area in northwestern Syria.        

During a funeral at the Umayyad Mosque, the imam, Muhammad al-Bouti, blamed the Syrian opposition for the bomb attack.        

&ldquo;This was the gift of Burhan Ghalioun and his comrades to Syria,&rdquo; he said, referring to the leader of the Syrian National Congress, an opposition group.        

&ldquo;Are the covers removed from the eyes of the Arab League representatives to see who is the killer and who is the victim?&rdquo; Mr. Bouti asked, according to an account of his remarks carried by the official Syrian news agency, SANA. &ldquo;The Syrian Army couldn&rsquo;t bomb gas pipelines, kill its personnel or kill itself.&rdquo;        

Opposition groups, including a leading militia of army defectors, the Free Syrian Army, have denied responsibility for the attacks. Some analysts have suggested that the government&rsquo;s eagerness to publicize the bombings, in contrast with its previous practice, indicated that it at least found the attacks useful.        

A claim of responsibility posted online added to the confusion.        

Early on Saturday, Agence France-Presse reported that the Syrian Muslim Brotherhood had posted a statement on its Web site, saying that one of its &ldquo;victorious Sunni brigades&rdquo; had carried out the attack.        

&ldquo;We warn our fellow citizens and advise them not to approach government centers or security branches,&rdquo; the agency quoted the statement as saying.        

But the Web site was a fake, a spokesman for the Syrian Muslim Brotherhood said.        

&ldquo;The site is a fraud,&rdquo; the spokesman, Mulham al-Droubi, said in a telephone interview from Saudi Arabia. &ldquo;We deny our involvement in such criminal acts.&rdquo; He said the site was posted to &ldquo;distort&rdquo; the Brotherhood&rsquo;s image; it closely resembled the group&rsquo;s real Web site and had a similar address. By Saturday afternoon, it had been taken down and was no longer accessible.        

There was no sign of a letup in the week&rsquo;s violence on Saturday. Human rights activists in the central city of Homs reported a siege under way, saying government shelling had killed at least 18 people and set houses ablaze.        

In an interview from the Bab Amr neighborhood, Omar Shaker, an opposition activist, said government troops had surrounded the area. Heavy booms and gunfire could be heard in the background.        

The shelling had gone on for a whole day, he said. &ldquo;I can see flames coming from the orchards west of Bab Amr,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There is no way to evacuate the civilians and no water.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;We&rsquo;re not building any hope on the Arab observers or other countries.&rdquo;        
