
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; A suicide car bomber drove a vehicle packed with explosives into a building used by paramilitary forces in northwestern Pakistan early on Saturday, killing at least six soldiers and wounding 11 others, police officials said.        

The attack took place near the town of Bannu, in the Bannu tribal region 25 miles east of North Waziristan. The paramilitary troops, known as Tochi Scouts, are deployed mainly in North Waziristan, the rugged mountainous region that is part of Pakistan&rsquo;s tribal area and that has been a stronghold of militants.        

The attack broke a lull in the suicide attacks that have ravaged the country in recent years, and the Taliban were quick to claim responsibility. It was another reminder that an Islamist insurgency remains a viable threat even as Pakistan careens from an internal political crisis, with rumors of a possible military coup, to a diplomatic one with the United States over an errant airstrike.        

The suspension of terrorist attacks had been attributed to continuing peace talks between the Taliban and the government, though military officials have denied the existence of such talks.        

A Taliban spokesman, Ihsanullah Ihsan, said the bombing was to avenge the death of a Taliban commander, Taj Gul, killed in an American drone strike in South Waziristan in October.        

On Friday, at least 40 Taliban militants attacked a fort in the Mullazai area in South Waziristan. The militants killed one soldier and kidnapped 15, officials said. Mr. Ihsan said the abducted soldiers were taken to Taliban hide-outs in the tribal area.        

Relations between Pakistan and the United States have remained strained since a November border airstrike by American-led forces that killed 26 Pakistani soldiers.        

Pakistan has since blocked NATO supplies from crossing into neighboring Afghanistan.        

On Thursday, the Pentagon acknowledged making mistakes before and during the airstrikes. But it said the Pakistanis had also erred. Pakistan&rsquo;s military called the inquiry &ldquo;short on facts.&rdquo;        
