
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Government soldiers opened fire on a giant demonstration in Yemen&rsquo;s capital on Saturday, killing at least nine protesters in the worst violence since President Ali Abdullah Saleh agreed to give up his post more than a month ago.        

The march, which activists said was peaceful, was to protest a deal granting Mr. Saleh immunity from prosecution for the killing of protesters.        

Hours after Saturday&rsquo;s killings, Mr. Saleh, who retains his title and much of his power until a new election in February, announced that he would soon be leaving for the United States. The announcement seemed intended to defuse anger at the violence by his forces as well as pressure from some of his political rivals and foreign allies, who fear that Mr. Saleh has no intention of fading from the scene.        

The American Embassy in Sana and officials in Washington said they had no comment about Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s plans.        

Speaking to reporters at his presidential palace, Mr. Saleh said he was leaving to &ldquo;get out of sight and the media, to calm the atmosphere for the unity government to hold the presidential election,&rdquo; according to The Associated Press. He did not say when he was leaving, and noted that he would eventually return, to work as an &ldquo;opposition figure.&rdquo;        

His departure had been rumored for weeks, amid speculation that he would seek medical treatment abroad for injuries from a June bomb attack on his palace.        

It was not clear that his departure would end nearly a year of turmoil in Yemen that continues to flare despite Mr. Saleh&rsquo;s promises to leave power. Antigovernment activists have called for Mr. Saleh and other officials to be tried for killing protesters during the 11-month uprising, and have expressed deep anger at the promise of immunity that Mr. Saleh received in exchange for signing the power-transfer deal. Many say the deal, which calls for Mr. Saleh to be temporarily replaced with his vice president, does not constitute real change.        

Some activists said that if Mr. Saleh did leave, they would demand the United States not grant him safe harbor. &ldquo;The Americans will have a lot to lose with the Yemenis,&rdquo; said Osamah Shamsan, a youth activist in Sana. &ldquo;They have to hand him over.&rdquo;        

The United States ambassador in Yemen, Gerald M. Feierstein, was criticized by activists on Saturday after he scolded protesters for trying to provoke the government. Speaking to local reporters on Saturday afternoon, Mr. Feierstein said that thousands of protesters who had walked for days to Sana from the central Yemeni city of Taiz were &ldquo;not peaceful&rdquo; and seemed intent on traveling to the capital in order to cause &ldquo;chaos&rdquo; and &ldquo;provoke a violent response,&rdquo; according to an account of his remarks in Al-Masdar online.        

&ldquo;The government has the right to maintain the law,&rdquo; he said. The article noted that Mr. Feierstein made his remarks just before the violence started.        

Mr. Shamsan said that he and other activists traveled outside Sana to meet up with the marchers from Taiz, an opposition stronghold. The protesters were escorted for a while by troops from the government&rsquo;s Central Security Forces, Mr. Shamsan said, before the security forces and soldiers with the Republican Guard started firing on the protesters at an approach to the city.        

The attack, with live ammunition, tear gas and water cannons, surprised the protesters. &ldquo;One minute they were protecting me, and the next they were shooting at me,&rdquo; Mr. Shamsan said.        

At least nine protesters, including a woman, were killed, according to two doctors at the protesters&rsquo; field hospital and an activist, The A.P. said. Protesters said the number was probably higher because some victims were taken to other hospitals or removed by soldiers.        

The last deadly violence against the protests in Sana was weeks ago, the day after Mr. Saleh signed the agreement, when plainclothes loyalists killed five protesters.        

In the interim, there had been progress on a political transition. A temporary government took power this month, and some of the checkpoints in the capital have been removed. But militias and government troops have not left the streets.        
Eric Schmitt contributed reporting from Washington.
