
KANO, Nigeria (Reuters) &mdash; Gun battles between Nigerian security forces and an Islamist sect have killed at least 68 people in two days of fighting in northern Nigeria, the authorities and hospital officials said Saturday.        

The militant group Boko Haram, which wants to impose Islamic law across the country, has been blamed for scores of shootings and bombings in Nigeria&rsquo;s remote, semiarid northeast, including a spate of attacks in the past few weeks.        

Nigeria&rsquo;s army killed more than 50 members of the sect during fighting on Thursday and Friday in the northeastern city of Damaturu, the force&rsquo;s chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Azubuike Ihejirika, said in comments published in the local news media.        

Three soldiers also died, he added.        

&ldquo;There was a major encounter with Boko Haram in Damaturu, and we overran their stronghold and their ammunition site,&rdquo; General Ihejirika said.        

He said the sect had &ldquo;sophisticated and heavy weaponry,&rdquo; including machine guns and bombs.        

Hospital officials in Damaturu said they had counted 50 bodies so far.        

&ldquo;So far 50 bodies have been deposited at the mortuary by the military and police operatives,&rdquo; a hospital worker said by telephone. The worker said the dead included seven police officers and two soldiers.        

In a separate attack in the city on Friday, sect members opened fire on a group of police officers shortly after prayers, killing four, police said.        

Residents said Damaturu was quiet on Saturday, but guarded by a heavy military and police presence.        

&ldquo;Everywhere is so tense here,&rdquo; Usman Mamman, a Damaturu resident, said by telephone. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s nobody on the street except security men. The bodies of those killed are being removed from the mortuary. Our town is virtually a ghost town.&rdquo;        

At least 11 people were killed in another shootout in the remote northeastern city of Maiduguri, Boko Haram&rsquo;s heartland on the threshold of the Sahara and bordering Chad, Niger and Cameroon, on Thursday, a morgue official said.        

Clashes between security forces and the sect, whose name roughly translates as &ldquo;Western education is forbidden,&rdquo; have become increasingly frequent in the past couple of weeks, as the north&rsquo;s simmering conflict escalates.        

There was no immediate comment from Boko Haram, which rarely makes public statements.        

Nigeria&rsquo;s population is about half Christian and half Muslim.        

Before this year, the Islamist insurgency was largely contained in its heartland in Maiduguri. It has since has spread to other parts of the north, including neighboring Yobe State, where Damaturu lies.        

The town was the scene of the deadliest Boko Haram assault to date, when 65 people were killed in a wave of shootings and bombings in early November that left churches, police stations and mosques reduced to rubble.        

This year the Islamists struck the capital, Abuja, twice, including a suicide car bomb attack against the United Nations headquarters that killed 26 people.        

President Goodluck Jonathan, a southern Christian who has dismissed the Islamist rebellion as &ldquo;a temporary setback,&rdquo; made no mention of the violence in a Christmas address on Saturday.        
