
BANGKOK &mdash; At the entrance to a neighborhood in Bangkok&rsquo;s garment district, an unambiguous message hangs on an archway decorated with an image of Thailand&rsquo;s king.        

&ldquo;If you live in Thailand, you must be loyal,&rdquo; says the sign, prominently suspended over the road. &ldquo;If you are not loyal, you are not Thai.&rdquo;        

Thailand has always stood out for the deference that many Thais show their monarch. But in the twilight of the reign of King Bhumibol Adulyadej, 84, now ailing and living in a specially outfitted suite in a Bangkok hospital, dedicated loyalists are leading a feverish, with-us-or-against-us campaign to defend him from any perceived slights or criticism. The government has also intensified its crackdown on criticism of the monarchy, prosecuting a record number of people charged with insulting the royal family.        

Passions over the monarchy have escalated to the point where some Thais say they fear the situation could turn violent.        

&ldquo;We have reached a stage where people would want to drive you out of the country or even want to kill you for having different thoughts,&rdquo; said Anon Numpa, a lawyer who represents a dozen clients accused of insulting the monarchy.        

The royalists say they feel as though they are under attack, most recently from outside the country. In response, thousands of Thais have posted angry comments on the United States Embassy&rsquo;s Facebook page after an American citizen who was born in Thailand was convicted of insulting the king.        

The Facebook page has become a focal point for denouncing the United States, with commentators lashing out at it for, among other things, invading foreign countries, producing junk food and discriminating against African-Americans. The comments have been particularly striking because Thailand has traditionally harbored relatively little anti-American sentiment.        

&ldquo;Please leave Thailand alone and manage your huge debt,&rdquo; wrote one visitor to the Facebook page.        

The outpouring of anger, which has continued for more than a week, is a reaction to foreign criticism of the crackdown on royal insults. This month, the convicted American citizen, Joe Gordon, whose Thai name is Lerpong Wichaicommart, was sentenced to two and a half years in prison, prompting the United States Embassy to criticize the &ldquo;severity&rdquo; of the sentence. Last month, the European Union&rsquo;s office in Bangkok said it was &ldquo;deeply concerned&rdquo; about a separate case, a 20-year prison sentence given to a man convicted of sending text messages that a court ruled were critical of the monarchy.        

A United Nations official, Frank La Rue, issued a statement in October calling for a review of the laws that ban criticism of the monarchy, saying they put &ldquo;in jeopardy the right to freedom of opinion and expression.&rdquo;        

These comments have riled royalists, who say the outside world does not understand the near godlike status that the king, who has reigned for more than six decades, has in the country.        

But royalists also see threats from inside the country.        

Tul Sittisomwong, a physician who has led a series of pro-monarchy street demonstrations, contends that there is a plot to overthrow the monarchy led by Thaksin Shinawatra, the former prime minister ousted in a 2006 military coup.        

Mr. Thaksin is making a comeback in Thailand. His sister Yingluck Shinawatra became prime minister in August, and longtime allies of Mr. Thaksin are now running government ministries. He remains in self-imposed exile overseas, but the government recently returned his passport, which had been confiscated by the previous government.        

Dr. Tul and his associates in the so-called yellow-shirt royalist movement have long accused Mr. Thaksin of harboring republican leanings.        

&ldquo;If you want to be the most powerful person in Thailand, you have to get rid of the royal family,&rdquo; Dr. Tul said in an interview, summarizing what he believes to be Mr. Thaksin&rsquo;s strategy. &ldquo;Otherwise, you will always be No. 2.&rdquo;        

His analysis is at odds with the government&rsquo;s policies. Ms. Yingluck&rsquo;s government, perhaps to allay fears that it came to power with the support of antimonarchists, has increased the policing of criticism of the monarchy. Tens of thousands of Web pages have been blocked by government censors.        

The country&rsquo;s deputy prime minister, Chalerm Yubamrung, has rejected calls to amend l&egrave;se-majest&eacute; laws, saying that to do so would create &ldquo;chaos.&rdquo;        

Mr. Chalerm recently derided those calling for reform of the law. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t they have any jobs to go to?&rdquo; he asked.        

The passions surrounding the monarchy are coloring the workings of the legal system. Government prosecutors this month used emotionally charged language to charge a critic of the monarchy, straying from the previous norm of measured legalese, said Mr. Anon, the lawyer representing people accused of insulting the monarchy.        

Surapak Puchaisaeng, a 40-year-old freelance computer programmer, is accused of creating a Facebook page that prosecutors say contained insulting content about the king.        

&ldquo;His Majesty has contributed to the country and people benevolently and immeasurably,&rdquo; reads the charge against Mr. Surapak. &ldquo;The defendant is not only ungrateful for his royal grace that has been given to people continually, but is also audacious, threatening and aiming to overthrow the monarchy, which is enthroned in a position of revered worship for the entire Thai people.&rdquo;        
(Page 2 of 2)
Over the years, the Thai government and the palace have nurtured an image of King Bhumibol as the heart and soul of the nation. A government radio station regularly broadcasts interviews with people on the street professing their love for the king, who is commonly referred to in Thailand as the &ldquo;lord above our head.&rdquo;        

Although the king has been forced to curtail his public outings because of illness and age, the monarchy is still very present in the daily lives of Thais. The king&rsquo;s portrait is ubiquitous around the country. Moviegoers stand for the royal anthem before every screening at theaters. There is a nightly &ldquo;royal news&rdquo; program broadcast on all public channels detailing the activities of the royal family. And recently, a dozen pop stars held a concert &ldquo;to show our deep loyalty to His Majesty the King.&rdquo;        

In the Bangkok garment district, Yuak Kadsuksai, a 61-year-old woman who sells meatballs from a cart in the street, said that for years residents could look to a picture of the king that had been put up in their neighborhood. But this year, they made his portrait bigger.        

&ldquo;We have progressed in Thailand today because of the monarchy,&rdquo; Ms. Yuak said. &ldquo;If we had had no kings, our country would have been even more impoverished.&rdquo;        

But there are also many who feel that the latest waves of royal adulation have gone too far.        

Pitch Pongsawat, a lecturer at Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok, said the country&rsquo;s &ldquo;royal worship system&rdquo; was engendering fear. &ldquo;People are keeping track of who loves the royals and who doesn&rsquo;t,&rdquo; he said on a recently broadcast television program.        

Kong Rithdee, a columnist for the newspaper The Bangkok Post, compared the campaign to prosecute perceived criticism of the monarchy to the fatwa placed on Salman Rushdie by Iranian clerics.        

In their zeal to protect the king, ultraroyalists in Thailand may be weakening the institution of the monarchy, he said.        

&ldquo;To protect God,&rdquo; Mr. Kong wrote, &ldquo;sometimes the self-appointed guardians risk despoiling his name.&rdquo;        
