
A series of Christmas Day church bombings rocked Nigeria on Sunday in what appeared to be a coordinated assault by a radical Islamist sect with suspected training links to Al Qaeda, raising the sect&rsquo;s violent antigovernment struggle to a new and more dangerous level that the Nigerian authorities seem powerless to contain. At least 25 people were killed.        

The sect, known as Boko Haram, until now mostly targeted the police, government and military in its insurgency effort, but the bombings on Sunday represented a new, religion-tinged front, a tactic that threatens to exploit the already frayed relations between Nigeria&rsquo;s nearly evenly split populations of Christians and Muslims.        

The worst bombing was at the St. Theresa Catholic Church in Madala, a suburb of the capital, Abuja, where an explosion ripped through a crowd of worshipers as they left morning Mass. The bomb tore through the church, said Bassey Udo, a Nigerian journalist in Madala, and left a deep crater. A government spokesman, Reuben Abati, said at least 25 people were killed in that blast and that many were wounded in a chaos of fire and rubble, suggesting the toll would rise.        

At least two other churches in other towns were attacked Saturday evening and Sunday, as well as a police headquarters in the north, an area where dozens have been killed in a bloody conflict in recent days between the security forces and the sect. Officials said the attack on the police headquarters was a suicide bombing and that at least three officers were killed.        

In Madala, there were charred bodies on the street and twisted cars burned in front of the church. Rescue workers struggling to cope with the mayhem faced a shortage of ambulances for the dozens of wounded and an enraged crowd that blocked them from entering the church until soldiers arrived.        

Boko Haram, which roughly translates as &ldquo;Western education forbidden,&rdquo; seeks to impose a stricter application of Shariah, or Islamic, law across the largely Muslim northern half of Nigeria. For more than two years it has been waging an insurgency against the government, mainly through bombings. Hundreds have been killed in these attacks, mostly in the north, many of them police officers, government officials and military personnel.        

Critics of the government campaign against Boko Haram say that the effort has not only failed but has increased the sect&rsquo;s appeal, because the security forces&rsquo; heavy-handed tactics have given it new sympathizers.        

The sect&rsquo;s attacks have been further bolstered by festering economic resentment in the impoverished and relatively neglected north, which has an exploding birthrate, low levels of literacy and mass unemployment.        

Boko Haram&rsquo;s campaign has grown in intensity and scope all year. Attacks on the national police headquarters in Abuja in June and a suicide bombing at the United Nations building there in late August, which killed at least 23, signaled an expansion in the group&rsquo;s focus. Experts viewed those attacks as worrisome indicators that Boko Haram was receiving training outside Nigeria, perhaps from Al Qaeda&rsquo;s North African affiliate.        

The obvious religious overtone to the attacks on Christmas Day appeared to represent another dangerous shift in strategy.        

&ldquo;This is a sign that they&rsquo;ve decided to try to ignite the Muslim-Christian fault line,&rdquo; said Darren Kew, a Nigeria expert at the University of Massachusetts Boston.        

If so, it has ominous implications, because hundreds have died in clashes between Nigeria&rsquo;s Muslims and Christians in recent years. That fight has taken place largely outside Boko Haram&rsquo;s base in the north.        

&ldquo;They are trying to expand from their roots,&rdquo; said Mr. Kew, adding that until now, the group had &ldquo;largely avoided antagonizing the Christians. This is a strategic choice on their part to broaden their offensive.&rdquo;        

Catholic officials in Nigeria expressed concern Sunday about the Madala bombing. The White House also issued a statement deploring the violence.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s very worrying,&rdquo; said Archbishop Ignatius A. Kaigama of Jos, where there was a smaller explosion at a church on Sunday. No casualties were reported, but the blast occurred in a violence-wracked city on the religious fault line between north and south. &ldquo;With this happening, it&rsquo;s a different dimension,&rdquo; the archbishop said.        

A Boko Haram spokesman, identified as Abu Qaqa, claimed responsibility for the attacks in statements to the local news media.        
Musikilu Mojeed contributed reporting from Benin City, Nigeria, Eric Schmitt from Washington and Herbert Buchsbaum from New York.
