
JERUSALEM &mdash; Ismail Haniya, the Hamas prime minister of Gaza, left the isolated Palestinian enclave on Sunday to seek regional support for his Islamic movement in his first foreign trip since uprisings spread across the Arab world a year ago.        

A deputy, Mohammed Awad, said by telephone that Mr. Haniya would stop first in Egypt and then Sudan. He was expected to continue to Qatar and Tunisia and to other Muslim and Arab countries, including Turkey and Bahrain, where preparations for a visit were not final.        

&ldquo;The Arab Spring has opened a wide horizon for us, and we must take advantage to promote the interests of our people,&rdquo; Mr. Haniya told reporters before crossing the border with Egypt.        

Mr. Haniya has not left Gaza on an official visit since 2007 when, after a brief civil war, his Hamas movement pushed the Fatah-dominated Palestinian Authority, led by Mahmoud Abbas, out of Gaza, leaving it to hold sway only in parts of the West Bank.        

The division between the two movements has been fierce, although Mr. Abbas met with the exiled Hamas leader Khaled Meshal last May and they agreed to establish a unity government of technocrats and hold elections in the West Bank and Gaza by next May. Egypt has played an important role in promoting reconciliation.        

The two leaders met again in Cairo last week and agreed to form a committee that would prepare the elections as well as a restructuring of the Palestine Liberation Organization, from which Hamas has been excluded. The P.L.O. is the supreme authority of the Palestinian national movement.        

Many obstacles remain in the path of Palestinian reconciliation, including American and Israeli warnings that if Hamas is included in any future government, tax revenue transfers from Israel and aid from Washington would be cut. Other powers, including the European Union, Russia and the United Nations, say Hamas must renounce violence, recognize Israel and accept previous Israeli-Palestinian agreements before it can be seen as a legitimate partner.        

The Palestinians want to include East Jerusalem, their desired future capital, in their coming elections. Israel has indicated that as long as Hamas members are candidates, it will not allow Jerusalem residents to vote.        

Polls show Fatah ahead of Hamas in Palestinian voters&rsquo; esteem. But the failure of peace negotiations with Israel and the recent exchange of more than 1,000 Palestinian prisoners for an Israeli soldier held by Hamas for more than five years are thought to have boosted Hamas&rsquo;s standing, along with regional trends toward Islamic governments.        

One of Mr. Haniya&rsquo;s goals on his trip, expected to last up to two weeks, is to raise money to rebuild Gaza, which suffered extensive damage during the three-week Israeli offensive three years ago in which some 1,300 people were killed. Israel&rsquo;s goal was to stop rocket fire from Gaza into its southern communities.        
