
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; North Korea broadcast television footage on Sunday of the top military brass flanking the country&rsquo;s young new leader, Kim Jong-un, as they paid respects to Mr. Kim&rsquo;s father, who died of a heart attack on Dec. 17, and vowed allegiance to his chosen successor.        

Among the officials present was Jang Song-taek, Mr. Kim&rsquo;s uncle and a vice chairman of the powerful National Defense Commission, whose role as the young successor&rsquo;s caretaker has been magnified during the transition. Mr. Jang, 65, in what was said to be his first public appearance in a military uniform on state television, wore a general&rsquo;s insignia.        

On Saturday, the generals visited the Kumsusan mausoleum, where Mr. Kim&rsquo;s father, Kim Jong-il, lay in a glass coffin. North Korea&rsquo;s state-run media also published an entreaty to Kim Jong-un the same day to become &ldquo;supreme commander&rdquo; of the military. That official plea, along with the television footage of the generals and Mr. Jang&rsquo;s appearance in a military uniform, signals that the military is spearheading Mr. Kim&rsquo;s succession.        

The generals&rsquo; allegiance to Mr. Kim came as the government appeared to move swiftly to rally the key agencies of power behind the young leader. Both on Sunday and Monday, Rodong Sinmun, the official newspaper of the ruling Workers&rsquo; Party and the primary outlet of the government&rsquo;s policy statement, called on North Koreans to &ldquo;defend the party&rsquo;s Central Committee, with Dear Leader Kim Jong-un as its head, with our lives.&rdquo;        

The reference to Mr. Kim as head of the Central Committee indicated that Mr. Kim was readying to take the top party post &mdash; &mdash; general secretary &mdash; as well. The head of the Central Committee doubles as general secretary.        

The military&rsquo;s support is considered crucial if Mr. Kim is to consolidate control after his father&rsquo;s death, and a commentary by Rodong Sinmun is part of the pattern set when Kim Jong-il took power: Entreaties are made, and the leader graciously accepts.        

South Korea and the United States have been worried that a power struggle could lead the North to lash out to build the new leader&rsquo;s military credentials.        

On Sunday, striking a typically strident note, North Korea reiterated that if the South blocked private delegations from visiting the capital, Pyongyang, for Mr. Kim&rsquo;s funeral on Wednesday, there would be &ldquo;unimaginably disastrous consequences&rdquo; for relations between the two.        

On Monday, a former South Korean first lady and the chairwoman of Hyundai-Asan, which had business ties with North Korea, crossed the border to pay respects to Mr. Kim.        

Lee Hee-ho, the widow of former President Kim Dae-jung, and the Hyundai-Asan chairwoman, Hyun Jeong-eun, the wife of Hyundai&rsquo;s former chairman, Chung Mong-hun, were the only South Koreans allowed by the government in Seoul to lead private delegations to Pyongyang.        

The government said that Ms. Lee and Ms. Hyun were reciprocating the North Korean delegations that visited Seoul to express condolences over the deaths of President Kim and Mr. Chung.        

Hyundai-Asan led a flurry of South Korean investments that followed a 2000 summit meeting. But the South suspended its signature project in North Korea &mdash; a hiking and spa resort in the North&rsquo;s Diamond Mountain &mdash; after North Korean guards shot a female South Korean tourist who strayed off the resort in 2008.        
