
BEIJING &mdash; Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda of Japan arrived in Beijing on Sunday for a two-day state visit that was originally aimed at improving bilateral ties, but is now expected to focus on the uncertainty over North Korea&rsquo;s intentions after the death of Kim Jong-il.        

Speaking before he left Tokyo, Mr. Noda told reporters that he planned &ldquo;to exchange views and information in detail so as to avert a harmful effect on peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula.&rdquo;        

Mr. Noda was expected to ask the Chinese government to try to revive the six-party talks on dismantling North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear weapons program, Japan&rsquo;s Kyodo news service reported.        

But his influence may be limited. In office only since September, Mr. Noda&rsquo;s diplomatic skills are mostly untested, and China has conspicuously thrown its support behind North Korea and Mr. Kim&rsquo;s son and designated successor, Kim Jong-un.        

Mr. Noda was expected to meet the Chinese prime minister, Wen Jiabao, on Sunday and President Hu Jintao on Monday.        

China presides over the six-party talks, which have been stalled since 2008. North Korea pulled out of the negotiations in April 2009 to protest a United Nations resolution condemning its suspected test launching of an intercontinental ballistic missile.        

&ldquo;We are currently facing a new situation in East Asia,&rdquo; The Associated Press quoted Mr. Noda as telling reporters after mentioning the death of Kim Jong-il. &ldquo;On this issue, it is very timely to exchange views with the host of the six-party talks and the country with the most influence on North Korea.&rdquo;        

The future of North Korea&rsquo;s nuclear program tops a long list of concerns about its direction as Kim Jong-un, who is believed to be in his 20s and who has little government experience, seeks to consolidate his hold on power.        

The stakes for Japan are especially high. North Korea&rsquo;s ballistic missiles pose a direct military threat to Tokyo, and enmity between the two states lingers over Japan&rsquo;s 35-year occupation of the Korean Peninsula before and during World War II. Japan and North Korea do not have diplomatic relations.        

Mr. Noda, the first head of state to visit Beijing since Kim Jong-il&rsquo;s death, talked last week with President Obama and South Korea&rsquo;s president, Lee Myung-bak, about a coordinated response to developments in North Korea.        

Before Mr. Kim&rsquo;s death, North Korea expressed a desire to restart the talks, which also include representatives from Japan, Russia, South Korea and the United States. But the Obama administration and South Korea have ruled out any new round of negotiations unless the North halts its uranium enrichment program and other nuclear activities under the watch of United Nations inspectors, who have been barred from North Korea since 2009.        

Mr. Noda is also expected to work on improving relations with China, which have been hamstrung by territorial disputes over the Senkaku Islands in the East China Sea, which are also known as the Diaoyu Islands.        

A September 2010 collision between a Chinese fishing boat and a Japanese Coast Guard vessel in the disputed region threw a chill over bilateral ties and led to anti-Japan demonstrations across China.        

Both sides have been working to stabilize relations before the 40th anniversary next year of the resumption of diplomatic relations between the two governments.        

Japan said last week that it may make a symbolic purchase of $10 billion in renminbi-denominated Chinese government bonds, the first such purchase by a developed nation.        

Japan also sent a destroyer, the Kirisame, to the Chinese port of Qingdao on a five-day good-will visit last week.        
