
BEIJING &mdash; China&rsquo;s state-run media have had a field day this autumn with Occupy Wall Street, spinning an almost daily morality play about capitalism gone amok and an American government unable or unwilling to aid the victims of a rapacious elite.        

Occupy Wukan is another matter entirely. The state press has been all but mute on why 13,000 Chinese citizens, furious over repeated rip-offs by their village elite, sent their leaders fleeing to safety and repulsed efforts by the police to retake Wukan. But the village takeover can be ignored only at Beijing&rsquo;s peril: There are at least 625,000 potential Wukans across China, all small, locally run villages that frequently suffer the sorts of injustices that prompted the outburst this month in Wukan.        

&ldquo;What happened in Wukan is nothing new. It&rsquo;s all across the country,&rdquo; said Liu Yawei, an expert on local administration who is the director of the China program at the Carter Center in Atlanta.        

A second analyst, Li Fan, estimated, in an interview, that 50 percent to 60 percent of Chinese villages suffered governance and accountability problems of the sort that apparently beset Wukan, albeit not so severe. Mr. Li leads the World and China Institute, a private nonprofit research center based in Beijing that has extensively studied local election and governance issues.        

On paper, the Wukan protests never should have happened: China&rsquo;s village committees should be the most responsive bodies in the nation because they are elected by the villagers themselves. Moreover, the government has built safeguards into the village administration process to ensure that money is properly spent.        

Village self-administration, as the central government calls it, is seen by many foreigners as China&rsquo;s democratic laboratory &mdash; and while elections can be rigged and otherwise swayed, many political scientists say they are, on balance, a good development.        

Actually running the villages, however, is another matter. Village committees must provide many of the services offered by governments, such as sanitation and social welfare, but they cannot tax their residents or collect many fees. Any efforts to raise additional money, for things like economic development, usually need approval from the Communist Party-controlled township or county seats above them.        

In practice, the combination of the villages&rsquo; need for cash and their dependence on higher-ups has bred back-scratching and corruption between village officials and their overseers. China&rsquo;s boom in land prices has only broadened the opportunity for siphoning off money from village accounts.        

And the checks and balances &mdash; a village legislature to sign off on major decisions, a citizens&rsquo; accounting committee to watch over the village books &mdash; have turned out to be easily manipulated by those who really hold the power.        

&ldquo;Land sales are where the big money is,&rdquo; Edward Friedman, a political science professor and a China scholar at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, said in a telephone interview. &ldquo;Every level can see how much better the level above it is doing. And each one wants to live at least that well. The system has within it a dynamic which makes people feel it&rsquo;s only fair that they get their share of the wealth.&rdquo;        

The opportunities to get that share are vast, apparently. In 2003, a candidate for village committee chairman in Laojiaotou village, in Shanxi Province, spent two million renminbi &mdash; then about $245,000 &mdash; to campaign for an office that paid 347 renminbi a month, the Chinese journal Legal News reported at the time.        

In interviews this month, leaders of the Wukan protest said it was common knowledge that local government and Communist Party officials had spent millions of renminbi to buy potentially lucrative posts. They maintained that Wukan&rsquo;s village committee stayed in power in part by threatening any challenges to its continued rule.        

None of those allegations could be quickly confirmed. One verified statistic, however, is compelling. Of the nine members of Wukan&rsquo;s village committee, five had held their posts since the committee system itself was set up under Mao Zedong&rsquo;s successor, Deng Xiaoping.        

The same was true of the village&rsquo;s Communist Party secretary, Xue Chang, who had held office since 1970 before being replaced amid Wukan citizen protests in September.        

Though a village in legal terms, Wukan is bigger than most such entities. It sits in urban Guangdong Province, abutting a natural harbor on the Pacific Ocean that is ideal for development.        
Mia Li contributed research from Beijing, and Shi Da from Wukan.
