
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; President Hamid Karzai has taken steps to disband a little-known, irregular police force financed by the American military with members in at least four northern provinces. Some members of the force are former militiamen and thugs known as much for extorting money from ordinary citizens as for intimidating insurgents and upholding the law.        

The decision appeared aimed at stopping at least some of the militias that are beyond the control of Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s administration and could one day challenge the government. It also appeared to be an effort to constrain the independence of northern Afghanistan, where strongmen and power brokers, especially the governor of Balkh Province, have often seemed to operate with only nominal deference to the central government in Kabul.        

Additionally, it was a slap at NATO, which has had a hand in establishing this particular force, known as the Critical Infrastructure Police.        

For Mr. Karzai, the potential long-term threat posed by an irregular police force outweighed any short-term gains it could deliver, said Shaida M. Abdali, Afghanistan&rsquo;s deputy national security adviser. The force is distinct from a far larger irregular police force, the Afghan Local Police, which Mr. Karzai is preserving, and which is under the control of the Interior Ministry. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want a force that is likely to be out of control. We don&rsquo;t want a force that will become a future security threat,&rdquo; Mr. Abdali said.        

The Critical Infrastructure Police has members in Balkh, Kunduz, Jowzjan and Faryab Provinces, according to a letter sent this month to the governors of those provinces by Maj. Gen. Markus Kneip of Germany, the head of NATO&rsquo;s Regional Command North. Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s disbandment announcement, released Sunday, said the force also operates in Sar-i-Pul Province.        

The force, officially set up in August by Regional Command North, was organized in part to fill a security gap, but it also appears to have been an effort to get control of the scores of often lawless militia groups that intimidate residents in the region.        

In Kunduz Province, for instance, local officials and tribal leaders said that many of the infrastructure police officers were simply militiamen renamed. Numbering 1,200 to 1,700 men, according to the estimates of local officials, the infrastructure police officers are untrained, mostly self-armed or armed by the strongmen who are their patrons. They do not wear uniforms.        

Formerly unpaid, the force&rsquo;s members used to routinely extort money, food, fuel and other support in areas under their jurisdiction. NATO then used an American discretionary fund to pay monthly salaries of $150 per officer and $200 per commander, partly in hopes that they would stop such behavior. But it still happens, according to local police officials, one of whom described the force members as &ldquo;thieves and lowlifes.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Now they are trying to behave better,&rdquo; said an official with a nongovernmental organization in Balkh Province, who asked not to be identified because he was not authorized to speak to reporters. &ldquo;Before they were roving around the countryside, looking to support themselves with their gun,&rdquo; he said.        

Ethnicity is an underlying problem: many of the infrastructure force members are Tajiks or Uzbeks and have exploited their positions to intimidate Pashtuns, who are less numerous in the north. Hazrat Mohammad, 45, a Pashtun resident of Charbolak District in Balkh Province, said last week that he believed he had lost a land dispute to some local power brokers because he had complained about the Critical Infrastructure Police.        

&ldquo;How could the people be happy with the thieves?&rdquo; Mr. Mohammad said. He said the force&rsquo;s members had belonged to a gang that demanded $20 in monthly protection money from every house in the district.        

Gen. John R. Allen, the senior commander for Afghanistan, described the force in an interview last week as &ldquo;a temporary solution.&rdquo; At the time the force was created, he said, Afghanistan lacked the Special Operations forces required to train and vet members of the Afghan Local Police.        

The short history of the infrastructure police illustrates how Afghan authorities and NATO commanders often created new problems as they struggled to contain an insurgency after a decade of war. A favored solution has been to establish auxiliary police forces, of which the infrastructure police is just one example. It has proved to be a risky proposition in a country riven by ethnic divisions and saddled with a history of warlords who have employed their own militias to gain dominance and raise money through illegal taxation.        

The decision to disband the force appeared to come in part because Mr. Karzai and his aides were not even aware of its existence until he was asked about it by reporters during a visit to Germany this month. He expressed concern about the force&rsquo;s behavior and asked his staff to look into it.        

Dismantling the force may be easier said than done. Neither Mr. Abdali, the deputy national security adviser, nor Sediq Sediqi, the spokesman for the Interior Ministry, could say how it would be done. Disarmament efforts have proved extremely difficult in Afghanistan, where many militiamen simply bury their guns for another day.        

NATO did not respond on Monday to requests for comment on how the group would be disarmed and disbanded.        
Matthew Rosenberg reported from Kabul, and Alissa J. Rubin from New York. Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul.
