
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani on Monday denied news reports that he was planning to dismiss the country&rsquo;s army and intelligence commanders in the aftermath of tensions that have emerged over a controversial memo that claims the civilian government had sought American help in constraining the powerful Pakistani military.        

Last week, in an unusual outburst, Mr. Gilani had warned of conspiracies against the civilian government, accused the commanders of acting as &ldquo;state within a state&rdquo; and reminded them they were accountable to the parliament. The tone of his remarks suggested that dismissals were possible &mdash; the opposite of the message he sought to convey on Monday.        

Speculation about the government&rsquo;s intentions dismiss the two commanders &mdash; Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, the head of the army, and Lt. Gen Ahmad Shuja Pasha, the head of Pakistan&rsquo;s intelligence service, were fueled by news reports in the stridently anti-American press in Pakistan, where many people view the United States as an arrogant adversary instead of an ally.        

Any hints of clandestine collaboration between the civilian government and Washington represents potential political damage to Mr. Gilani and the president, Asif Ali Zardari, who is already unpopular.        

On Monday, The News, an English language daily known for aggressive reporting against the Mr. Gilani&rsquo;s Pakistan Peoples Party, the majority party that runs the government, published a report titled &ldquo;Is sacking of Generals Kayani and Pasha on the cards?&rdquo;        

The speculative article, which carried no byline, claimed that United States officials had encouraged the civilian government to dismiss the two generals. The article said their removal would make it easier for the United States to impose its &ldquo;desired strategy in the region&rdquo;, a veiled reference to the Pakistani military&rsquo;s differences with the United States over the conflict in neighboring Afghanistan.        

Denying any such plans, Mr. Gilani also rejected speculation that tensions even existed between the military and his civilian government.        

&ldquo;How can we run a government if there is any tension?,&rdquo; Mr. Gilani said in response to a question during a news conference at the prime minister&rsquo;s house in the capital. &ldquo;There is no clash between the government and the military.&rdquo;        

Mr. Gilani also said that it was not prudent to change the military leadership during a time when the military was fighting an insurgency against Taliban militants.        

&ldquo;We cannot change a general in a middle of a war,&rdquo; Mr. Gilani said.        

While Mr. Gilani&rsquo;s apparent about-face suggested an effort at containing the dispute over the memo, political analysts here said that tension persisted between the civilians and the military. Mehreen Zahra-Malik, an assistant editor at The News, said Mr. Gilani&rsquo;s remarks did not signal &ldquo;that a rapprochement has occurred or is even underway.&rdquo; She said the prime minister was &ldquo;trying to calm nerves.&rdquo;        

On Tuesday, the Supreme Court resumes a hearing on petitions that seek an investigation of the memo and its origins. General Kayani and General Pasha, who have said the memo is authentic, urged the court to authorize an inquiry. The civilian government has contended the memo is a &ldquo;pack of lies&rdquo; and was concocted to sow distrust between the civilian administration and the military, which has a history of intervening in Pakistani politics.        
