
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; At least 30 people were killed in fighting in the rebellious Syrian city of Homs on Monday, spurring France to join with residents and opposition figures in urging observers from the Arab League to quickly visit the city.        

What residents described as a multiday siege of Homs, Syria&rsquo;s third-largest city, has left several neighborhoods without food, water or electricity. Videos posted by human rights activists showed bloodied bodies lying in the streets, and residential buildings badly scarred by a fierce urban battle.        

&ldquo;The authorities in Damascus must imperatively, in keeping with the Arab League plan, allow the access of observers to the city of Homs,&rdquo; a spokesman for the French Foreign Ministry said in a statement. &ldquo;The repression and unprecedented violence committed by the regime of Damascus must cease.&rdquo;        

Fifty observers, from Jordan, Egypt, Tunisia and elsewhere, arrived in Syria on Monday night. They are supposed to monitor pledges by President Bashar al-Assad&rsquo;s government to withdraw its tanks and troops from cities and release political prisoners.        

The Arab League said its observers would travel to Homs and other cities on Tuesday, even as human rights activists questioned how effective the mission would be. Critics have raised doubts about whether the observers can, or will, work independently of the Syrian government, and whether the team has members qualified to make sense of a conflict that looks increasingly like a civil war.        

The Arab League has not released a list of the observers, though the names of a few people have become public.        

Speaking to the Reuters news agency Monday, the team leader, Lt. Gen. Mohamed al-Dabi, a former head of military intelligence and external security in Sudan said, &ldquo;Our Syrian brothers are cooperating very well and without any restrictions so far.&rdquo; He added that Syrian forces would be providing transportation for the observers.        

Wissam Tarif, the Arab world campaigner for Avaaz, which documents protests, said he and other activists had repeatedly asked for biographies of the observers. He said his organization had decided not participate over concerns that government would be escorting the observers to conflict zones, making it impossible to do impartial interviews.        

&ldquo;A rapist can&rsquo;t be one of the forensic experts examining a victim,&rdquo; he said.        

The observer visit coincides with some of the worst violence in the nine-month uprising, as the army and the security forces have attacked strongholds of resistance, in Homs and near Idlib.        

Residents of Homs said the security forces had fired on protesters. They also spoke of an intensifying war in some neighborhoods, pitting defecting soldiers and other armed government opponents against the security forces and the army. Soldiers surrounded neighborhoods, tanks patrolling the streets. The residents, holed up in bathrooms or lower floors, could not say where most of the firing was coming from.        

The fighting was concentrated in the Bab Amr neighborhood. A resident there, Abu Omar, said hundreds of families had fled and the neighborhood had run low on food. His family was surviving on potatoes. Several days ago, dozens of soldiers took over part of his house, firing heavy machine guns from his third floor for days.        

In the city&rsquo;s Inshaat neighborhood, residents said that the dead included a 60-year-old man, apparently shot as he walked to a mosque. Two groups &mdash; the Local Coordination Committees and the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights &mdash; said that 30 to 35 people were killed, but their tallies could not be confirmed independently.        

Armed military defectors also seemed to be fighting intensely. A witness quoted by Reuters reported seeing ambulances full of wounded government soldiers over the last few days. Other residents said there was heavy shelling by government forces, but also exchanges of gunfire between the army and the opposition. The state news agency, Sana, said funerals were held on Monday for several members of the security forces killed in Homs.        

Videos posted by activists on the Internet showed bodies in the rubble of buildings and mortar shells striking apartment buildings. The fighting is the latest trial for Homs, a stronghold of government resistance that has become one of Syria&rsquo;s most perilous cities. Sectarian murders have left scores dead as armed defectors have carved out strongholds in some neighborhoods.        

Some of the killings seemed to underscore the increasingly confused state of the battle in Homs. A 56-year-old woman in the Al-Malaab al-Baladi neighborhood, who gave her name as Nagham, said that on Monday morning, armed men told a taxi driver to stop, then shot at the taxi when he refused.        

The car wound up in a public garden facing the woman&rsquo;s house. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know who stopped him,&rdquo; she said, speculating that the man could have been an informer stopped by revolutionaries, or a man wanted by the security forces. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know anything anymore.&rdquo;        
Hwaida Saad and an employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Beirut, and Scott Sayare from Paris.
