
LONDON &mdash; Eleven people between 16 and 22 years old were in custody on Tuesday after a fatal stabbing 24 hours earlier shut down London&rsquo;s main shopping street during one of its busiest days of the year, a move that prompted frustrated consumers to surge against police lines and a police officer to fire a stun gun.        

The stabbing, part of a wave of knife crime that has swept through many of Britain&rsquo;s largest cities in recent years, stunned many here. It seemed likely to renew pressure for stiffer penalties against those who carry knives, and demands that Prime Minister David Cameron fulfill promises in a general election 20 months ago that all those caught carrying knives would face prison terms.        

Scotland Yard announced that a post-mortem had shown that the stabbing victim, Seydou Diarrassouba, 18, had died of a knife wound to the heart during a fight in a sneaker store on Oxford Street, an iconic stretch of chain stores and boutiques in the heart of London and the traditional center of its Christmas festivities.        

The episode unfolded on Monday, as thousands of local residents and tourists flocked to Boxing Day sales. British newspaper reports said members of rival youth gangs had clashed over a pair of sneakers in a Foot Locker store. They quoted witnesses as saying that Mr. Diarrassouba had staggered into the street and collapsed amid a heavy crowd of shoppers.        

With shoppers looking on, police officers and paramedics came to his aid. Armed officers deployed in the area stood guard, repeatedly pushing back angry youths seeking to reach the victim as the paramedics tried in vain to revive him.        

A few hours later, a second man, 21, was stabbed in the leg near the Oxford Circus Underground station, a few hundred yards from of the first attack. His wounds were not life-threatening.        

Commenting on a possible connection between the stabbings, a police inspector, Bruce Middlemiss, was quoted by The Guardian newspaper as saying: &ldquo;There&rsquo;s nothing firm. However, they are a similar sort of circumstances, youths possibly from the same South London area.&rdquo;        

News reports said that various weapons had been recovered in the first case, and that the police were questioning a 16-year-old, three 17-year-olds, five 19-year-olds and two 22-year-olds. The police were focusing their investigation across the Thames in South London, setting up an incident room at Lewisham, a district where youth gangs rioted in August in the wave of rioting that struck dozens of British cities and towns.        

Detective Chief Inspector Mark Dunne told the BBC, &ldquo;There appear to be two groups of young people involved in this incident and opposing each other.&rdquo; Appealing for witnesses, John Sweeney, Scotland Yard detective superintendent, said the police were particularly eager to have camera-phone footage.        

Oxford Street, home to major multistory retailers including Selfridges and Debenhams, reopened Tuesday for the second day of an annual post-Christmas shopping spree. Monday and Tuesday were both holidays in England.        

Retailers had been looking forward to a post-Christmas sales boom to make up for lackluster pre-holiday sales. Shoppers gathered on Oxford Street from 10:30 p.m. on Christmas Day to be first in line for bargains and shop owners in Central London reported $23.5 million of business in their first three hours on Monday.        

The sales are being closely watched in Britain for a clue of what may lie ahead for the economy in the new year, with sluggish growth in recent months having fallen further, to near zero, and some economists predicting a return to recession if there is no resolution to the crisis in the euro zone, which accounts for 40 percent of Britain&rsquo;s overseas trade.        
