
PRAGUE &mdash; It could be the plot of a Cold War thriller: a Russian spy working undercover as a prison psychologist seduces an attractive female army major, dubbed the Czech Mata Hari, who passes on state secrets from three senior generals. The spy flees the country. The generals resign in disgrace.        

But in what some here have called the worst espionage scandal in the Czech Republic since 1989, the Rakhardzho affair &mdash; named for Robert Rakhardzho, a wily Russian spy &mdash; appears to contain elements of both fact and fiction. Distinguishing the two is difficult, but the tale includes a subplot involving one of the largest nuclear power deals in Czech history, an intricate web of deceit and a cast of characters that has reached the highest levels of the army and government.        

&ldquo;It is disturbing to many Czechs that Russian spies are working here, influencing us, even as we don&rsquo;t even realize it,&rdquo; said Jaroslav Spurny, a leading investigative journalist who has written widely on the case. &ldquo;We got rid of those people and now they are coming back.&rdquo;        

The scandal, which began to surface last summer, is still reverberating in a country where the memory of 40 years of communist rule overseen by the Soviet Union remains strong. Fears are intensifying that Russia, under Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin, is seeking to re-establish its influence in its former satellites, using its vast energy resources &mdash; and a network of Russian spies masquerading as diplomats and businessmen &mdash; to dominate the region.        

Mr. Rakhardzho did not return phone calls and is believed to have fled the country. But details gleaned from investigators and people who knew him paint a picture of a charming and acutely intelligent man adept at deception and camouflage.        

The Rakhardzho case has eerie parallels to those accused of being Russian sleeper agents arrested in the United States this summer. Like the spies in America, who quietly infiltrated suburban life, Robert Rakhardzho operated deep in the fabric of his adopted country for years, gaining Czech nationality, speaking fluent Czech and enjoying weekend mountain treks near the Polish border, according to investigators.        

Fears about shadowy Russian influence have intensified in recent weeks with ferocious jockeying over a $20 billion project to build several nuclear reactors at Temelin, in the south of the country, that has pitted a consortium led by a subsidiary of Rosatom, the Russian state nuclear company, against separate bids by Westinghouse, which is owned by Toshiba, and Areva of France.        

The government said in October that the winner would be chosen in 2013. State security officials despair that Russia will do whatever it takes to emerge on top of what has become a highly symbolic showdown between pro-Russian and pro-Western forces in the country.        

That has set off alarms among the intelligence community that Prague &mdash; with its large Russian-speaking community, Slavic culture, and Russian-linked energy industries &mdash; is becoming a hotbed of Russian espionage not seen since the Cold War.        

Nestled next to the imposing Prague Castle, home to the Czech president, are anonymous tree-lined streets with elaborate mansions that serve as offices for Russian captains of industry. Nearby, gaggles of well-heeled Russian tourists shop for luxury goods before heading to Grand Caf&eacute; Slavia, a meeting place for artists, intellectuals and dissidents since the 19th century that is also believed to be a favorite of agents and would-be spies.        

The motives of Russian espionage, intelligence officials insist, are also geopolitical: the Czech Republic, a staunch ally of the United States, recently attracted the ire of the Kremlin for agreeing to allow Washington to install part of a proposed missile defense system in the Czech Republic.        

Fears of Russian infiltration have been swirling for years. In the summer of 2009 the Czech Republic evicted two alleged Russian agents from the embassy in Prague. A June report by BIS, the domestic intelligence agency, warned that up to 150 people connected to Russian intelligence were operating in the country, coordinated by the Russian ambassador to Prague.        
(Page 2 of 2)
Aleksei Fedotov, the former Russian ambassador, who left Prague in September, has dismissed the allegations. In an interview with the Czech daily Pravo in September he called the reports that Russian spies were operating in the Czech Republic a &ldquo;media fiction produced on political order.&rdquo;        

Other Russian business executives call the case a pretext by right-wing opponents of the Kremlin to bait Russians in order to exclude them from lucrative business deals like Temelin.        

The son of a Russian archivist mother and an Indonesian father, Mr. Rakhardzo moved to Prague in 1992 to study psychology, and married a Polish woman. Investigators believe he was recruited by the Russian secret service in 2003 while on vacation in Crete.        

He worked as a psychologist at the Jirice prison on the outskirts of Prague, conducting psychological profiles of police and prison officials, and using his links to the Interior Ministry to cultivate high-level contacts.        

His mission, investigators say, was to collect compromising information on Czech military, economic and political officials to make them susceptible to blackmail. They say he received logistical and financial support via Berlin rather than Prague to avoid detection by Czech counterintelligence agents.        

Mr. Rakhardzho achieved a breakthrough in 2004 in a psychology class when he befriended Major Vladimira Odehnalova, chief of staff to the three senior generals, and offered to be her academic adviser. Investigators allege that Ms. Odehnalova, 39 and married, was passing on information about the generals&rsquo; families, hobbies, finances and personalities, ostensibly unaware that Mr. Rakhardzho was a spy.        

While it is unclear what exactly Mr. Rakhardzo achieved, the fact that he was able to infiltrate the highest echelons of the Czech establishment has alarmed the intelligence community here. &ldquo;In terms of depth, intensity, aggressiveness and sheer number of operations, the Russian intelligence services have no competition on Czech territory,&rdquo; noted the report by the domestic intelligence agency.        

Ms. Odehnalova &mdash; dubbed by the media the &ldquo;Czech Mata Hari&rdquo; after the Dutch courtesan accused of spying and executed in France during World War I &mdash; declined to comment. But in an interview with the daily Mlada Fronta Dnes, she said she had no idea that Mr. Rakhardzho was a spy. Describing him as &ldquo;tall, educated, cultured&rdquo; and &ldquo;a bit mysterious,&rdquo; she said the two were friends, went to the movies, had dinner and talked over five years, but that she had never divulged classified information.        

She said the revelation that he was a spy destroyed her life. &ldquo;My life disintegrated like a house of cards,&rdquo; she told the newspaper. &ldquo;I will never forgive myself for my share of guilt in destroying the careers of the generals.&rdquo;        

Intelligence experts say Mr. Rakhardzho, sensing he was being tailed, fled the Czech Republic in September 2009 for Moscow. He left in such a hurry, they say, that his wife, abandoned with two children, filed a missing persons report with the Czech police.        

Two months later, Ms. Odehnalova and two of the generals &mdash; Josef Sedlak, who was a military representative to the NATO command in Europe, and Josef Proks, deputy general for the Chief of Staff &mdash; suddenly resigned in mysterious circumstances. The third, Frantisek Hrabal, head of the Military Office of the President, left his position in March. The Defense Ministry has said that they left at their own request.        

In a rare interview in late November, Mr. Sedlak, who has gone underground since the scandal erupted, vigorously denied that he had passed on any state secrets. He said he had never met Mr. Rakhardzo and that the first he ever heard of him was in November 2009 when he was summoned to the office of the then defense minister, Martin Bartak, informed that he was under suspicion and asked to resign.        

He said he was told that his phone had been tapped and that there was damning evidence implicating him in breaching state security, evidence he says he was never shown.        

Mr. Sedlak said he believed the Rakhardzho case was a setup aimed at purging him and his fellow generals. Other military officials say the minister, who later resigned in an unrelated incident, was seeking a scapegoat after a hugely embarrassing incident in 2009 in which several senior Czech officers stationed in Afghanistan had been caught wearing Nazi SS insignia on their helmets.        

&ldquo;I never saw one shred of evidence against me, not one, ever,&rdquo; Mr. Sedlak said, saying that his relations with Ms. Odehnalova were purely professional. &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t buy this idea that Ms. Odehnalova is some kind of Mata Hari. This idea that she was having a relationship with three generals is a story for a novel.&rdquo;        

Reporting was contributed by Jan Krcmar in Prague and Clifford J. Levy from Moscow.        
