
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; After prodding by his American and European backers, President Hamid Karzai dropped his opposition to allowing the Taliban to set up an office in the Persian Gulf state of Qatar, saying on Tuesday that he could abide by such a step if it was what the United States wanted.        

In a statement issued late Tuesday, Mr. Karzai reiterated his preference that a proposed Taliban peace mission be opened in Saudi Arabia or Turkey. But if the United States insisted that it be in Qatar, then &ldquo;we are agreed,&rdquo; he said in remarks to the Kuwaiti news media, according to the statement from his office.        

The statement also made no mention of a previous Afghan demand that the Taliban stop fighting before being allowed to open an office.        

The idea behind the office is to give Afghan and Western peace negotiators an &ldquo;address&rdquo; where they can openly contact legitimate Taliban intermediaries. American and Afghan officials say that setting it up in a country like Qatar &mdash; or, for that matter, Saudi Arabia or Turkey &mdash; would have the added benefit of lessening Pakistani influence over the Taliban.        

Afghan and American officials fear that Pakistan could use any talks as a way to cement its own influence in Afghanistan. They consider that problematic because Pakistan, which has an increasingly tense relationship with Washington, has tolerated the Taliban leadership&rsquo;s residing there and coordinating attacks into Afghanistan from Pakistan.        

Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s reversal on Qatar&rsquo;s offer to host a Taliban office appeared to represent a small step forward for a peace process that has been marred by a series of false starts, including the discovery last year that a man who said he was a Taliban emissary was an imposter.        

The wild card now is what the Taliban will do. It is unclear if they are truly open to talks, especially since some in the movement believe they are winning &mdash; or at least can hold out until the end of 2014, when most of the foreign forces are scheduled to be withdrawn.        

Mr. Karzai has become more wary of the Taliban&rsquo;s intentions after the former chief of the country&rsquo;s peace council, Burhanuddin Rabbani, was killed in September by a suicide bomber posing as a Taliban emissary.        

Despite Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s uneasiness, the United States and Germany together have made some progress in reaching out to the Taliban in recent months. The talks had centered on opening an office, preferably in Qatar, which is seen as relatively neutral and, most important, was willing to host it, according to American and Afghan officials.        

Everyone appeared to be on the same page until this month, when reports surfaced in the Indian and Pakistani media that the plan for an office in Qatar had been completed. Afghanistan promptly recalled its ambassador, saying the Qataris had not cleared their plan with Kabul. Western diplomats expressed dismay. The Afghans, they said, were demanding a leading role but not doing anything to move the process forward.        

Afghan officials countered by saying they had not been fully consulted and that they could not take part in a process controlled by foreigners. They insisted that the office be in Saudi Arabia or Turkey, although it was never clear that either of those countries was willing to host a Taliban peace mission. Afghan officials also never fully explained why they preferred those two countries over Qatar, all three of which fit their demand that the office be in a Muslim country.        

It was not apparent on Tuesday what had changed Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s mind. But an American official said that it was made clear to the Afghans that Qatar was the only option at the moment, and that waiting for another country to step forward would be only a waste of valuable time. The American asked not to be identified because he needed to maintain working relationships with his Afghan counterparts.        
