
NEW DELHI &mdash; After a day of high political theater, India&rsquo;s Parliament moved closer on Tuesday to passing landmark legislation to create an independent anticorruption agency, even as the activist Anna Hazare sought to rally public support for his own anticorruption demands by beginning a three-day hunger strike in Mumbai.        

The issue of official corruption has dominated India&rsquo;s politics this year, making the fate of the proposed agency, known as the Lokpal, the year&rsquo;s capstone political fight.        

On Tuesday, lawmakers in the lower house of India&rsquo;s Parliament, the Lok Sabha, spent hours waging a contentious, nationally televised debate before finally passing the legislation in a late-night vote. The measure will now be taken up for possible final passage by Parliament&rsquo;s upper house as soon as Wednesday.        

The Lokpal fight poses a critical challenge for the Indian National Congress, the party that leads the national coalition government and has been sharply criticized for an ineffective response to corruption. For months, Mr. Hazare and leaders of the political opposition have criticized the party over corruption scandals, and they are now attacking the government&rsquo;s Lokpal legislation as too weak.        

But Congress party leaders appeared determined to use Tuesday&rsquo;s parliamentary debate to place the political onus on their opponents. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said during the debate that the government had listened to public concerns about corruption and had shaped a Lokpal bill that &ldquo;lives up to the promise&rdquo; made to the Indian people.        

&ldquo;I urge all my colleagues in Parliament to rise to the occasion and look beyond politics to pass this law,&rdquo; Mr. Singh said.        

Pranab Mukherjee, the powerful finance minister, rebutted the various criticisms raised by opposition parties and civil society leaders like Mr. Hazare who have said that the government proposal is either too weak or, conversely, that it poses a threat to India&rsquo;s democratic checks and balances.        

&ldquo;We have incorporated the suggestions coming from various sections, including the suggestions from the civil society,&rdquo; Mr. Mukherjee said.        

If approved, the Lokpal would be created as a nine-person board empowered to investigate corruption accusations against bureaucrats and elected officials, including the prime minister.        

Last summer, Mr. Hazare fasted for 12 days in New Delhi in a campaign that pushed the Lokpal issue to the forefront of India&rsquo;s political agenda. Hundreds of thousands of supporters poured into the streets and forced the Congress party to agree to certain demands in shaping the Lokpal legislation. Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s movement tapped into widespread public anger over corruption and managed to awaken India&rsquo;s usually politically apathetic middle class.        

On Tuesday, Mr. Hazare sought again to galvanize public sentiment with his new hunger strike in Mumbai. He has sharply criticized the government&rsquo;s Lokpal bill as inadequate, and he hoped to rally his supporters in a new pressure campaign.        

But the crowds were modest, with about 5,000 people.        

Mr. Hazare has been sick, and his doctor had advised him against fasting. By late Tuesday night, Indian news channels showed him lying on a cot with several aides kneeling beside him. Ambulances were standing by to deliver him to the hospital if he agreed to go, local media reported.        

Mr. Hazare has vowed to wage a nationwide campaign to force lawmakers to create an anticorruption agency to his liking. After his three-day fast in Mumbai, he plans to travel to New Delhi and to &ldquo;court arrest&rdquo; by protesting outside the home of Sonia Gandhi, the president of the Congress party.        

Mr. Hazare&rsquo;s aides say that more than 130,000 supporters have volunteered to participate in similar civil disobedience campaigns intended to force the government to carry out mass detentions. He is also planning to campaign in state elections against Congress and other parties in the coalition government.        

&ldquo;The government has betrayed the people,&rdquo; Mr. Hazare told the crowd on Tuesday. &ldquo;One day, the people will teach them a lesson.&rdquo;        

In Mumbai, Amit Jani, 38, a doctor of homeopathy, said he was attending the rally because of the frustratingly slow pace of change in India. &ldquo;Every election, at every rally, Sonia Gandhi speaks about corruption,&rdquo; Mr. Jani said. &ldquo;But nobody does anything about it.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hazare and his advisers have attacked the government&rsquo;s legislation on several points, while focusing much of their criticism on the Central Bureau of Investigation. Mr. Hazare has argued that the C.B.I. should be placed under the control of an independent Lokpal. Under the government&rsquo;s bill, the agency would remain under the government&rsquo;s control.        

In Parliament on Tuesday, a leading opposition leader, Sushma Swaraj, criticized the government&rsquo;s Lokpal bill on many fronts while also arguing that certain provisions could violate the Indian Constitution.        

Other opposition lawmakers made similar complaints during a full-throated debate over the provision. The government has extended the session of Parliament through Thursday to provide enough time for lawmakers to debate and vote on the Lokpal bill.        

Under the government&rsquo;s bill, the Lokpal would be created through a constitutional amendment, as a constitutional body, rather than as part of the broader government bureaucracy. The bill also establishes quotas for minority groups on the Lokpal board. Ms. Swaraj argued that such quotas exceeded the mandate of the Constitution, which has no such provisions for quotas in constitutional bodies.        
Jim Yardley reported from New Delhi, and Vikas Bajaj from Mumbai. Hari Kumar contributed reporting from New Delhi.
