
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; North Korea said on Tuesday that it wanted to restore scuttled agreements with South Korea that could channel extensive investments from the developed South into the impoverished North. The request was conveyed in the first official interaction with visitors from the South since the death of the North&rsquo;s leader, Kim Jong-il.        

But it was unclear whether North Korea, under the new leadership of Kim Jong-il&rsquo;s untested young son Kim Jong-un, was prepared to offer any concessions in return for restoring those agreements, which the South Korean leader, Lee Myung-bak, scrapped when he came to power nearly four years ago.        

Kim Yong-nam, president of the North Korean Parliament and a ceremonial head of state, expressed the request when he met with Lee Hee-ho, the widow of former President Kim Dae-jung of South Korea, according to Ms. Lee&rsquo;s spokesman, Yoon Cheol-gu.        

Ms. Lee&rsquo;s 13-member delegation returned home on Tuesday after visiting Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, where she expressed condolences to Kim Jong-un. Members of her delegation and one led by Hyun Jeong-eun, chairwoman of Hyundai Asan, a company that has business ties with North Korea, were the first South Koreans to meet with Kim Jong-un and other North Korean leaders since his father&rsquo;s death on Dec. 17.        

Kim Jong-il held summit meetings with Kim Dae-jung in 2000 and with his successor, Roh Moo-hyun, in 2007. Both meetings produced promises of large South Korean investments. Both South Korean leaders believed that boosting economic exchanges would ease military tensions on the divided Korean Peninsula, which has been in a technical state of war for more than six decades, and reduce the cost of an eventual reunification of Korea.        

But that approach was reversed when Mr. Lee, a conservative, took office in early 2008. He demanded that the North first abandon its nuclear weapons program. North Korea has since denounced Mr. Lee as a &ldquo;national traitor,&rdquo; and relations with the South have worsened considerably over the last few years.        

Ms. Lee and Ms. Hyun had volunteered to visit Pyongyang in recognition of North Korea&rsquo;s delegations that had attended their husbands&rsquo; funerals.        

Ms. Lee wished that her husband&rsquo;s biggest legacy &mdash; the &ldquo;sunshine policy&rdquo; of bolstering economic exchanges with the North &mdash; would be revived. Ms. Hyun, too, had reasons to hope for better ties; Hyundai Asan has suffered heavy losses from its investments in the North&rsquo;s Diamond Mountain resort, which has been closed since 2008.        

On Wednesday afternoon, North Korean television began showing recorded footage of Kim Jong-il&rsquo;s funeral procession. It showed a hearse moving slowly through a snowy plaza filled with soldiers, who gave the body of their former leader a last salute.        

For Kim Jong-un, two urgent tasks loom after his abrupt rise: consolidating loyalty of the party and military elites, and engineering an economic recovery, said Jonathan D. Pollack, a senior fellow in foreign policy at the Brookings Institution.        

In the last years of Kim Jong-il, North Korea had shown interest in attracting foreign investment. It opened a couple of special economic zones along the border with China. Despite worsening ties with the South, it did not close a joint industrial park on that border. It also agreed in principle to let a pipeline pass through its territory so Russia could sell natural gas to South Korea. But it remains unclear to outside analysts whether the isolated and paranoid leadership will dare full-scale, Chinese-style market reform any time soon.        

Unlike his grandfather Kim Il-sung, who was often vilified as a war criminal in the South, and his father, whom most South Koreans regarded as a terrorist, Kim Jong-un can be seen by many in the South as the first leader of the North with a relatively &ldquo;clean past,&rdquo; said Yang Moo-jin, a professor at the University of North Korean Studies in Seoul. That could make him more willing to open up, if Washington and Seoul coax him with the right overtures, he said.        

On Tuesday, North Korean television showed Kim Jong-un courteously receiving Ms. Lee and Ms. Hyun when they arrived to pay their respects to his father, whose body was lying in state in a Pyongyang mausoleum on Monday. He clasped their hands with both of his hands and bowed when the visitors voiced their condolences.        

&ldquo;Thank you for coming a long way,&rdquo; he told Ms. Lee, her spokesman said.        

Since Kim Jong-il&rsquo;s death was announced on Dec. 19, North Korea has hailed his son as supreme commander of the Korean People&rsquo;s Army and as head of the ruling Workers&rsquo; Party, signaling that he will soon officially take those top titles, which his father had held. The North&rsquo;s news media, all controlled by the state and the government&rsquo;s main tool of indoctrination, started a widespread campaign to build a personality cult around Kim Jong-un, glorifying the family&rsquo;s dynastic rule.        
