
BEIJING &mdash; Three of five village advocates who had been abducted by men in plain clothes and detained by the police during a prominent confrontation between local officials and irate residents of a coastal village in south China have been released, a village spokesman said on Tuesday.        

The release of the three advocates in the village, Wukan, was part of an agreement reached between a protest leader, Lin Zuluan, and provincial officials on Dec. 21. Mr. Lin met with other protest leaders later that day, and in the afternoon they called off their occupation of the village.        

The villagers had taken full control of Wukan, which has 13,000 residents, on Dec. 12, after running out all the Communist Party officials and repelling an assault by the police. The takeover of the fishing village was the culmination of protests that began in September over what many villagers called illegal land sales by party officials to wealthy developers, a common problem across China.        

In the fall, the villagers had chosen 13 representatives to negotiate with the officials to get the land back. On Dec. 9, men in plain clothes arrived in Wukan in four minibuses without license plates and seized five of the representatives at a restaurant, according to a report in The Daily Telegraph, a British newspaper.        

One of the men, Xue Jinbo, died in police custody on Dec. 11. Family members, some of whom saw his body, say he was tortured to death. Although officials denied this, news of the death infuriated the villagers, who then chased out the last of the party officials on Dec. 12 and began demanding that the police return Mr. Xue&rsquo;s body.        

The spokesman who talked by telephone on Tuesday, Chen Xidong, said one representative was still being held because the police were looking into matters involving him that are unrelated to the larger Wukan protests. Mr. Chen did not talk in more detail about the police investigation.        

The first detainee to be released returned to Wukan on Dec. 22, the day after the protests were called off. The other two were released later.        

Provincial officials have not appointed replacements for the party positions abandoned by the officials who fled Wukan, Mr. Chen said, and the party committee building in the village remained empty.        

Village leaders have met with higher officials in the past week to discuss the land issue and other problems. The senior official who led negotiations on Dec. 21 was Zhu Mingguo, the deputy party secretary of Guangdong Province. The most senior official in Guangdong, Wang Yang, a man said to have aspirations for a top party position, has generally preferred to negotiate settlements to protests rather than ending them by force. The day after the agreement was reached, an article in People&rsquo;s Daily, the mouthpiece of the Communist Party, praised Mr. Wang for settling the situation, but it was unclear whether the article represented a widespread view inside the party.        

Mr. Zhu was among more than 30 officials who returned to Wukan on Dec. 22 to meet again with the village leaders, Mr. Chen said.        

On Tuesday, an article in The Guangzhou Daily, an official newspaper based in the provincial capital, cited Mr. Zhu telling officials at a meeting that the problems of ordinary people are not trivial. &ldquo;Many of the mass incidents are first triggered by some simple reasons,&rdquo; he said.        

Mr. Zhu spoke to officials on Monday at a meeting on social stability and appeared to be sharing lessons learned from the Wukan protests.        

&ldquo;In terms of society, the public&rsquo;s awareness of democracy, equality and rights is constantly strengthening, and their corresponding demands are growing,&rdquo; he said, according to a translation of the Guangzhou Daily article by Reuters.        

&ldquo;Public consciousness of rights defense is growing, and the means used to defend rights are increasingly intense,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;Their channels for voicing grievances are diverse, and there is a tendency for conflicts to become more intense.&rdquo;        

Mr. Zhu said local officials in Wukan were largely to blame for the recent unrest. They had sold two-thirds of the land without giving adequate compensation to the villagers, he said.        

&ldquo;Now, where are the state cadres who remember that farmers don&rsquo;t have land for their food?&rdquo; Mr. Zhu said. &ldquo;When do they think of the hardships of ordinary people?        

&ldquo;If these complaints had been dealt with sooner, would they have ever caused such a big ruckus?&rdquo;        
Shi Da contributed research.
