
TRIPOLI, Libya &mdash; Sometimes the young fighters gather under a date palm next to the empty swimming pool to joke and strum the guitar. When it rains, they retreat indoors to play foosball in an improvised game room inside their favorite hangout, a ransacked house where one of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi&rsquo;s sons once lived and entertained.        

The house is a sprawling one-story pleasure dome, completely unlike any in which they were raised, set in a compound of manicured gardens whose sprinklers still spin two months after its former owner, Muatassim el-Qaddafi, died shortly after his capture by rebels. It is hidden from the neighborhood around it by walls of steel and concrete, and its luxuries include a high-tech workout room and a private Turkish bath, with water still pooled on its dank floors and its ceiling studded with hundreds of tiny lights that mimic the night sky.        

&ldquo;You have to see this place with your own eyes to believe it,&rdquo; Moad Farhat, 21, a university student-turned-rebel, said as he walked through the marble-floored rooms and the winding, fluorescent-lighted corridors of the bunker beneath the house, its rooms full of outdated computers and beds for security guards. &ldquo;This was the son of the president.&rdquo;        

The fall of the Qaddafi government pulled back the curtain on many state secrets, some better kept than others. All of Libya knew of the chasm between the luxuries afforded Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s inner circle and the lives of most Libyans, but seeing it up close is another matter entirely. And for the young men in the Capital Martyr&rsquo;s Brigade who are living there now, the house is more than just a symbol of that divide: it is one last mission they have assigned themselves.        

&ldquo;All of us rebels stay here, and if something happens somewhere, then we will go there,&rdquo; said Yahya Warragh, 25, an engineering student from the town of Nalut in the mountains southwest of the capital. &ldquo;But everything has stopped now. Before, we caught many people who fought for Qaddafi and killed people, but now we just protect the house. That is the main thing we do.&rdquo;        

That means its heavy metal gate, now painted with rebel flags, remains shut to the &ldquo;general public,&rdquo; who Mr. Warragh and others fear &ldquo;would break or steal things.&rdquo; A team of West African groundskeepers still show up to trim the grass; shape the hedges into neat, leafy pyramids; and collect a salary that the ex-rebels take up a collection to pay.        

&ldquo;We pay the workers, but no one is paying us,&rdquo; Mr. Warragh said.        

Members of the brigade first came upon the house on Aug. 25 as they swept through the Ben Ashour neighborhood and engaged in a brief gunfight with its security guards, who they say soon fled. When the fighters returned to the house three days later, they found it mostly looted. The groundskeepers said that Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s son had not lived there for three months.        

Like the other young men in this and other militias, Mr. Warragh gave up schoolwork and job searches for the chance to &ldquo;save the country,&rdquo; he said. But now that Colonel Qaddafi is gone, many believe that the militias&rsquo; work is done, creating an open, and sometimes contentious, question for the fighters and the interim government that is working to build a new state from the ruins of 42 years of Colonel Qaddafi&rsquo;s brutal, eccentric and narcissistic rule.        

The interim government has asked the militias to lay down their arms, but most have refused. Their leaders say they fear that a new tyrant will arise in the nation&rsquo;s uncertain political landscape, and for many rank-and-file fighters there is simply no reason to leave militia life until the government can offer them something to do.        

&ldquo;I am sick of being here,&rdquo; said Mr. Warragh, lying on one of the plush sofas overlooking the empty pool. He dreams of traveling to Canada to finish his education, getting a good job and seeing the world, but he says that many in the brigade just want a stable life.        

&ldquo;None of the revolutionaries have any money,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There are a million things I want from the government. We made the revolution and we created the government, and now it has to do something for us.&rdquo;        

That demand was echoed this week when about 200 ex-rebels protested in the rain outside the sleek glass-and-steel office of Libya&rsquo;s interim prime minister, Abdel Rahim el-Keeb, one day before a deadline &mdash; again, ignored &mdash; for fighters from outside of Tripoli to leave the capital.        
(Page 2 of 2)
The government has struggled to exert authority even in the streets of the capital, where fighters from a patchwork of groups perform duties typically undertaken by the state, like directing traffic or providing airport security. The government&rsquo;s inability to carry out these functions is a barometer of its limited authority, as well as a major complaint of ex-rebels who say the state benefits from their labor but does not pay them.        

&ldquo;We work like the police, but we do it for free,&rdquo; said Tarek al-Guindy, 25, a fighter from the Nafusah Mountains who came to the protest. &ldquo;We are tired of being in these brigades sitting around guarding things all day. We want jobs, like any normal person&rdquo;        

Libyan officials have pledged to integrate fighters into the security services or create jobs for those who disarm and return to civilian life, but have released no specifics. &ldquo;We know it is not a matter of simply saying, &lsquo;Put down your arms and go back to work,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; Mr. Keeb told reporters recently.        

Abdul Hafidh Ghoga, a spokesman for the Transitional National Council, said that despite the release of $40 billion of state assets that had been frozen abroad, the government simply did not have the money for programs that could coax fighters into state jobs or smooth a return to civilian life. He said it could take several weeks for the money to be put to work. &ldquo;We have a lot of programs designed, but we are not able to execute them because we do not have the financial resources,&rdquo; he said.        

Back at the house, the young fighters skip rocks across a small artificial pond, its water murky and still because they have not figured out how to turn on a towering waterfall in the corner. Lawn chairs had been tossed into the rain-soaked grass, and white roses grew nearby.        

&ldquo;Muatassim lived a fancy life,&rdquo; Mr. Farhat said. But it was not one that he envied. &ldquo;He lived like a dog, cut off from the world behind these high walls, in here with all his toys.&rdquo;        

Still, the men admit that it is sometimes hard to approach their new base, or the shocking turn of events that brought them here, with anything besides giddiness or awe. &ldquo;Every day I have to remember to thank God,&rdquo; Mr. Warragh said with a smile. &ldquo;They killed Muatassim, and we took his house.&rdquo;        
