
BEIJING &mdash; Chinese investigators delivered a long-awaited report on Wednesday on the deadly July 23 high-speed train crash in the eastern coastal city of Wenzhou, citing a string of blunders, including serious design flaws in crucial signaling equipment.        

Two former top officials of the Railway Ministry &mdash; who had been removed from their posts months before the crash over alleged corruption &mdash; were singled out for blame.        

The disaster killed 40 people and injured 191. It was a serious setback to China&rsquo;s hopes to turn high-speed rail into a symbol of the nation&rsquo;s technological and industrial progress, and led to an online wave of public outrage that died down only after government authorities muzzled the domestic media.        

The crash investigators found sloppy development of the signaling equipment, bidding irregularities in the contract to provide it and lapses by safety inspectors who were supposed to ensure its quality. When lightning struck the Wenzhou line, the wrong signals appeared, sending one high-speed train smashing into the rear end of another on a viaduct.        

Investigators put the bulk of the responsibility the former railway minister, Liu Zhijun, and the Railway Ministry&rsquo;s deputy chief engineer, Zhang Shuguang. Before Mr. Liu&rsquo;s arrest on corruption charges in February, he led the endeavor to build nearly 5,000 miles of high-speed rail in seven years, one of China&rsquo;s most dramatically ambitious initiatives.        

Mr. Zhang reportedly controlled the contracts for the high-speed system. He was also taken into custody early this year.        

Also singled out was Ma Cheng, the former head of China Railway Signal and Communication Corporation, an enormous state-owned enterprise that specializes in rail-control technology and provided the signaling equipment for the Wenzhou line. Mr. Ma died of a heart attack a month after the accident.        

The investigators&rsquo; findings were presented Wednesday afternoon to the State Council, China&rsquo;s equivalent of a cabinet, which decided to punish 54 officials for failing to do their jobs. Some were involved in a badly bungled rescue effort.        

The Railway Ministry called off the search for survivors after just eight hours and instead concentrated on clearing the wreckage so rail traffic could resume. Workers dug a pit and buried one carriage before investigators even showed up. They were forced to unearth it two days later. Officials &ldquo;did not disclose information and did not respond to the concerns of the public in time,&rdquo; the report said. &ldquo;Both caused a negative impact in the society.&rdquo;        

The report, which was posted online, did not address the question of whether the same design flaw threatens the signaling equipment on other lines. Government sources quoted by a Shanghai newspaper last summer said that the same equipment had been installed at 58 stations and 18 signal-relay stations.        

Any acknowledgement of systematic flaws could hurt China&rsquo;s hopes of exporting its high-speed rail equipment and technology. But customers might also back away if the inquiry is seen as incomplete or a whitewash.        

China Railway Signal and Communication, the signaling-system provider, sells its technology and services to more than 20 countries, including Pakistan, North Korea, Iran and Zambia. The company&rsquo;s Web site says it devotes itself first of all to safety.        

The much-anticipated report provided names of officials who would be held to account, but few new details about the cause of the accident. Officials pinpointed a design flaw in the signaling equipment months ago. They also blamed poorly trained station workers for failing to notice the equipment malfunction and halt trains on the line.        

In August, the authorities ordered a safety review of all high-speed trains and suspended the construction of new lines pending safety checks. According to Xinhua, the official news agency, the State Council also reduced the top rail speed to 186 miles per hour from 217.        

The disaster threw a spotlight on skulduggery in the Railway Ministry, a fief of two million workers that owns the railways it regulates, a stark conflict of interest that experts have repeatedly criticized. Caixin, a Chinese magazine known for aggressive reporting, disclosed last week that Mr. Zhang, the ministry&rsquo;s former chief engineer, had purchased a luxurious home in a Los Angeles suburb in 2002, when his government salary amounted to about 2,200 renminbi, or $264, a month.        

The magazine estimated the cost of the house, which Mr. Zhang bought with his wife, at roughly $860,000, or about 7.12 million renminbi. It said Mr. Zhang, the right-hand man and confidant of Mr. Liu, the disgraced minister, transferred his share of the house to his wife in January, just before he was taken into custody. &ldquo;Where did he get the millions needed to by an upscale home in California?&rdquo; the article asked.        
Mia Li contributed research.
