
BUENOS AIRES &mdash; Damian V&aacute;squez used to regularly update the prices of household cleaning products on the sign outside his store. Today he often does not bother. Inflation has been causing prices to rise so fast that he grew tired of the effort to keep up.        

&ldquo;When prices stabilize a little, I write the new prices,&rdquo; said Mr. V&aacute;squez, 27. &ldquo;But lately prices have been changing almost weekly.&rdquo;        

High inflation &mdash; a weakness of the Argentine economy for decades &mdash; is soaring again. Independent economists say inflation rose by 25 to 30 percent in 2010, the highest level since the calamitous 2002 devaluation that sent the economy into a tailspin.        

This time around, the pain is already being felt by the poor. Food-price increases began to outstrip wage increases in 2010, leading Argentines to buy less food, private economists say. And many in the middle and upper classes are leaning more heavily on credit cards, helping push up levels of personal debt.        

While a return to the kind of hyperinflation that swept Argentina in the 1970s and 1980s &mdash; when retailers sometimes updated prices hourly &mdash; seems unrealistic to most, inflation shows no sign of abating and is calling into question the success of efforts for more &ldquo;social inclusion&rdquo; by President Cristina Fern&aacute;ndez de Kirchner, who is expected to seek re-election in October.        

Inflation has reared its head elsewhere in Latin America as well. Brazil, which was ravaged by hyperinflation of more than 2,000 percent as recently as 1994, has become increasingly concerned that inflation will exceed 5.5 percent this year. In Venezuela, inflation is 27.2 percent, according to Venezuela&rsquo;s Central Bank, the highest in Latin America, and President Hugo Ch&aacute;vez has blamed &ldquo;speculators&rdquo; for raising prices there.        

In Argentina, it has become a heated political issue. Mrs. Kirchner insists inflation is not a problem, even in the face of substantial evidence presented by private economists and local officials that the government&rsquo;s national statistics agency has been grossly underreporting inflation and poverty  for four years.        

The government&rsquo;s official 10.9 percent inflation rate is less than half the estimate of private economists and firms like Ecolatina, which put inflation at 26.6 percent in a report last month. The official 12 percent number for poverty is also well below independent estimates of about 30 percent.        

The economy minister, Amado Boudou, said in November that inflation was a problem of &ldquo;the middle and upper classes,&rdquo; and blamed companies for raising prices. Inflation &ldquo;is not an issue of big proportions that the Argentine population is criticizing,&rdquo; he said in a radio interview.        

But some economists and pollsters say rising prices of food and clothing affect the poor most, especially those in the informal economy, in which 40 percent of Argentines make their living.        

&ldquo;It is clear that inflation weighs heaviest on Argentines on fixed incomes and especially those in the informal economy that don&rsquo;t have a union to defend their interests,&rdquo; said Sergio Berensztein, a political analyst with Poliarqu&iacute;a, a consulting firm in Buenos Aires.        

Even as the government says Argentina&rsquo;s economy grew by 9.5 percent in 2010, the nation&rsquo;s poverty level topped 30 percent of the population, the highest since poverty exceeded 50 percent after the 2001-2 economic crisis, private economists said.        

&ldquo;The poverty level is higher now than the worst moments of the 1990s,&rdquo; said Domingo Cavallo, a former economy minister. &ldquo;Without a doubt, inflation is increasing poverty.&rdquo;        

In early 2007, the government of President N&eacute;stor Kirchner, Mrs. Kirchner&rsquo;s husband, who died last year, began manipulating data from the statistics agency, said Mart&iacute;n Redrado, who was president of Argentina&rsquo;s Central Bank at the time.        

Mr. Kirchner replaced personnel at the statistics agency in a bid to &ldquo;improve operations,&rdquo; he said. Two of the agency&rsquo;s directors were fired or resigned after refusing to manipulate economic figures, Mr. Redrado said.        

In the years since then, the cumulative rate of inflation has been 120 percent, private economists said, though the government has reported it to be 39 percent in the four-year period, according to a comparison in the newspaper La Naci&oacute;n last month.        

The manipulation of the statistics has drastically increased Argentina&rsquo;s risk profile, driven away foreign investors and complicated the country&rsquo;s efforts to return to the credit markets, even as it moves to settle $100 billion in debt from a 2001 default.        

Mr. Redrado said he resigned from the Central Bank in early 2010 after refusing Mrs. Kirchner&rsquo;s request to tap bank reserves. After his departure, the government started borrowing heavily from the Central Bank.        

Critics say the government is also refusing to print bills in denominations larger than 100 pesos because that would be an acknowledgment of soaring prices and could revive memories of hyperinflation, when the Central Bank issued notes of up to 1 million pesos.        

To keep up with the demand for more bills, the government has contracted with Brazil to print 16 billion pesos in banknotes, the first time Argentina has turned to Brazil for printing money, said a spokesman at the Central Bank.        
Charles Newbery contributed reporting from Pinamar, Argentina.
