
CAIRO &mdash; Egypt&rsquo;s military rulers are lending $1 billion to the central bank to prop up the country&rsquo;s flagging currency, offering evidence of both the precarious state of the economy and the military&rsquo;s singular status within it.        

The loan, reported by state news media on Wednesday, appeared to be part of a broad public relations campaign. Faced with criticism of its reluctance to turn over power and its brutal treatment of protesters, the ruling military council is apparently trying to show it is helping alleviate Egyptians&rsquo; financial distress.        

Economists, however, noted that the easy access to $1 billion &mdash; money in undisclosed military accounts outside of the central government&rsquo;s control &mdash; is also a reminder of the special power and privileges top generals have long enjoyed. Their efforts to preserve that special status in perpetuity, even after the promised election of a new civilian government, set off the outbreak of protests against military rule last month and the generals&rsquo; subsequent crackdown.        

&ldquo;If they lend $1 billion, it means they have got a far greater amount out there,&rdquo; Ragui Assaad, an Egyptian economist at the University of Minnesota, said in a telephone interview. &ldquo;They want to show that they are trying to be as helpful as they can, but it is also a reminder that they have this big autonomous budget.&rdquo;        

News of the loan came on the same day that former President Hosni Mubarak was wheeled into a courtroom on a hospital gurney to resume his trial, which itself is a focus of popular frustration.        

Mr. Mubarak is charged with conspiring to kill demonstrators during the 18 days of protests that ended his rule, and with using his position to enrich himself, his sons and a friend. But after five months and only five hearings, there are suspicions that the verdict will be not guilty. That could be explosive, given that most Egyptians appear to hold Mr. Mubarak ultimately responsible for violence and corruption under his decades of rule.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t think it is going well,&rdquo; said Hossam Bahgat, executive director of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights. &ldquo;The way it is going now, many feel that he might be acquitted.&rdquo;        

Such an outcome could be politically damaging for the military rulers, but the $1 billion loan was intended to help stave off a more immediate threat. Because the economy has ground to a virtual halt since Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s ouster &mdash; foreign investment and tourism both ran dry &mdash; economists and bond buyers now say Egypt will almost certainly be forced to further devalue its sagging currency. Prices could soar, squeezing the majority of Egyptians who live in or near poverty.        

Economic advisers to the military rulers have said that with the economy starved of foreign money, foreign currency reserves are falling at rate of about $2 billion a month. The government held about $30 billion before the January revolution, counted about $22 billion in October and projects $15 billion by the end of next month. Mahmoud Nasr, an assistant to the minister of defense for financial affairs, has said $5 billion is for prior obligations, leaving only $10 billion &mdash; just enough to cover two months of imports and not enough to ensure a stable currency.        

While the Egyptian government is taking steps to fortify its reserves, like selling bonds abroad and soliciting rapid international aid, Mr. Nasr said in state news media on Wednesday that the military was also doing its part with a $1 billion loan from its &ldquo;production profits&rdquo; &mdash; that is, profits from its unusual ministry-owned commercial empire.        

The armed forces have not opened their books to public or parliamentary oversight since the 1952 coup. In recent decades, top generals have built a sprawling conglomerate under the ministry&rsquo;s umbrella, with interests in automobile and electronics makers, hotels and resorts, and products like bottled water. The military also receives $1.3 billion in direct American aid, although much of it in the form of weapons and other goods.        

Under Mr. Mubarak, the military often drew on its commercial clout to help ease economic problems &mdash; for example, calling on its bakeries to turn out bread when supplies ran low &mdash; and burnish its public image in the bargain. On Wednesday, along with news of the $1 billion loan, state media said the military was building a $1.3 billion road and sending aid to the recently flood-damaged city of Aswan. A top general went on private television to announce a new public housing project.        

Egyptians, though, were more captivated by the sight of Mr. Mubarak once again taking his place inside the metal cage used in courts here as dockets. His condition appeared little changed since the start of his trial, on Aug. 3. As before, he arrived by helicopter. He was rolled into the courtroom, lying on his back surrounded by guards. A thick green blanket protected him from the morning chill, and he cradled his hands behind his head.        

Lawyers for families of those killed in the uprising say they are increasingly concerned that Mr. Mubarak might beat the charges. The prosecution appears to be dependent on the testimony of former Mubarak officials, most notably Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, the current head of state. None has provided damning statements.        

Gamal Eid, a rights lawyer representing some of the families, said prosecutors&rsquo; investigation was &ldquo;weak and flimsy.&rdquo; &ldquo;If I were Mubarak&rsquo;s lawyer, I would get him innocence,&rdquo; he said.        
Mayy el Sheikh contributed reporting.
