
MOSCOW &mdash; President Dmitri A. Medvedev has responded to the street protests in Moscow with proposals for political reform, but his recent personnel appointments seem to tell a different story: top posts went to former officers in the K.G.B. and long-serving loyalists of his political mentor, Vladimir V. Putin.        

Mr. Medvedev said Wednesday that the law on reforms should be ready for consideration by the Parliament by mid-February.        

But without any delay, Mr. Medvedev has made several promotions this month from a hard-line faction in the Russian government known as the siloviki, or &ldquo;the strong ones,&rdquo; a term referring to men with backgrounds in the secret police or the military.        

The highest position went to Sergei B. Ivanov, a former colleague of Mr. Putin&rsquo;s from the Leningrad office of the K.G.B., who was appointed chief of staff of the presidential administration, a powerful role in the executive wing.        

He is hardly a figure who speaks to reform.        

Mr. Ivanov, who was an intelligence analyst specializing in Scandinavia during the cold war, and was once posted to London with the K.G.B., will replace Sergei Y. Naryshkin, a former Soviet diplomat.        

Mr. Naryshkin moved to Parliament, where he will be speaker, representing the United Russia Party.        

In another change, Russia&rsquo;s envoy to NATO, Dmitri O. Rogozin, who is known as irascible and an outspoken nationalist and who once hung a poster of Stalin in his office in Brussels, was appointed a deputy prime minister overseeing the military-industrial complex.        

Finally, the Kremlin&rsquo;s deputy chief of staff, Vladislav Y. Surkov, who had overseen domestic politics, moved to a deputy prime minister&rsquo;s position in the cabinet. He was replaced by Mr. Putin&rsquo;s former chief of staff in the prime minister&rsquo;s office, Vyacheslav Volodin, a loyalist who helped form a pro-Putin national political movement this year called the People&rsquo;s Front.        

Interpreting the meaning of these changes is an admittedly imprecise science &mdash; akin to the now-dated practice in Kremlinology of analyzing the position of bureaucrats on Lenin&rsquo;s Mausoleum during parades.        

All the same, critics of Mr. Putin say they contradict the promises of reform. The appointment of Mr. Ivanov in particular appears a retort to demonstrators.        

&ldquo;Hopes of some Russians that this regime can change through education, proper instruction or with convincing arguments are unfounded,&rdquo; Andrei N. Illarionov, a former economic adviser to Mr. Putin, wrote in a blog post this week. &ldquo;All hopes in its ability to evolve in the direction of democracy and liberalization collapsed.&rdquo;        

Dmitri B. Oreshkin, a member of a presidential advisory panel on human rights, said the appointees are &ldquo;men who act directly, decisively and in the Soviet style: If you are against us, you will receive a blow to the forehead.&rdquo;        

After the first of two protests in Moscow that were the largest street demonstrations since Mr. Putin came to power, Mr. Medvedev had offered in a speech that he would restore direct elections for governors, ease the rules on registering political parties and transform state television into public television. These changes were held up as concessions.        

Mr. Putin, for his part, on Wednesday told Russian journalists at a gathering for the New Year&rsquo;s holiday that &ldquo;there has to be dialogue&rdquo; with the opposition and &ldquo;I will think in what form it can take place.&rdquo; But he made it clear that was not about to happen anytime soon.        

Mr. Ivanov and Mr. Putin have said they are acquainted from work in the Leningrad office of the K.G.B. in the 1980s. Mr. Ivanov, a former minister of defense, is so close to Mr. Putin that he had been considered a plausible successor to the presidency in 2008, before Mr. Putin endorsed Mr. Medvedev instead.        

Mr. Rogozin was promoted to deputy prime minister in charge of weapons manufacturing.        

He said after Mr. Medvedev announced his appointment at a meeting in the Gorky residence outside Moscow that he would use an &ldquo;iron fist&rdquo; to whip the sector into shape as Russia sets out on a major rearmament program.        

&ldquo;That&rsquo;s how it should be done,&rdquo; Mr. Medvedev responded.        
