
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Until this week, a little-noticed part of the United States&rsquo; war effort here included teaching Afghan officials the art of public relations &mdash; mainly, how to give news conferences &mdash; at an American-financed government information center.        

But on Wednesday, as word spread that the American military and civilian advisers had been abruptly pulled from the center this week, both American and Afghan officials broke a cardinal rule of public relations: They could not get their stories straight.        

The Americans said that it was time for Afghan officialdom to deliver news on its own, and that the move had been planned for some time as part of the broader drawdown slowly under way. The Afghans said the Americans were annoyed over a news conference on Saturday that featured criticism of civilian deaths in NATO raids.        

In the grand scheme of the American war, this is a small spat over an institution that is little known outside Kabul news media circles. But if the Americans did leave over the news conference, it may signal their growing impatience with the steady drumbeat of Afghan criticism &mdash; and an increasing willingness to disengage from Afghan institutions with which they are displeased.        

That is a marked change from only a year ago, when American officials ordinarily reacted to perceived Afghan failures by pushing harder to reverse them. But the urge to reshape Afghanistan in a Western image appears to be fading.        

The news conference in question was held on Saturday, and it focused on the report of a delegation appointed by President Hamid Karzai to look into accusations of civilian casualties in the provinces of Kandahar, Kapisa and Paktia. The delegation painted a harsh picture of NATO forces, portraying them as callous and careless.        

But that was not unusual. Mr. Karzai has been voicing the same message for years, much to the frustration of American officials, who point out that a vast majority of civilian casualties are caused by the Taliban, not NATO.        

Afghans who work at the Afghan Government Media Information Center said they had not been told of any planned transition. They said they had noticed growing American impatience with some new Afghan employees at the center, who seemed to have more of an anti-American bent than their predecessors.        

The Americans have been back to the information center only once since Dec. 25 &mdash; they showed up with a truck on Monday night and packed up their equipment, an Afghan official said.        

The Afghans did not seem to have a problem with that. &ldquo;We have no regrets if they want to leave us,&rdquo; said Ezatullah Safi, the deputy director of the information center.        

A major, if often unnoticed, part of the American project in Afghanistan has involved embedding Western advisers &mdash; most civilian, some military &mdash; in nearly every Afghan department to help create a functioning government. In some cases, there was a point not so long ago when the American mentors were the main interlocutors between government ministers and foreigners in Kabul.        

Their efficacy has, at times, been questionable: the mentors at the central bank, for instance, failed to catch the brewing scandal with Kabul Bank. Once Afghanistan&rsquo;s largest lender, the bank nearly collapsed last year after evidence emerged that the Afghan political elite had used it as a personal piggy bank for years. The Western mentors are now gone.        

The Afghan attorney general threw out the mentors at his office last year when they became too helpful in pursuing corruption cases against government officials.        

The information center, in contrast, was a relative success, providing a focal point for news conferences, and in the process encouraging officials to hold them. That is a big change from a few years ago when some government ministries would request that questions be submitted by fax, even though they did not have working fax machines.        

American mentors still remain sprinkled throughout other parts of the Afghan government. But their importance is fading as the Americans try to start stepping back, militarily and economically. The American Embassy said in a short statement on Wednesday that the withdrawal from the information center was part of that process.        

&ldquo;The United States is reassessing and reviewing its relationship with the Afghan Government Media Information Center, and thought it appropriate to withdraw U.S. personnel while that process is under way,&rdquo; it said.        

The statement added that the withdrawal of the personnel was part of a planned transition, and added, &ldquo;We want to ensure that U.S. support and resources are used efficiently and effectively as the transition takes place.&rdquo;        

Gavin Sundwall, an embassy spokesman, said later in a brief telephone interview that timing of the pullout and the news conference were only a &ldquo;coincidence.&rdquo;        

American financing will continue. Afghan officials said the center received $3 million this year, and $4 million last year.        
Sharifullah Sahak and Rohullah Sorush contributed reporting.
