
VLADIMIR, Russia &mdash; At first glance, Sergei N. Filippov seems an unlikely political provocateur.        

A consummate insider, he is the chief executive of a regional affiliate of the government-owned energy giant, Gazprom, here in this ancient town. And he is an influential local member of Russia&rsquo;s ruling party, United Russia.        

But there he was at the latest session of the Vladimir Region legislature last week, disrupting scheduled debates on forest fire prevention and a transportation tax, to make an appeal to his fellow party members: acknowledge and repair the fraud that many people here believe United Russia committed in recent parliamentary elections.        

&ldquo;These violations must be documented,&rdquo; said Mr. Filippov, who has worked in the regional government for about 15 years. &ldquo;We cannot be silent about this. We will be doing a disservice if we fail to speak up today.&rdquo;        

The Kremlin has been shaken in recent weeks by the sudden and unexpected awakening of political life in Russia, as the middle class, angered by the election results, twice this month held huge protests in Moscow against United Russia and its leader, Vladimir V. Putin. On Tuesday, Vladislav Y. Surkov, a Kremlin official who is considered the architect of the centralized political system that has angered the protesters, was moved to a different job, in what appeared to be a sign that Mr. Putin takes the threat seriously.        

But for United Russia and Mr. Putin, who has dismissed the fraud accusation and belittled the protesters, Mr. Filippov represents another, perhaps more serious threat. Mr. Filippov is just one of several officials to publicly break ranks with the party leadership in recent weeks, suggesting fraying loyalties while undermining the party&rsquo;s already crumbling credibility more than any protester could.        

&ldquo;This is probably what United Russia is scared of most: that someone from the inside will start to talk,&rdquo; said an official in the Vladimir Region government, who did not want to be identified speaking about the party.        

&ldquo;They don&rsquo;t understand that the silence is hurting them above all. If nobody is guilty, then why remain silent? The question answers itself.&rdquo;        

Whether out of conscience or a desire to assuage the anger of local constituencies, these dissenters have opened up a new front against the party as it maneuvers to confront the first real challenge to its authority in a decade.        

&ldquo;I think the party needs to be revived, and not only revived because this is happening already,&rdquo; said Olga V. Kryshtanovskaya, an academic and a United Russia member. &ldquo;The party has to be cleansed of the corrupt.&rdquo;        

Ms. Kryshtanovskaya and several colleagues created a group on Facebook called &ldquo;UR for Free Elections,&rdquo; using the United Russia logo with a white ribbon, the symbol of the protest movement. More than 250 people have joined the group, though it is unclear how many are actually United Russia members.        

Vladimir V. Semago, a member of the governing council of United Russia&rsquo;s Moscow branch, wrote an op-ed in the opposition newspaper Novaya Gazeta last week praising the recent protests in an apparent attempt at penitence.        

&ldquo;I have done many things in my political life that I am ashamed of,&rdquo; Mr. Semago wrote. &ldquo;But I do not have the nerve to appear in front of people who are now carrying out their civic duty, look them in the eye, and tell them that our seats in the Parliament are more important than their protest.&rdquo;        

Some, including Mr. Semago, have even come out to the recent protests.        

Mr. Filippov has perhaps become the best known of these dissenters, thanks to a few minutes of video footage showing him condemning fellow United Russia legislators this month for failing to look into violations.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;re sitting here like ostriches with our heads in the sand,&rdquo; he says on video taken at a meeting of the budget committee. &ldquo;The people are outraged, and we&rsquo;re just going to sit here silently. This is a slap in the face to all voters in the Vladimir Region.&rdquo;        

Mr. Filippov clearly did not intend for the footage to go public. An employee with a local television station has been accused of taking raw footage and uploading it to YouTube, where it was picked up by national news agencies.        

But he has not backed down from his efforts. He joined 11 local opposition legislators in signing an appeal to colleagues, outlining what the officials believe are the most egregious violations in the Vladimir Region, a relatively prosperous region of about 1.5 million people a few hours&rsquo; drive to the east of Moscow.        

Ballot stuffing and repeat voting for United Russia, documented across the country, were extensive in the region, the appeal said.        
(Page 2 of 2)
In addition, regional authorities unexpectedly created 59 additional polling places four days before the elections. Most were in factories, offices and universities, where the Sunday of the elections was declared a working day. Observers were blocked from monitoring many of these sites, the statement said, and in many of them United Russia received over 90 percent of the vote.        

In some towns in the region, the number of voters exceeded the number of residents.        

&ldquo;There is not one person who could say that these elections were honest,&rdquo; the appeal said.        

Even such blatant falsification failed to save the party, which officially gained 38 percent of the vote in the Vladimir Region, one of the worst showings in the country.        

The pressure on Mr. Filippov by United Russia leaders to drop the issue has been enormous, opposition legislators said. After inviting a reporter for The New York Times to the recent legislative session, he backed out of a promised interview without explanation.        

But he did call during the session for his fellow United Russia deputies to open an inquiry into the violations outlined in the appeal.        

The legislature, in which United Russia deputies hold over two-thirds of the seats, refused to submit the appeal for discussion.        

The depth of the discord within United Russia is unclear. There is certainly no sign that members will soon abandon the party in large numbers.        

&ldquo;In the minds of many party members there is chaos, a kind of creative dissonance,&rdquo; said Sergei A. Markov, a Kremlin-connected political analyst and former United Russia member of Parliament. &ldquo;I think the majority just want to wait this out.&rdquo;        

Asked after the session in Vladimir whether he thought more would eventually follow Mr. Filippov&rsquo;s lead, Aleksandr M. Sinyagin, a Communist Party legislator, said some in United Russia had &ldquo;moral support&rdquo; for a clear accounting of what happened during the elections.        

&ldquo;One or two will always come into my office and say, &lsquo;Aleksandr Mikhailovich, forgive us, I was forced to vote this way, though you are absolutely right,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;I am very happy that at least Sergei Filippov grew a heart and a spine. This was certainly unexpected and pleasant.&rdquo;        
