
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Violence continued to flare in the Syrian city of Homs on Wednesday, despite the presence of Arab League observers who are supposed to be monitoring a withdrawal of government forces from the city.        

At least one person was killed there, but away from the gaze of the observers, the death toll may have been higher: at least two &mdash; and as many as six &mdash; demonstrators were killed in the city of Hama after members of the security forces fired on a protest, according to antigovernment activists. In images posted on the Internet purporting to show the protest, gunfire could be heard as several people carried a wounded young man.        

The Syrian official news agency, SANA, reported Wednesday that armed men also killed eight members of one family in Hama.        

The Arab League observers are scheduled to visit Hama on Thursday, along with several other Syrian cities, including Idlib and Dara&rsquo;a. But the continuing violence seemed to underscore nagging doubts about the prospects for their mission.        

Human rights advocates have questioned whether the team has the qualifications or enough independence from the government to help end a conflict that many fear is veering toward civil war as growing numbers of armed men join the opposition. Already, more than 5,000 people have been killed since the popular uprising began gathering momentum &mdash; and harsh government retaliation &mdash; in March, according to United Nations estimates.        

The doubts about the observer mission seemed to grow Wednesday after comments by its leader, Lt. Gen. Muhammed al-Dabi, a former head of military intelligence in Sudan. Speaking about a visit on Tuesday to Homs that was interrupted by gunfire &mdash; and a city that has seen some of the worst violence in the nine-month conflict &mdash; General Dabi told Reuters, &ldquo;Some places looked a bit of a mess, but there was nothing frightening.&rdquo;        

At the same time, maybe because of the observers&rsquo; presence, the Syrian government on Wednesday seemed to offer a concession to its opponents, announcing that it had released more than 700 prisoners who did not have &ldquo;Syrian blood&rdquo; on their hands. The release, which could not be confirmed independently, followed a report on Tuesday by Human Rights Watch that said the government had recently transferred hundreds of political prisoners to sites including military installations to hide them from the monitors.        

Many opposition figures have argued that more time is needed to see whether the observers can be effective. Luay Hussein, an antigovernment activist, called the release &ldquo;an achievement of the street movement,&rdquo; but also said it represented a success for the observers. In Hama, one protest leader said that a large crowd tried to hold a demonstration on Wednesday in Aasi Square, the site of some of the largest demonstrations of the uprising.        

&ldquo;We thought the observers were coming and the security won&rsquo;t open fire,&rdquo; he said, using the nom de guerre Manhal for fear of retribution. &ldquo;It was a massive crowd. We tried to take over the square but the army and security forces blocked the way. They used tear gas and live ammunition,&rdquo; he said, adding that an unofficial photographer for the demonstrations was killed. &ldquo;I&rsquo;m afraid to meet with the observers because they are being monitored, and they are not coordinating with us,&rdquo; he said.        

He appeared to be referring to reports from activists in Homs that observers who toured the city on Wednesday were at some point escorted by a Syrian military officer. Activists said the officer left after they refused to meet with the monitoring team.        

For a second day, there was evidence of a growing effort under way to observe the observers. In images posted by activists on the Internet, the observers, wearing bright orange vests, are seen walking as heavy gunfire can be heard somewhere nearby. One of the observers calmly turns toward the gunfire and takes a picture with his camera. Someone screams a narration, making sure viewers are aware of &ldquo;explosions&rdquo; during the visit. One of the observers says, &ldquo;Enough,&rdquo; seeming to ask the crowd to let them get on with their work.        

Other images highlighted the central role that the observers were already playing, despite any misgivings about their mission. In one clip, a crowd of people can be seen placing the body of a young boy, swathed in blankets, on the hood of a car bearing the Arab League logo. &ldquo;A 5-year old child, Nabil al-Araby,&rdquo; a man yells, referring to the secretary general of the Arab League, before someone places bullet casings on the child&rsquo;s stomach.        
Hwaida Saad contributed reporting.
