
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; For the second time in a week, a man wearing an Afghan Army uniform attacked NATO personnel on Thursday, this time gunning down two members of the French Foreign Legion in eastern Afghanistan before being fatally shot.        

The coalition released only a brief statement, saying that the two NATO service members were killed by &ldquo;an individual wearing an Afghan National Army uniform,&rdquo; and that the episode was under investigation. The French government later identified the two as legionnaires and said they had been &ldquo;deliberately shot by an Afghan National Army soldier.&rdquo;        

The Taliban were quick to take responsibility for the attack, which they said took place in the Tagab district of Kapisa Province, an area where the French forces in Afghanistan operate. Zabiullah Mujahid, a spokesman for the Taliban, said the assailant was a Taliban sympathizer in the Afghan Army who opened fire on the French around 6 a.m. inside a joint French-Afghan military base. &ldquo;There are soldiers in the army who are in contact with us and waiting for their chances to attack and kill the foreigners inside their bases,&rdquo; Mr. Mujahid said in a telephone interview.        

The Taliban often overstate the effectiveness of their forces. But Afghan soldiers have repeatedly shot their NATO counterparts in recent years, and there is widespread concern among NATO and Afghan commanders about insurgents infiltrating the ranks of the Afghan security forces.        

The earlier shooting occurred Saturday when an Afghan soldier &mdash; or possibly an insurgent wearing an Afghan Army uniform &mdash; opened fire on American soldiers in the western province of Farah during a joint patrol. Only the attacker was killed in that attack, which was preceded by an argument between the Afghans and the Americans. The Taliban took responsibility for Saturday&rsquo;s shooting as well.        

In a separate attack on Thursday, a roadside bomb that appeared to have been planted by insurgents killed at least 10 members of the Afghan Local Police, an adjunct force meant to augment the national police, an Afghan official said. The 10 police officers were riding in a pickup in the Nad Ali district of Helmand Province around 11:30 a.m. when they hit the buried explosives, said Daud Ahmadi, a provincial government spokesman.        
