
MOGADISHU, Somalia &mdash; A foreign aid worker was shot dead and another was wounded by a former colleague at their office here in the capital on Thursday, according to officials and witnesses, adding to a series of attacks on humanitarian workers and journalists that has underscored the dangers of working in this war-torn country.        

The foreigners, said to be French and Indonesian, worked for the Belgian branch of Doctors Without Borders. The Indonesian, a doctor, was taken to Madina Hospital.        

The suspect had worked for the aid organization but had recently been fired, according to witnesses. They said the man returned to the office with a concealed pistol late on Thursday afternoon.        

&ldquo;He had a hidden pistol and shot the aid workers,&rdquo; said an aid worker who identified himself as Ali. &ldquo;He was fired from work this week.&rdquo;        

Soon after the attack, Somali security forces sealed the area and arrested the person suspected of being the shooter. Telephone calls to the organization on Thursday went unanswered.        

The shooting follows a string of attacks on aid workers and journalists in recent days. A prominent Somali broadcast journalist, Abdisalan Sheikh Hassan, was shot to death on Dec. 18 in the Hamar-jajab neighborhood of Mogadishu. The assailant was a man in a government military uniform, according to a witness who was in the car with the journalist when he was he killed. The local journalists union said that Mr. Hassan was assassinated for his reporting. A suspect has been arrested.        

More than two dozen journalists have been killed in Somalia in recent years, but Mr. Hassan&rsquo;s death may be the first case to be prosecuted. More than 50 Somali journalists, fearing for their safety, are now living in Nairobi, in neighboring Kenya, in self-imposed exile.        

Also last week, two staff members of the World Food Program and a colleague with a partner organization were killed in the town of Mataban, in central Somalia, according to the organization. Mataban, which is under the control of a moderate Sufi group, was badly affected by the drought across the Horn of Africa. The organization said it had temporarily suspended its operations in the town as a result of the killings.        

Many analysts say they believe that many aid workers and journalists who brave one of the world&rsquo;s most dangerous environments to work here seem to be losing their tolerance for the risks, especially given the impunity with which attackers target them.        

Somalia has been without an effective central government since 1991, when the former military government was overthrown by clan militias that later turned on one another.        
