
Twelve days into an uprising in Egypt that threatens to upend American strategy in the Middle East, the Obama administration is struggling to determine if a democratic revolution can succeed while President Hosni Mubarak remains in office, even if his powers are neutered and he is sidelined from negotiations over the country&rsquo;s future.        

The latest challenge came Saturday afternoon when the man sent last weekend by President Obama to persuade the 82-year-old leader to step out of the way, Frank G. Wisner, told a group of diplomats and security experts that &ldquo;President Mubarak&rsquo;s continued leadership is critical &mdash; it&rsquo;s his opportunity to write his own legacy.&rdquo;        

But just before his remarks, Secretary of State Hilary Rodham Clinton gave a strategy overview that stood at odds with that assessment. At a minimum, she said, Mr. Mubarak must move out of the way so that his vice president, Omar Suleiman, can engage in talks with protest leaders over everything from constitutional changes to free and fair elections.        

It is hardly the first time the Obama administration has seemed uncertain on its feet during the Egyptian crisis, as it struggles to stay on the right side of history and to avoid accelerating a revolution that could spin out of control.        

The mixed messages have been confusing and at times embarrassing &mdash; a reflection of a policy that, by necessity, has been made up on the fly. &ldquo;This is what happens when you get caught by surprise,&rdquo; said one American official, who would not speak on the record. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ve had endless strategy sessions for the past two years on Mideast peace, on containing Iran. And how many of them factored in the possibility that Egypt,&rdquo; and presumably whatever dominoes follow it, &ldquo;moves from stability to turmoil? None.&rdquo;        

Just hours before offering her correctives of Mr. Wisner, Mrs. Clinton made the case at a gathering in Munich that the entire process would take time, and must be carefully managed. &ldquo;Revolutions have overthrown dictators in the name of democracy,&rdquo; she reminded her audience, &ldquo;only to see the process hijacked by new autocrats who use violence, deception and rigged elections to stay in power.&rdquo;        

Administration officials insist their responses have been more reaction to fast-moving events than any fundamental change in objective. Over the last few days, with Mr. Mubarak making it clear he does not intend to resign anytime soon, they have described their latest strategy as one of encouraging Egyptian elites to isolate him to the point where he is essentially a spectator to the end of his own rule.        

They want Mr. Mubarak to be able to leave with honor, so once again on Friday, Mr. Obama stopped short of telling him to go for fear, as one senior official put it, that &ldquo;the more he digs in, the harder it will be at the right moment to get him to let go.&rdquo;        

Transmitting the right message to constituencies who hear them differently is a problem the administration has confronted from the start of the crisis almost two weeks ago.        

When the first protesters appeared in Tahrir Square, Mrs. Clinton, working off the traditional American script that portrays Mr. Mubarak as a reliable ally in need of quiet, sustained pressure on human rights and political reform, said, &ldquo;Our assessment is that the Egyptian government is stable and is looking for ways to respond to the legitimate needs and interests of the Egyptian people.&rdquo;        

One week later, that script was cast aside for the first time in three decades. On Tuesday night, Mr. Obama and his top national security aides watched Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s defiant speech, in which he refused to resign but insisted he had never intended to run for re-election in September. It confirmed the conclusion they had gradually reached as the protest mounted: Instability would reign until the Mr. Mubarak got out of the way.        

&ldquo;He needed a push,&rdquo; said one official who was in the Situation Room with the president. When Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s speech was over, Mr. Obama called him, for what turned into a tense 30-minute conversation.        

Shortly afterward, Mr. Obama appeared in the foyer of the White House to declare that &ldquo;orderly transition must be meaningful, it must be peaceful, and it must begin now.&rdquo; He did not press Mr. Mubarak directly to resign, but Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s loyalists clearly interpreted it that way. The next day, government supporters were bused into the square and changed what had been a largely peaceful process in a day of rage, stone-throwing, clubbing and arrests, the most violent so far.        
 Helene Cooper and Scott Shane contributed reporting from Washington, and Mark Landler from Munich.
