
BEIJING &mdash; In a year of China under lockdown, when dissident writers have received breathtaking prison sentences and the mere whisper of a &ldquo;Jasmine Revolution&rdquo; has spurred mass detentions, perhaps the riskiest thing a Chinese politician could do is put his iron glove on the shelf.        

Which makes Wang Yang&rsquo;s gamble this month in Wukan all the more interesting.        

Mr. Wang, the up-and-coming Communist Party secretary of the southern Chinese province of Guangdong, faced a political turning point when 13,000 irate residents of Wukan evicted their leaders and barricaded themselves in their coastal village for 13 days in a last-straw uprising against local corruption.        

Given a choice of storming the village with armed police officers or conceding that the villagers&rsquo; complaints had merit, Mr. Wang chose the latter. And in a single morning, he defused a standoff that had drawn unflattering worldwide news coverage.        

The decision won him praise in the Communist Party&rsquo;s flagship newspaper, People&rsquo;s Daily, which called it an act of &ldquo;political courage&rdquo; in a tense situation. Some analysts said it might have strengthened his already strong prospects to land a seat on China&rsquo;s elite ruling body, the nine-member Standing Committee of the party&rsquo;s Politburo, when a wave of mandatory retirements vacates seven of the seats this coming year.        

And it raised the hopes of those here who want someone liberal &mdash; as defined by China&rsquo;s restrictive definitions &mdash; to push for political and social reforms at the highest level of China&rsquo;s leadership.        

&ldquo;He seems to favor reform,&rdquo; said Zhang Lifan, a historian formerly with the government-run Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. &ldquo;At least Mr. Wang realizes that maintaining stability with force and violence is both economically and politically unsustainable, and came up with an alternative that seems to work better.&rdquo;        

But as is amply shown by the travails of China&rsquo;s best-known quasi liberal, Prime Minister Wen Jiabao, having a soft heart for the dispossessed gets a politician only so far in a party where stability is the trump card.        

&ldquo;How high can a man jump?&rdquo; asked Yan Lieshan, a senior editor of Southern Weekly, a Guangzhou-based newspaper known for hard-hitting reporting. &ldquo;If officials overstep the limits set by the central government, their positions will become untenable.&rdquo;        

And in fact, while Mr. Wang has sometimes talked boldly about how power should not be concentrated in a &ldquo;minority of elites,&rdquo; many liberal-minded analysts characterize his own initiatives in Guangdong as modest, at best.        

&ldquo;Wang Yang&rsquo;s problem is when you try to make reform happen inside the system, if you go too fast you hurt the interests of others, and they will gang up on you to eliminate you,&rdquo; Mr. Zhang said.        

Like President Hu Jintao, widely seen as his ally, Mr. Wang, 56, comes from modest circumstances in Anhui, one of China&rsquo;s poorest provinces. Forced to leave school at 17 to work in a food factory, he got his political start in the early 1980s in Anhui&rsquo;s Communist Party Youth League, serving under Mr. Hu, who led the organization. One political insider said Wan Li, the Anhui party secretary who served as China&rsquo;s vice premier through most of the 1980s, first noticed Mr. Wang in Anhui and remained an influential backer.        

After impressive stints in local, provincial and national jobs, Mr. Wang gained two posts in 2007: membership on the 24-member Politburo and appointment as party secretary of Guangdong, China&rsquo;s most populous province and the government&rsquo;s minilaboratory for more progressive policies.        

Almost immediately, he talked of &ldquo;thought emancipation&rdquo; and the need to pioneer changes &mdash; and just as quickly hit head winds.        

On the economic front, he tried to use administrative levers to replace low-end, heavily polluting workshops and factories with high-tech, value-added industries. That prompted fierce resistance from local officials, who argued that deserting the factories that drove Guangdong&rsquo;s export-based economy would be fiscal suicide.        
Jonathan Ansfield contributed reporting. Li Bibo, Mia Li and Shi Da contributed research.
