
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; A huge car bombing in the restive southwestern city of Quetta killed at least 10 people and wounded 23 people on Friday evening, according to police officials.        

The Baluchistan Liberation Army, a shadowy banned separatist group, claimed responsibility for the attack and said that the blast was carried out by a suicide bomber, according to the local news media.        

Police officials disputed the claim and said that about 110 pounds of explosives were planted in a vehicle that was parked outside the home of Shafiq Mengal, the son of a former federal minister and former provincial acting chief minister, Naseer Mengal.        

The family of Mr. Mengal remained unhurt, the police said.        

It remained unclear why the Mr. Mengal&rsquo;s house was a target, but the B.L.A. has in the past targeted soldiers and government officials and buildings.        

The powerful explosion, heard from several miles away, spread panic in the volatile provincial capital. It damaged over a dozen vehicles and several houses in the neighborhood caught fire.        

Police officers and paramilitary soldiers cordoned off the area as ambulances ferried the wounded to Civil Hospital.        

A separatist insurgency led by has simmered for decades in the southwestern Baluchistan Province. Baluch nationalists demand greater autonomy and a bigger share of revenue from the province&rsquo;s mineral-rich resources. The sense of alienation and economic and political marginalization runs deep in the Baluch people.        

The insurgency in the province adds to the troubles of the federal government and the military, which has been fighting Taliban militants in the country&rsquo;s northwest. Human rights activists have condemned the heavy-handed approach of the military&rsquo;s intelligence and paramilitary troops in quelling the insurgency, accusing them of extra-judicial killings and kidnappings. Military officials deny those allegations.        

In a speech on Dec. 27, President Asif Ali Zardari urged the Baluch to give up arms and wage a political struggle.        
