
HYDERABAD, India &mdash; For more than two decades, M. A. Hakeem has arguably done the job of the Indian government. His private Holy Town High School has educated thousands of poor students, squeezing them into cramped classrooms where, when the electricity goes out, the children simply learn in the dark.        

Parents in Holy Town&rsquo;s low-income, predominantly Muslim neighborhood do not mind the bare-bones conditions. They like the modest tuition (as low as $2 per month), the English-language curriculum and the success rate on standardized tests. Indeed, low-cost schools like Holy Town are part of an ad hoc network that now dominates education in this south Indian city, where an estimated two-thirds of all students attend private institutions.        

&ldquo;The responsibility that the government should shoulder,&rdquo; Mr. Hakeem said with both pride and contempt, &ldquo;we are shouldering it.&rdquo;        

In India, the choice to live outside the faltering grid of government services is usually reserved for the rich or middle class, who can afford private housing compounds, private hospitals and private schools. But as India&rsquo;s economy has expanded during the past two decades, an increasing number of India&rsquo;s poor parents are now scraping together money to send their children to low-cost private schools in hopes of helping them escape poverty.        

Nationally, a large majority of students still attend government schools, but the expansion of private institutions has created parallel educational systems &mdash; systems that are now colliding. Faced with sharp criticism of the woeful state of government schools, Indian policy makers have enacted a sweeping law intended to reverse their decline. But skeptics say the litany of new requirements could also wipe out many of the private schools now educating millions of students.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s impossible to fulfill all these things,&rdquo; said Mohammed Anwar, who runs a chain of private schools in Hyderabad and is trying to organize a nationwide lobbying campaign to alter the requirements. Referring to the law, he said, &ldquo;If you follow the Right to Education, nobody can run a school.&rdquo;        

Education is one of India&rsquo;s most pressing challenges. Half of India&rsquo;s 1.2 billion people are 25 or younger, and literacy levels, while improving, could cripple the country&rsquo;s long-term prospects. In many states, government education is in severe disarray, with teachers often failing to show up. Rote drilling still predominates. English, considered a prerequisite for most white-collar employment in India, is usually not the medium of instruction.        

When it took effect in April 2010, the Right to Education Act enshrined, for the first time, a constitutional right to schooling, promising that every child from 6 to 14 would be provided with it. For a nation that had never properly financed education for the masses, the law was a major milestone.        

&ldquo;If we nurture our children and young people with the right education,&rdquo; said Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, commemorating the act with a televised address, &ldquo;India&rsquo;s future as a strong and prosperous country is secure.&rdquo;        

Few disagree with the law&rsquo;s broad, egalitarian goals or that government schools need a fundamental overhaul. But the law also enacted new regulations on teacher-student ratios, classroom size and parental involvement in school administration that are being applied to government and private schools. The result is a clash between an ideal and the reality on the ground, with a deadline: Any school that fails to comply by 2013 could be closed.        

Kapil Sibal, the government minister overseeing Indian education, has scoffed at claims that the law will cause mass closings of private schools. Yet in Hyderabad, education officials are preparing for exactly that outcome. They are constructing new buildings and expanding old ones, partly to comply with the new regulations, partly anticipating that students will be forced to return from closing private institutions.        

&ldquo;Fifty percent will be closed down as per the Right to Education Act,&rdquo; predicted E. Bala Kasaiah, a top education official in Hyderabad.        
Sruthi Gottipati contributed reporting.
