
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; North Korea announced on Saturday that its new leader, Kim Jong-un, had officially been named supreme commander of the country&rsquo;s powerful army, a day after the country warned that it would not soften its stance toward South Korea.        

The announcement of Mr. Kim&rsquo;s new military position was not unexpected, but his rise has taken place much faster than anticipated. Analysts have said the speed with which the relatively untested Mr. Kim is collecting titles after the death of his father, Kim Jong-il, suggests that he is vulnerable and that his supporters are trying to forestall any challenges to his power.        

The military post, awarded to Mr. Kim at a Politburo meeting of the ruling Workers&rsquo; Party on Friday, was the first official leadership title Mr. Kim has taken since the country proclaimed him to be the supreme leader at a huge rally in Pyongyang, the North&rsquo;s capital, on Thursday, one day after his father&rsquo;s funeral.        

By choosing the military title first, Mr. Kim, or whoever is engineering his rapid rise to power, was ensuring that he inherited the country&rsquo;s most important tool of control and his father&rsquo;s &ldquo;military first&rdquo; policy.        

North Korea made Mr. Kim top commander of the military according to instructions his father gave before his death, the North&rsquo;s official Korean Central News Agency said Saturday. When the decision was made, the Politburo meeting erupted with &ldquo;an ardent standing ovation,&rdquo; it said.        

It seems likely that Mr. Kim will soon assume more top titles, like general secretary of the party and chairman of the National Defense Commission.        

&ldquo;Kim Jong-un, as he is now, doesn&rsquo;t hold as much leadership and authority as his father did, so he must hurry to declare at home and to the world that he is the top man in his country,&rdquo; said Chang Yong-seok, a senior researcher at the Institute for Peace and Unification Studies at Seoul National University. &ldquo;And the first institution he must have control of is the military, which is key to protecting power.&rdquo;        

But Mr. Chang said that it might not be Mr. Kim himself, but rather his senior guardians, who were elevating him to the top post. &ldquo;They know that if they don&rsquo;t hang together in this sensitive transition time and protect their own vested interest in upholding the system, they might hang separately,&rdquo; Mr. Chang said.        

The warning directed at the South, which included a threat to punish President Lee Myung-bak of South Korea for &ldquo;unforgivable sins,&rdquo; was the North&rsquo;s first official pronouncement to the outside world since Mr. Kim&rsquo;s elevation to supreme leader.        

Although the statement suggested that the North&rsquo;s stance toward countries it considers enemies would also not change, it did not name the United States or any other nation.        

&ldquo;We declare solemnly and confidently that the foolish politicians around the world, including the puppet group in South Korea, should not expect any change from us,&rdquo; the statement said. &ldquo;We will never deal with the traitor group of Lee Myung-bak.&rdquo;        

President Lee&rsquo;s government had refused to express official condolences to North Korea after Kim Jong-il&rsquo;s death. The South allowed only two private delegations to visit Pyongyang during what the North called &ldquo;the great funeral of the nation.&rdquo;        

But the North&rsquo;s anger at Mr. Lee dates to when he took office in 2008. A conservative, Mr. Lee reversed his liberal predecessors&rsquo; policy of providing large amounts of aid and investment to the North as a way of promoting political reconciliation. He first wanted the North to abandon its nuclear weapons program.        

By reverting swiftly to bellicosity after two weeks of mourning, North Korea appeared to demonstrate a confidence that the transition of power in Pyongyang was going smoothly. But, analysts say, the strident rhetoric is also a sign that the government is using tensions with the outside world to rally its military and people behind the new leader.        

&ldquo;By taking a confrontational stance with the external world, North Korea seeks to solidify its internal cohesion as it tries to establish Kim Jong-un as leader,&rdquo; said Kim Yong-hyun, a North Korea expert at Dongguk University in Seoul. &ldquo;At the same time, it is pressuring the South to change its policy.&rdquo;        
