
MOGADISHU, Somalia &mdash; A day after two of its foreign workers were gunned down by a former colleague, a medical aid group vowed on Friday to continue working in Somalia. The attack was the latest in a series on humanitarian workers and journalists, underscoring the dangers of operating in this war-torn country.        

The group, Doctors Without Borders, said the two workers, a Belgian and an Indonesian, were killed during a shooting at its offices here in the capital on Thursday morning, but the group added that it remained &ldquo;committed to continuing our humanitarian work in Mogadishu and elsewhere in Somalia.&rdquo;        

Somali security forces sealed the area after the attack and arrested a suspect in the shooting. He had recently been fired from Doctors Without Borders, witnesses said, and had returned to the office with a gun late on Thursday afternoon.        

&ldquo;He had a hidden pistol and shot the aid workers,&rdquo; said a fellow aid worker. &ldquo;He was fired from work this week.&rdquo;        

Telephone calls to the organization went unanswered.        

The shooting follows a string of attacks on aid workers and journalists in recent days. A prominent Somali broadcast journalist, Abdisalan Sheikh Hassan, was shot to death on Dec. 18 in the Hamar-jajab neighborhood of Mogadishu by a gunman wearing a government military uniform, according to a witness who was in the car with the journalist when he was he killed. The local journalists&rsquo; union said that Mr. Hassan was assassinated for his reporting; a suspect has been arrested.        

More than two dozen journalists have been killed in Somalia in recent years, but Mr. Hassan&rsquo;s death may be the first to be prosecuted. More than 50 Somali journalists, fearing for their safety, are now living in self-imposed exile in Nairobi, Kenya.        

Last week, two members of the World Food Program&rsquo;s staff and a colleague who worked for a partner organization were killed in Mataban, in central Somalia. Mataban, which is controlled by a moderate Sufi group, was badly affected by the drought across the Horn of Africa. The World Food Program said it had temporarily suspended its operations in the town as a result of the killings.        

Many analysts say they believe that many aid workers and journalists here seem to be losing their tolerance for the risks, especially given the impunity of the attacks.        

Somalia has been without an effective central government since 1991, when the former military government was overthrown by clan militias that later turned on one another.        
J. David Goodman contributed reporting from New York.
