
BEIJING &mdash; Police officers killed seven people they accused of being kidnappers in a remote mountainous area of Xinjiang on China&rsquo;s turbulent western frontier, according to state-run news organizations on Friday.        

One police officer was also reported to have been killed in the shootout, which occurred on Wednesday.        

Parts of Xinjiang, particularly in its southern reaches, experience regular waves of protest, with many members of the region&rsquo;s ethnic minorities citing oppressive rule by the Han, the dominant ethnic group in China. The Chinese government, by contrast, has said it is battling separatists in Xinjiang and the neighboring Tibetan plateau.        

A spokesman for the Xinjiang government told the Xinhua state news agency that a group of &ldquo;violent terrorists&rdquo; abducted two people in Pishan County. The area is in the restive Hotan Prefecture, which is dominated by Uighurs, a Turkic people who practice a relatively moderate form of Islam. The Han make up less than 2 percent of the population in Pishan.        

Xinhua did not specify the ethnicity of the people who were killed by the police, but Radio Free Asia, which has a Uighur-language service, quoted local residents as saying on Thursday that all of the victims were Uighurs. A spokesman for the World Uyghur Congress, an exile group in Germany, told Radio Free Asia that he doubted the official version of events.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not really credible to say the clashes were entirely caused by the actions of one party,&rdquo; the spokesman, Dilxat Raxit, said. &ldquo;There are various accounts on the ground of the number of people who died.&rdquo;        

Mr. Raxit said the authorities had sealed off roads into Pishan and had stationed security forces around the hospital where the dead and injured had been taken.        

A spokesman for Xinjiang&rsquo;s foreign affairs office declined to comment when reached by telephone. He said more details were available in an article printed Friday in Global Times, a state-owned newspaper.        

The article provided a complicated narrative of the events, with elements rarely seen in China, even in the troubled Xinjiang region. It cited a local official as saying that a group of 15 men had been trying to cross into Central Asia to receive &ldquo;jihadist training&rdquo; when they lost their way near Pishan. The men then seized two herdsmen and forced them to lead the way. The herdsmen escaped and contacted the local police. In the shootout, the police killed seven of the so-called kidnappers, injured four and detained another four.        

Global Times said Hou Hanmin, a spokesman for the Xinjiang government, confirmed the account and said the men attacked by the police were all from ethnic minorities, although he declined to specify.        

The newspaper also reported that police officers had looked into another kidnapping this month in Pishan in which a Uighur man was abducted and killed because he was found to be drinking alcohol.        

On Thursday, Xinhua reported that there were signs that religious extremism was on the rise in the area. It reported that store owners and vendors in rural areas of Pishan said they were afraid to sell alcohol or cigarettes for fear of retaliation.        

Doubts have been raised in recent years over the official versions of events in Xinjiang. In 2008, officials said two Uighur men were responsible for killing 16 paramilitary officers in the city of Kashgar by hitting them with a truck, setting off homemade explosives and attacking them with machetes. But foreign tourists who witnessed the event and took photographs of it said that there were no explosions and that the men wielding the machetes appeared to be wearing uniforms.        

The region has experienced frequent bouts of violence. In July, at least 18 people were killed when rioters, some armed with homemade explosives, attacked a police station in the city of Hotan, Xinhua reported, adding that 14 of the victims were rioters. The same month, at least 13 people were killed and 44 injured in two episodes in Kashgar involving groups of attackers, civilians and the police, Xinhua reported. Officials in Kashgar said a leader of one of the assault groups had trained in Pakistan, while a little-known Islamic group claimed the attacks were retaliation for the government&rsquo;s repression of the region&rsquo;s Uighur population.        

The biggest eruption in Xinjiang in recent years took place in July 2009, when Uighurs rioted in Urumqi, the regional capital, after the police broke up a protest rally. At least 197 people were killed and more than 1,700 were injured, most of them Han, according to Chinese officials. Uighur exile groups said an unknown number of Uighurs were killed by Han civilians and the police.        

It has been a year of unrest in Tibet, too: a dozen Buddhist monks and nuns have burned themselves to protest Chinese policies. Six of the protestors have died. A senior official, Zhu Weiqun of the United Front Work Department, said that the self-immolations would not lead to any policy changes, Reuters reported on Friday. Mr. Zhu&rsquo;s remarks on the self-immolations, which included a swipe at the Dalai Lama, were posted on the Web site tibet.cn.        

&ldquo;I can honestly say to our friends that even if such a thing happens again,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;the direction of the Chinese government&rsquo;s policies in Tibet and our attitude toward the Dalai clique&rsquo;s struggle will not change in any way.&rdquo;        
