
BAGHDAD        

RAFE AL-ESSAWI is the man in charge of Iraq&rsquo;s finances, a moderate Sunni doctor who greets his guests and denounces his foes in practiced English. He may also be the next leader to fall as the country&rsquo;s Shiite prime minister takes aim at perceived rivals and enemies, his fate a litmus test for a country in crisis.        

Unlike other Sunni politicians who have drawn fire from the Shiite-led government, Mr. Essawi is known as a conciliatory figure who has built bridges with Kurds, Shiites and Westerners. If the prime minister, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, takes action against him &mdash; he has already tried to relieve Mr. Essawi of his duties &mdash; it could open deep new divisions in Iraq&rsquo;s already tattered sectarian landscape and send a discouraging signal about whether a post-United States Iraq can forge a truly inclusive and representative government.        

Speaking in his chandeliered office, Mr. Essawi offered a grim read on his place in a political crisis that has brought Iraq&rsquo;s power-sharing government to the edge of ruin and raised questions about the Obama administration&rsquo;s assertion to have produced a stable and self-reliant Iraq. The only solution, he said, was new leadership. &ldquo;Maliki now wants just to get rid of his partners, to build a dictatorship,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;He wants to consolidate power more and more.&rdquo;        

He added: &ldquo;Someone else should be prime minister.&rdquo;        

TO his supporters, Mr. Essawi, 45, is a capable politician with deep ties to Iraq&rsquo;s Sunni heartland. To his critics, he is a political operator trying to bring down the government from the inside. His uncertain fate, working inside a government he opposes, offers a view into the bizarre, discordant world of Iraqi politics at a moment of deep upheaval.        

Mr. Essawi is one of dozens of politicians from the largely Sunni Iraqiya coalition who have decided to boycott cabinet meetings and sessions of Parliament in protest of what they say is Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s refusal to share power. Four members of the group have declined to join in the cabinet boycott, and Iraqi political analysts say Mr. Maliki could take advantage of the group&rsquo;s loose connections to try to coax one faction to his side. But he remains the finance minister, responsible for a $100 billion budget that pays millions of salaries and pensions. He has not spoken with Mr. Maliki in two weeks, and assails him as a new Iraqi strongman.        

On Tuesday, Mr. Maliki offered a kind of rebuttal. At his regular cabinet meeting, the prime minister asked that Mr. Essawi be declared &ldquo;ill and absent&rdquo; and said his job of preparing the budget should be handed over to Ali Shakri, the minister of planning and a politician allied with the Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr.        

Ali al-Mousavi, a top adviser to the prime minister, said that Mr. Maliki was simply trying to find a temporary solution to draw up Iraq&rsquo;s budget in the vacuum left by Mr. Essawi. He said that Mr. Essawi would retain his job as finance minister. In any event, the cabinet and Mr. Shakri refused to go along. Mr. Essawi saw the move as an escalation in Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s battle with Iraqiya and disclosed that he had received an apologetic phone call from Mr. Shakri, perhaps a small sign that some sectarian differences may yet be overcome in the new Iraq.        

Some of the criticism against Mr. Essawi has darker overtones. A few Iraqi officials have revived old accusations that Mr. Essawi has supported Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia. One of them, Abdul Hussein Hamid, a Maliki adviser, told the Kurdistan News Agency that &ldquo;there is a case that accuses the finance minister of supporting assassinations of political figures in Falluja.&rdquo;        

Hassan al-Saneed, a close ally of the prime minister&rsquo;s, said that the government was not investigating Mr. Essawi. But the timing of the leaks may be telling. Similar innuendo floated through Iraq&rsquo;s partisan press in the days before the government announced an arrest warrant for the Sunni vice president Tariq al-Hashimi, on charges that he ran a death squad. Mr. Hashimi is now camped out in Iraq&rsquo;s Kurdish north to avoid arrest, saying he cannot get a fair trial in Baghdad.        

Mr. Essawi said the charges against him were perennial falsehoods that surfaced whenever his opponents wanted to attack him. Last year, when Mr. Essawi was serving as Mr. Maliki&rsquo;s deputy, the prime minister told the American military he was worried about Mr. Essawi&rsquo;s possible links to terrorists.        

In August 2010, Gen. Ray Odierno, then the commander of United States forces in Iraq, took the extraordinary step of sending Mr. Maliki a letter in Arabic assuring him that American intelligence analysts had conducted a comprehensive review into the charges and determined they were groundless.        
Jack Healy reported from Baghdad, and Michael R. Gordon from Washington.
