
BEIRUT, Lebanon &mdash; Tens, and possibly hundreds, of thousands of people defied a continuing government crackdown to fill the streets of several Syrian cities on Friday, intent on showing visiting monitors from the Arab League the extent of opposition to President Bashar al-Assad.        

As thousands marched in Idlib, Homs, Hama and in the suburbs of the capital, Damascus, violence flared at several of the rallies. By day&rsquo;s end, activist groups said that more than two dozen people had been killed by security forces. The large crowds, while not unprecedented, underscored the resilience of the protest movement despite United Nations estimates that more than 5,000 people have died since opposition to the government galvanized in March.        

A protester in Dara&rsquo;a, who reported huge demonstrations, said: &ldquo;We want to show the Arabs and the world that we are peaceful protesters, not criminals or armed gangs. The coming days and weeks will prove our statements, not the regime&rsquo;s story.&rdquo;        

The government&rsquo;s supporters also held rallies, according to witnesses and the Syrian state news agency, SANA, which posted photographs of large gatherings in Aleppo and Damascus. The news agency said the protesters were &ldquo;demanding the Arab League observer mission to be credible and professional in conveying the facts of what the terrorist groups are perpetrating.&rdquo;        

The arrival of the observers has been one of the most closely watched developments in the nine-month-old Syrian conflict. For days this week, their role was heavily criticized by opposition activists, who complained about the paltry number of observers and about the mission&rsquo;s leader, a former Sudanese general. The military intelligence branch he oversaw has been accused of crimes by human rights groups.        

Many feared the mission was another stalling tactic by the government. Even so, everyone seemed to want a minute of the observers&rsquo; time.        

By week&rsquo;s end, after four hectic days of visits, the observers seemed to have ushered in a new phase of the conflict, or at the very least, altered its dynamic.        

They had not yet approached success in their official mission, including monitoring a withdrawal of government forces from cities and the release of political prisoners. Despite some withdrawals of tanks from certain neighborhoods, the government&rsquo;s security forces were still entrenched in restive cities. While people in Homs saw tanks pulling out, activists in Idlib said Friday that the security presence had increased.        

The government said it had released more than 700 prisoners this week, but activists and Human Rights Watch reported that hundreds of others were simply transferred to off-limits or secret detention facilities. The government still has not let journalists travel to the country, as it had promised.        

There were signs that the observers had begun registering some of the complaints that they had heard. In video posted by activists on Friday, a man wearing the observers&rsquo; orange vest &mdash; and whom advocates asserted was a member of the observer mission &mdash; tells a crowd of people that he and his colleagues saw snipers in buildings and had demanded that the government remove them.        

&ldquo;We saw them with our naked eyes,&rdquo; the man said. &ldquo;If they don&rsquo;t remove them, there will be other measures.&rdquo; In another clip, people showed the man bullet wounds and other scars.        

The presence of the observers also seemed to have altered the tactics of the opposition. The protesters, emboldened by the visitors, held vigorous demonstrations on several days this week, while an armed opposition militia, the Free Syrian Army, announced that it was halting its attacks on the government for the month that the observers would be on the ground.        

The leader of the rebel group, Col. Riad al-As&rsquo;aad, told Reuters that the group had halted attacks since the observers arrived last week, though his claim seemed to be contradicted by a video posted on the Internet on Wednesday showing armed gunmen aligned with the militia firing on a government convoy.        

And the mere presence of the observers did not seem to stop the killings of more than a hundred people, activists said, since the observers started their visits on Tuesday.        

From a rooftop in Qamishli, in the northeastern Syria, an activist captured on video a shooting at a demonstration on Friday. Young men, some throwing rocks, walked toward security officers, then scattered at the sound of heavy gunfire. Seconds later, on the ground below the activist, a man can be seen in a pink shirt, with what looks like blood welling in his lower back. Several men hauled him away.        

After security officers opened fire on a demonstration in a suburb of Damascus &mdash; an area the observers were visiting &mdash; one of the protesters, Muhammad al-Dormany, said: &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think 50 or 60 observers is enough to cover Syria.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;I think the Arab League should send thousands of observers, to all the hot spots.&rdquo;        
An employee of The New York Times contributed reporting from Damascus, Syria.
