
This article is by Kareem Fahim, Mark Landler and Anthony Shadid.        

CAIRO &mdash; The United States and leading European nations on Saturday threw their weight behind Egypt&rsquo;s vice president, Omar Suleiman, backing his attempt to defuse a popular uprising without immediately removing President Hosni Mubarak from power.        

American officials said Mr. Suleiman had promised them an &ldquo;orderly transition&rdquo; that would include constitutional reform and outreach to opposition groups.        

&ldquo;That takes some time,&rdquo; Secretary of State Hilary Rodham Clinton said, speaking at a Munich security conference. &ldquo;There are certain things that have to be done in order to prepare.&rdquo;        

But the formal endorsement came as Mr. Suleiman appeared to reject the protesters&rsquo; main demands, including the immediate resignation of Mr. Mubarak and the dismantling of a political system built around one-party rule, according to leaders of a small, officially authorized opposition party who spoke with Mr. Suleiman on Saturday.        

Nor has Mr. Suleiman, a former general, former intelligence chief and Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s longtime confidant, yet reached out to the leaders designated by the protesters to negotiate with the government, opposition groups said.        

Instead of loosening its grip, the existing government appeared to be consolidating its power: The prime minister said police forces were returning to the streets, and an army general urged protesters to scale back their occupation of Tahrir Square.        

Protesters interpreted the simultaneous moves by the Western leaders and Mr. Suleiman as a rebuff to their demands for an end to the dictatorship led for almost three decades by Mr. Mubarak, a pivotal American ally and pillar of the existing order in the Middle East.        

Just days after President Obama demanded publicly that change in Egypt must begin right away, many in the streets accused the Obama administration of sacrificing concrete steps toward genuine change in favor of a familiar stability.        

&ldquo;America doesn&rsquo;t understand,&rdquo; said Ibrahim Mustafa, 42, who was waiting to enter Tahrir Square. &ldquo;The people know it is supporting an illegitimate regime.&rdquo;        

Leaders of the Egyptian opposition and rank-and-file protesters have steadfastly rejected any negotiations with Mr. Suleiman until after the ouster of Mr. Mubarak, arguing that moving toward democracy will require ridding the country of not only its dictator but also his rubber-stamp Parliament and a Constitution designed for one-party rule.        

On Saturday, Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s party announced a shake-up that removed its old guard, including his son Gamal, from the party&rsquo;s leadership while installing younger, more reform-minded figures. But such gestures were quickly dismissed as cosmetic by analysts and opposition figures.        

Mr. Mubarak and Mr. Suleiman &ldquo;are trying to kill what has happened and to contain and abort the revolution,&rdquo; said Hassan Nafaa, a political science professor at Cairo University. &ldquo;They want to continue to manage the country like they did while making some concessions.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Clinton&rsquo;s message, echoed by Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain, and reinforced in a flurry of calls by President Obama and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. to Egyptian and regional leaders, appears to reflect an attempt at balancing calls for systemic change with some semblance of legal order and stability.        

Mrs. Clinton said Mr. Mubarak, having taken himself and Gamal out of the September elections, was already effectively sidelined. She emphasized the need for Egypt to reform its Constitution to make a vote credible. &ldquo;That is what the government has said it is trying to do,&rdquo; she said.        

She also stressed the dangers of holding elections without adequate preparation. &ldquo;Revolutions have overthrown dictators in the name of democracy, only to see the process hijacked by new autocrats who use violence, deception and rigged elections to stay in power,&rdquo; she said.        

Her emphasis on a deliberate process was repeated by Mrs. Merkel and Mr. Cameron. Mrs. Merkel mentioned her past as a democracy activist in East Germany, recalling the impatience of protesters after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, to immediately join democratic West Germany. But the process took a year, and it was time well spent, she said.        

&ldquo;There will be a change in Egypt,&rdquo; Mrs. Merkel said, &ldquo;but clearly, the change has to be shaped in a way that it is a peaceful, a sensible way forward.&rdquo;        

Mrs. Clinton highlighted fears about deteriorating security inside Egypt, noting the explosion at a gas pipeline in the Sinai Peninsula, and uncorroborated news reports of an earlier assassination attempt on Mr. Suleiman.        
Kareem Fahim and Anthony Shadid reported from Cairo, and Mark Landler from Munich. Reporting was contributed by Steven Erlanger from Munich, and David D. Kirkpatrick, Mona El-Naggar and Robert F. Worth from Cairo.
