
JUBA, Sudan (Reuters) &mdash; At least 50 people have died in a Sudanese Army mutiny that has spread through the oil-producing Upper Nile State, stoking tension as the south prepares for independence, the military said Sunday.        

Heavy fighting broke out Thursday in Malakal, the state capital, when members of one unit refused to redeploy to the north and turned against their fellow soldiers, state officials said. The fighting spread to Melut and Paloich over the weekend, they said.        

The violence illustrates concerns about how Sudan&rsquo;s northern and southern armies will separate their military hardware before July 9, when southern Sudan is expected to declare its independence.        

Final results from last month&rsquo;s secession referendum are to be announced Monday. Early results show the vast majority of southern voters chose to separate from the north. President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan, who campaigned for unity, has promised to accept the result.        

Malakal is patrolled by a military unit made up of the north&rsquo;s Sudan Armed Forces and the south&rsquo;s Sudan People&rsquo;s Liberation Army. The situation is complicated by the fact that the north&rsquo;s unit includes many southern soldiers drawn from a militia that fought with it during the civil war that ended in 2005. It was those soldiers who resisted redeployment to the north and began firing, said Col. Philip Aguer, a spokesman for the Sudan People&rsquo;s Liberation Army.        

Southern Sudanese leaders, meanwhile, said Sunday that they were considering building a new capital after independence, saying that Juba, the current seat of government, did not have enough infrastructure or space to accommodate expected growth.        

&ldquo;A committee has been formed to look into a more suitable place for a capital,&rdquo; said Anne Itto of the south&rsquo;s governing party, the Sudan People&rsquo;s Liberation Movement.  She said officials would consider expanding Juba or building a new capital a few miles outside the city.        
