
CAIRO &mdash; In a tearful, riveting live television interview only two hours after his release from an Egyptian prison, the Google executive Wael Ghonim acknowledged  Monday that he was one of the people behind the anonymous Facebook and YouTube campaign  that helped galvanize the protest that has shaken Egypt for the last two weeks.        

Since he disappeared  on Jan. 28, Mr. Ghonim, 30, has emerged as a symbol for the protest movement&rsquo;s young, digital-savvy organizers. During the interview on a popular television show, he said he had been kidnapped and held blindfolded by Egyptian authorities.        

Afterward, hundreds of Egyptians took to Twitter and the Internet, calling on him to become one of their new leaders.        

&ldquo;Please do not make me a hero,&rdquo; Mr. Ghonim said in a voice trembling with emotion, and later completely breaking down when told of the hundreds of people who have died in clashes since the Jan. 25 protests began. &ldquo;I want to express my condolences for all the Egyptians who died.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;We were all down there for peaceful demonstrations,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;The heroes were the ones on the street.&rdquo;        

Mr. Ghonim rejected the government&rsquo;s assertions that the protests had been instigated by foreigners or the Muslim Brotherhood, the banned Islamist opposition group. &ldquo;There was no Muslim Brotherhood presence in organizing these protests,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;It was all spontaneous, voluntary. Even when the Muslim Brotherhood decided to take part it was their choice to do so. This belongs to the Egyptian youth.&rdquo;        

The release of Mr. Ghonim, who oversees marketing efforts for Google in the Middle East and North Africa, comes as the government is trying to portray Egypt as returning to business as usual. But in the interview, Mr. Ghonim described the experience of what he called his extralegal &ldquo;kidnapping&rdquo; and imprisonment to rally the public to continue their protests. &ldquo;It is a crime,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;This is what we are fighting.&rdquo;        

Ending the mystery over who helped begin the social media campaign that inspired  the protests, Mr. Ghonim said that he was a  creator of the We are All Khaled Said Facebook page.  That page and multiple videos uploaded on YouTube about Mr. Said, a 28-year-old Egyptian man beaten to death by the police in Alexandria on June 6, 2010, helped to connect human rights organizers with average Egyptians and to raise awareness about police abuse and torture.        

Mr. Ghonim, an Egyptian who lives in Dubai with his wife and two children,  was not well known outside of technology and business circles in Egypt. But his disappearance, followed by his interview Monday night on the same program where the Nobel laureate and diplomat Mohamed ElBaradei plunged into Egyptian politics a year ago, appeared to have quickly turned him into a national celebrity.        

Mr. Ghonim, who came across as both humble and fearless, said he was grabbed by security police officers while getting into a taxi and then taken to a location where he was detained for 12 days, blindfolded the entire time. He said that he was deeply worried that his family did not know where he was.  He said he was not physically harmed.        

The first word of his release came when he posted this sentence in English on his Twitter account at 7:05 p.m.:        

&ldquo;Freedom is a bless that deserves fighting for it.&rdquo;        

Google then confirmed the news.  &ldquo;It is a huge relief that Wael Ghonim has been released,&rdquo; the company said in a message posted on Twitter and then released  in an e-mail. &ldquo;We send our best wishes to him and his family.&rdquo;        

Since last June, the Khaled Said Facebook page has attracted  more than 473,000 members and has become  a  tool not only for organizing the protests but also for providing regular updates about other cases of police abuse. But the page&rsquo;s creator remained a mystery.        

&ldquo;We did not know who he was,&rdquo; said Aida Seif el-Dawla, a human rights advocate and professor of psychiatry who works with El Nadeem Center for Rehabilitation of Victims of Violence and Torture in Cairo. The center became involved in Mr. Said&rsquo;s case  last June after police officials presented autopsy reports saying that he died of asphyxiation from swallowing drugs rather than the brutal beating witnessed by several people.        

She said many young people identified with Mr. Said and were outraged by his death and how the police had handled it. She said that there were many Facebook pages, but that it was the page that Mr. Ghonim started that gained momentum.        

&ldquo;It was the most popular,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;It gave a space for the young people to interact with each other and to plan together.&rdquo;        

The Facebook page published cellphone photographs from the morgue showing the horrific injuries Mr. Said had suffered, YouTube videos contrasting his smiling face with the morgue photos and witness accounts that disputed the initial Egyptian police version of his death. The information helped lead to prosecutors arresting two police officers in connection with Mr. Said&rsquo;s death. It also prompted Facebook members to attend both street and silent protests several times since last June.        

In addition to his work at Google, Mr. Ghonim had served as a technology consultant for Mr. ElBaradei&rsquo;s pro-democracy campaign.        

Before his family lost contact with him, Mr. Ghonim had posted an ominous message on Twitter  that troubled friends and family, raising concerns about his whereabouts: &ldquo;Pray for #Egypt. Very worried as it seems that government is planning a war crime tomorrow against people. We are all ready to die #Jan25.&rdquo;        

While friends and family searched hospitals in the area for him, several human rights activists became convinced that he was being held by the authorities for his role in the social media efforts and for inspiring some of the young protest organizers to use those media to help promote the protests.        

Last Friday, members of the April 6 Youth Movement Facebook page, a group of young advocates who began using Facebook in early 2008 to raise awareness about labor strikes and human rights abuses, announced that they had designated Mr. Ghonim their spokesman.        

Habib Haddad, a Boston-based businessman and a friend of Mr. Ghonim&rsquo;s, said he spoke to Mr. Ghonim&rsquo;s wife after her husband&rsquo;s  release on Monday. &ldquo;Not sure I ever heard someone that happy and emotional,&rdquo; Mr. Haddad posted on his Twitter account.        

Mr. Ghonim was among many in Egypt who have disappeared during the revolt.        

&ldquo;At this point, Wael has become a symbolic figure,&rdquo;  said Mr. Haddad.  &ldquo;Moving forward, it is going to be his personal decision if he were to embrace this symbolic figure or not. As a friend, I care mostly about his personal safety and his family&rsquo;s safety.&rdquo;        
 David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Cairo, and Jennifer Preston from New York. Mona El-Naggar contributed reporting from Cairo, and Christine Hauser from New York.
