
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; Evading security checks, a suicide bomber wearing a vest with  explosives  entered the customs  compound in Kandahar on Monday and detonated the vest as several American soldiers were emerging from their armored vehicle in the compound&rsquo;s courtyard.        

The blast killed an American and an Afghan civilian and wounded five other people, including two of the soldiers, according to Afghan and NATO security forces and the United States Embassy. It was the fourth suicide bombing of the year in Kandahar Province.        

Officials said the Afghan killed was an interpreter and the American was an adviser to the customs office. Their  identities were not immediately disclosed.        

&ldquo;At the time, I heard a big explosion and saw American bodies were lying on the ground bleeding,&rdquo; said Mohammed Shoib, the customs office&rsquo;s director of control. &ldquo;Then some other Americans came and started helping them, and then a helicopter landed inside the customs compound and took away the dead and wounded.&rdquo;        

Mr. Shoib said there were two entrance gates at the compound, one for pedestrians and the other for vehicles. He said that because pedestrians were thoroughly searched, the bomber had probably entered by truck. &ldquo;More than a hundred people come to the Customs House every day, and each of them get searched, but those trucks do not get searched by the security forces,&rdquo; he said.        

Elsewhere on Monday, an acting district governor in Khost Province, Sayed Mohammed Hamidi, was assassinated by four Taliban gunmen on motorcycles as he was traveling to work from home, said Gen. Abdul Hakim Ishaqzay, the provincial police chief. The gunmen escaped, he said.        

The Taliban claimed responsibility, saying that Mr. Hamidi had been chosen  because he worked for the Afghan government. &ldquo;Puppet government employees like district chiefs and other governmental department heads are also our targets,&rdquo; said Zabiullah Mujahid, the Taliban spokesman for eastern Afghanistan.        

In southern Afghanistan, a NATO soldier was killed Monday in a blast caused by an improvised explosive device, according to a NATO statement.        
Reporting was contributed by Farooq Jan Mangal from Khost, Sangar Rahimi from Kabul and an employee of The New York Times from  Kandahar.
