
MOSCOW &mdash; Russia has expelled the Moscow correspondent for The Guardian, who has played a role in its coverage of WikiLeaks, the newspaper said on Monday.        

Russian officials offered no explanation for the move. Under Communism, the authorities occasionally deported Western correspondents from Moscow whose reporting displeased them, but such occurrences have been highly unusual in the post-Soviet era.        

The Guardian correspondent, Luke Harding, returned to Moscow from London on Saturday after spending two months working in the newspaper&rsquo;s main office there. He had a valid journalist&rsquo;s visa and credentials obtained through the Russian Foreign Ministry.        

But upon Mr. Harding&rsquo;s arrival at the airport, a border security agent told him that his visa had been revoked, the newspaper said. He was held in a detention cell for about 45 minutes, then put on the next plane back to London. Border security in Russia is controlled by an arm of the F.S.B., the main domestic successor agency to the Soviet-era K.G.B.        

&ldquo;This is clearly a very troubling development with serious implications for press freedom, and it is worrying that the Russian government should now kick out reporters of whom they disapprove,&rdquo; The Guardian&rsquo;s editor in chief, Alan Rusbridger, said in a statement. &ldquo;Russia&rsquo;s treatment of journalists &mdash; both domestic and foreign &mdash; is a cause of great concern.&rdquo;        

While the Foreign Ministry would not comment on the decision, it had expressed displeasure with Mr. Harding&rsquo;s work even before he began writing about WikiLeaks.        

In November, the ministry told him that his journalist&rsquo;s visa would not be renewed because he had made trips to politically sensitive regions of Russia without permission. It said he would have to leave the country.        

But after Mr. Harding appealed the decision, the ministry gave him a new visa, valid until May 31.        

It is not clear what changed since then. The ministry typically warns correspondents in advance if their visas are being revoked. In this case it did not.        

Mr. Harding, 42, is one of several reporters at The Guardian involved in the coverage of a cache of a quarter-million confidential American diplomatic cables obtained by WikiLeaks. The New York Times and The Guardian have cooperated in evaluating the cables.        

On Dec. 1, The Guardian published an article by Mr. Harding about assessments of the Russian government in cables from the United States Embassy in Moscow.        

The cables, Mr. Harding wrote, depicted Russia as a &ldquo;corrupt, autocratic kleptocracy centered on the leadership of Vladimir Putin,&rdquo; the prime minister and former president, &ldquo;in which officials, oligarchs and organized crime are bound together to create a &lsquo;virtual mafia state.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        
