
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; South Korean military investigators on Monday were questioning 31 North Koreans whose fishing boat was seized in disputed waters in the Yellow Sea.        

The wooden boat with 20 women and 11 men came across the Northern Limit Line in the Yellow Sea at 11 a.m. Saturday, military officials said in Seoul.        

South Korea considers the line to be the official maritime boundary, while North Korea contests its validity.        

&ldquo;Our navy captured the boat and the people are being investigated,&rdquo; a Defense Ministry official said Monday in Seoul, speaking anonymously because of the ongoing inquiry.        

No mention of the incident was made by the North&rsquo;s official news agency.        

The defense official said the North Koreans were not defectors and that they had told investigators they were &ldquo;not willing to remain&rdquo; in South Korea. The official said there was no immediate plan to send the people back.        

A military official told the Yonhap news agency in Seoul that the North Koreans were part of a &ldquo;work group,&rdquo; not family members.        

The North Koreans were taken into custody near Yeonpyeong Island, the site of a deadly artillery exchange between the Koreas in November. A barrage by the North killed two civilians and two South Korean marines, and the episode put both nations on full military alert.        

Yeonpyeong sits just off the North Korean coast in fishing grounds rich with crabs and other shellfish.        

Meanwhile, officials from the two Koreas prepared to hold working-level talks on Tuesday, the first inter-Korean dialogue since the Yeonpyeong shelling. The South Korean delegation was to be composed of two military officers and an official from the Unification Ministry.        

The talks, to be held at the border village of Panmunjom, are intended to set an agenda for future substantive discussions about the shelling, the sinking of a South Korean warship last March and the North&rsquo;s ongoing nuclear programs.        

South Korea said the artillery barrage was unprovoked. The North said it fired in response to a South Korean artillery drill that sent live rounds into its territorial waters.        

Seoul also wants Pyongyang to apologize for what it says was an unprovoked torpedo attack on the warship, the Cheonan. North Korea has denied any involvement in the sinking, which killed 46 South Korean sailors.        
