
DHARAMSALA, India &mdash; His daring escape from Tibet seemed out of a movie. Then only 14, Ogyen Trinley Dorje was one of Tibetan Buddhism&rsquo;s most revered incarnate lamas, and his journey through the icy passes of the Himalayas was viewed as a major embarrassment for China. The youth arrived in India in early 2000 to a euphoric greeting from Tibetan exiles.        

India, though, was less certain about what to do with him. Intelligence agencies, suspicious of his loyalties and skeptical of his miraculous escape, interrogated him and tightly restricted his travel. He remains mostly confined to the mountainside monastery of a Tibetan sect different from his own. And that spurred an idea: He wanted his own monastery. Eventually, his aides struck a deal to buy land.        

Now, the 17th Karmapa, as he is known, has seen his quest for a monastery unexpectedly set off a national furor, fanned by Indian media that have tapped into growing public anxiety about Chinese intentions on their disputed border.        

The Indian police are investigating the Karmapa after discovering about $1 million in foreign currency at his residence, including more than $166,000 in Chinese currency. Flimsily sourced media accounts have questioned whether he is a Chinese spy plotting a monastic empire along the border.        

&ldquo;Monk or Chinese Plant?&rdquo; asked an editorial in The Tribune, a national English-language newspaper.        

Many Tibetans scoff at the spying allegations. But the episode starkly exposes the precarious position of the Dalai Lama and the exiled movement of Tibetan Buddhism he has led since he fled China in 1959. The Tibetan cause depends heavily on Indian good will, particularly as China has intensified efforts to discredit and infiltrate their exile organization.        

Tensions are rising between India and China over a variety of issues, including Tibet. Sophisticated hackers, traced to China, have penetrated computer systems in Dharamsala and at Indian government ministries. China has long blamed Tibetan exiles in India for fueling instability across the border in Tibet. But now India, too, seems more wary of Tibetan activities; the Indian police are investigating new Tibetan monasteries near the border for possible ties to China, a police official said.        

Meanwhile, Chinese leaders are betting that the Tibetan movement will fracture after the eventual death of the Dalai Lama, who is 74; they have even declared their intent to name his successor.        

Indian suspicions about the Karmapa are a particular problem. He has a global following and, at 25 years old, he is viewed as a potential future leader of the movement &mdash; a possibility deeply compromised if Indian authorities consider him a foreign agent.        

&ldquo;What Tibetans must address is the idea that Tibetans could be considered a security threat to India and not an asset,&rdquo; said Tsering Shakya, a leading Tibet specialist. &ldquo;But the idea that a boy at the age of 14 was selected as a covert agent by a foreign government to destabilize India &mdash; and the assumption the boy will assume leadership of the Tibetan movement and eventually work against India &mdash; is worthy of a cheap spy novel.&rdquo;        

For the past week, Tibetans have rallied behind the Karmapa, with thousands of monks holding candlelight vigils at his residence. Tibet&rsquo;s political leaders, including the Dalai Lama, have called on the Karmapa&rsquo;s aides to correct any financial irregularities but have dismissed any suspicions about the Karmapa&rsquo;s being a Chinese agent.        

&ldquo;Baseless, all baseless,&rdquo; said Samdhong Rinpoche, the prime minister of the Tibetan government in exile. &ldquo;Not a fraction of anything that has a base of truth.&rdquo;        

Many Indian intelligence agents have distrusted the Karmapa from the start. He was a unique case, since both the Dalai Lama and the Chinese government had endorsed him. He would explain his escape as an act of principle; he was being pressured to denounce the Dalai Lama, and Chinese officials also were forbidding him to study with high lamas outside China. Many investigators were unconvinced, wondering how such an important figure could slip so easily over the border.        

On Wednesday, when the procession of monks arrived to offer support, the Karmapa described the current controversy as a &ldquo;misunderstanding&rdquo; and expressed confidence in the fairness of Indian authorities.        
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
