
JERUSALEM &mdash; Several dozen Jordanian tribesmen, historically core loyalists to the monarchy, have issued a rare statement calling for urgent and far-reaching political reform in Jordan. They said that without it, the country was headed down the path taken by Tunisia and Egypt.        

&ldquo;Before stability and food, the Jordanian people seek liberty, dignity, democracy, justice, equality, human rights and an end to corruption,&rdquo; said the statement, signed by 36 members of tribes, mostly Bedouins.        

The statement, ignored by most Jordanian news media, was published Monday on Ammonnews, the country&rsquo;s most popular news Web site. But the site was hacked and out of commission for four hours on Monday, restored only after about 50 journalists held a sit-in at the journalists&rsquo; association headquarters in Amman, the capital.        

&ldquo;The intelligence police called us and told us they were taking down our site because it was against national interests,&rdquo; Basil Okoor, the publisher and editor of Ammonnews, said in a telephone interview. &ldquo;But we are not going to accept this way of dealing with journalists.&rdquo;        

The tribesmen&rsquo;s statement said, &ldquo;We are on the path where the floods of Tunisia and Egypt will reach Jordan sooner or later, whether we want it or not.&rdquo; It called on King Abdullah II to no longer appoint the members of his cabinet but rather for them to be elected.        

Jordan is a country of six million, more than half of them Palestinian, and 40 percent members of tribes, also known as East Bankers. The two groups maintain an uneasy coexistence under Abdullah&rsquo;s rule. The country has faced not only weeks of protests over prices and subsidies but also calls for wholesale political reform.        

The king named a new prime minister last week in an effort to calm the waters.        

Few consider either the monarchy or the country at imminent risk of serious unrest. But there is a clear undercurrent of unease, and the statement was a sign of that. It was careful not to attack Abdullah himself but it did not spare his wife, Queen Rania, who is of Palestinian origin and has been accused of insensitivity and of funneling business and money to her family.        

The statement mentioned those concerns, calling on Abdullah to return farmlands rumored to have ended up in the hands of the queen&rsquo;s family. Referring to a lavish party she threw in September in southern Jordan for her 40th birthday, it said, &ldquo;We reject outrageous birthdays that come at the expense of the poor and the treasury.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This statement was very important because it sent a clear message to everyone,&rdquo; said Mr. Okoor, of Ammonnews. &ldquo;It reflects the sentiments of the majority of Jordanians.&rdquo;        
Ranya Kadri contributed reporting from Amman, Jordan.
