
CAIRO &mdash; Pressure intensified on President Hosni Mubarak&rsquo;s government as the largest crowd of protesters in two weeks flooded Cairo&rsquo;s streets on Tuesday and the United States delivered its most specific demands yet, urging swift steps toward democracy.        

Protesters, some inspired by an emotional interview with an online political organizer on Egypt&rsquo;s most popular talk show, occupied Tahrir Square, surrounded the Egyptian Parliament and staged sporadic demonstrations and strikes in several Egyptian cities.        

At the same time, in a war of attrition with protesters for public opinion, Egyptian officials sought once more to declare the revolt a thing of the past.        

Vice President Omar Suleiman, who is leading an American-endorsed &ldquo;orderly transition&rdquo; toward elections in September, said Mr. Mubarak had appointed a committee of judges and legal scholars to propose constitutional amendments.        

The committee put Egypt &ldquo;on the path of peaceful and orderly transition of power,&rdquo; Mr. Suleiman said on state television.        

All the members, however, are considered Mubarak loyalists: many senior judges who owe their prominent positions to Mr. Mubarak, two legal scholars who were members of his cabinet and two others who have already expressed support for gradual change that would leave Mr. Mubarak in office.        

Although broadly committed to a transition, the Obama administration was trying to influence many of the details. Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. called Mr. Suleiman to ask him to lift the 30-year emergency law that the government has used to suppress and imprison opposition leaders, to stop imprisoning protesters and journalists, and to invite demonstrators to help develop a specific timetable for opening up the political process. He also asked Mr. Suleiman to open talks on Egypt&rsquo;s political future to a wider range of opposition members.        

Mr. Suleiman has said only that Egypt will remove the emergency law when the situation justifies its repeal, and the harassment and arrest of journalists and human rights activists has continued even in the last few days.        

Mr. Suleiman warned the protesters, most of whom are opposed to any negotiations while Mr. Mubarak is in power, that the only alternative to talks is a &ldquo;a coup.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;And we want to avoid that &mdash; meaning uncalculated and hasty steps that produce more irrationality,&rdquo; he said, according to the official news agency.        

&ldquo;There will be no ending of the regime, nor a coup, because that means chaos,&rdquo; Mr. Suleiman said. And he warned the protesters not to attempt more civil disobedience, calling it &ldquo;extremely dangerous.&rdquo; He added, &ldquo;We absolutely do not tolerate it.&rdquo;        

On the 15th day of the protests, young organizers guiding the movement from a tent city inside Tahrir Square, or Liberation Square, showed the discipline and stamina that they say will help them outlast Mr. Mubarak and Mr. Suleiman, even if their revolt devolves into a war of attrition.        

Many in the crowd, for example, said they had turned out because organizers had spread the word over loudspeakers and online media for demonstrators to concentrate their efforts on just Tuesdays and Fridays, enabling their supporters to rest in between. And while Mr. Mubarak remains in office, they say, there is no turning back.        

The independent group Human Rights Watch said that it had confirmed more than 300 fatalities during the protests by visiting hospitals in a few Egyptian cities. &ldquo;The government wanted to say that life was returning to normal,&rdquo; said Mahmoud Mustafa, a 25-year-old protester standing in front of Parliament. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re saying it&rsquo;s not.&rdquo;        

Many in the crowd said that they were newly inspired by the interview on Monday night with Wael Ghonim, a Google executive, who had been the anonymous administrator of a Facebook group that enlisted tens of thousands to oppose the Mubarak government by publicizing a young Egyptian&rsquo;s beating death at the hands of its reviled police force.        

In a tearful conversation, Mr. Ghonim told the story of his &ldquo;kidnapping,&rdquo; secret imprisonment in blindfolded isolation for 12 days and determination to overturn Egypt&rsquo;s authoritarian government. And on Tuesday, both Mr. Ghonim and the host, Mona el-Shazly, came to Tahrir Square to cheer on the revolt.        

Ahmed Mayer el-Shamy, an executive at the drug company Pfizer, said many of his colleagues had come out for the first time &ldquo;because of what they saw on TV last night.&rdquo;        
Reporting was contributed by Kareem Fahim, Anthony Shadid, Mona El-Naggar, Thanassis Cambanis and Liam Stack.
