
LONDON &mdash; Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder, said on Tuesday that the effort to extradite him to Sweden to face allegations of sexual misconduct represented a &ldquo;distortion of evidence and fact.&rdquo;        

Mr. Assange was speaking to reporters after the second day of a hearing that will determine whether he must return to Sweden, where prosecutors want to interrogate him about accusations made against him in Stockholm last summer by two women who had volunteered for WikiLeaks.        

&ldquo;We have seen the distortion of evidence and fact by prosecuting authorities in Sweden revealed at minute details throughout the course of the day,&rdquo; Mr. Assange, 39, said as he faced the cameras and correspondents massed outside the court.        

The hearing was expected to end Tuesday, but final arguments before the judge, Howard Riddle, are now scheduled for Friday.        

Mr. Assange&rsquo;s lawyers have said they do not expect a decision before next week. Both sides &mdash; the British lawyers representing the Swedish prosecutors, as well as Mr. Assange&rsquo;s legal team &mdash; are likely to appeal. His lawyers have hinted that they may take the case to European courts, a move that could drag out a final decision for months or even years.        

One of the women has accused Mr. Assange of sexual molestation and unlawful coercion. The other says that he started to have sex while she was asleep without putting on a condom; prosecutors contend that falls under one of Sweden&rsquo;s definitions of rape.        

During the hearing, Mr. Assange, wearing a dark suit and red tie, furiously scribbled notes and passed them to his legal team through a glass partition that separated him from the court during the spirited clashes between the prosecution and defense.        

One witness for Mr. Assange, Sven-Erik Alhem, a former Swedish prosecutor, expressed surprise that Marianne Ny, the Swedish prosecutor who requested the extradition, had not questioned him in Britain, where arrangements are in place for cooperation between law enforcement agencies from different countries. But under cross-examination by the prosecution&rsquo;s lawyer, Clare Montgomery, Mr. Alhem said that that if he were Mr. Assange, he &ldquo;would have gone to Sweden immediately to give my version of events.&rdquo; He also said that there was little prospect that Mr. Assange would be extradited from Sweden to the United States, where the Justice Department is seeking to determine whether it can bring charges against him, or subjected to &ldquo;illegal rendition,&rdquo; as the defense has asserted.        

Mr. Assange left Sweden on Sept. 27 &mdash; the same day that a detention order was put in place to try and compel him to talk to police.        

The prosecution suggested that there were &ldquo;technical reasons&rdquo; that Mr. Assange could not be interviewed by phone or video link or by authorities in Britain, and that he was required to give DNA samples in Sweden.        

Ms. Montgomery then read a statement from Ms. Ny in which she outlined the efforts over several months to contact Mr. Assange for an interview. He was told, she said, that &ldquo;it would be possible for him to attend an interview discreetly.&rdquo; Mr. Assange&rsquo;s Swedish lawyer, Bjorn Hurtig, who was called as a witness by the defense, countered some of Ms. Ny&rsquo;s claims and said that Mr. Assange had been hard to contact because he feared &ldquo;death threats&rdquo; by &ldquo;American politicians.&rdquo;        

Outside of court, Mr. Assange&rsquo;s lead lawyer, Mark Stephens, bellowing to be heard over the crowd, demanded that Ms. Ny testify in court on Friday to justify her extradition request.        
