
PARIS &mdash; Expectations that an important war crimes trial would conclude this week were upended on Tuesday when Charles G. Taylor, the former president of Liberia, and his defense lawyers boycotted the final stage of the proceedings, contending that the court was unfair and driven by politics.        

First the lawyers walked out. Then Mr. Taylor, who could not leave while guards were by his side, refused to go back into court after a break.        

The source of their ire was the rejection by the judges of a 600-page trial summary by Mr. Taylor&rsquo;s team that,  despite frequent warnings, had missed a deadline.        

The walkout came at a point of maximum media attention, as the trial drew to a close and prosecutors were about to present their closing arguments. Mr. Taylor and his team had used the same strategy, staging a boycott, when prosecutors opened the trial, now more than three and a half years ago.        

Since then, international judges of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, seated in The Hague, have heard testimony from 115 witnesses about the civil war in Sierra Leone in the 1990s. Many testified about horrifying crimes committed by rebels whom Mr. Taylor is accused of commanding. They spoke, too, about slave labor in captured diamond mines, episodes of cannibalism, of rape, of severed heads displayed on stakes and of captured villagers lining up, waiting to have their hands hacked off.        

Mr. Taylor, who took the stand in his own defense for seven months, presented himself as a man striving for peace and his accusers as liars.        

Over the course of the trial, which has now lasted more than twice as long as planned, Mr. Taylor&rsquo;s lawyers have frequently insisted on getting more time and have missed deadlines set by the judges, who have tried hard to appear fair to the defense.        

But in recent weeks a confrontation began to develop, as defense lawyers said they wanted extra time to prepare their closing arguments and the judges insisted that they abide by the deadline, Jan. 14. On Monday, with no sign of the summary, the judges ruled that Mr. Taylor had defied court orders and that his written summary was no longer admissible.        

Tempers rose Tuesday morning as Courtenay Griffiths, Mr. Taylor&rsquo;s lead defense lawyer, said he was no longer participating in the trial. The judges ordered him to sit down. Visibly angry, Judge Richard Lussick said Mr. Taylor could not make or disobey orders at will. &ldquo;You are not running the court, you know,&rdquo; he said.        

Prosecutors, who have often accused Mr. Taylor of trying to manipulate the court, weighed in. &ldquo;The accused is not attending a social event,&rdquo; said Brenda Hollis, the lead prosecutor. &ldquo;He may not R.S.V.P. at the last minute. He is the accused at a criminal proceeding.&rdquo;        

After leaving the courtroom, Mr. Griffiths told reporters that the trial was &ldquo;a complete farce&rdquo; and said that he was refusing to &ldquo;lend legitimacy to the proceedings.&rdquo;        

Lawyers at the court expect that the trial, scheduled to end on Friday, is now likely to go on for an unforeseeable time.        

The prosecution summarized its case, arguing that the court should hold Mr. Taylor criminally responsible for the deaths and mutilation of thousands of people, because, as Nicholas Koumjian, a prosecutor, put it, he had financed, armed, supplied and controlled rebels in Sierra Leone for &ldquo;power and profit.&rdquo;        

Mr. Taylor&rsquo;s defense is scheduled to present closing arguments on Wednesday, even without filing a written document, and both sides are scheduled to wrap up on Friday. But Mr. Griffiths has said he will stay away and file an appeal to have his documents accepted and his closing arguments rescheduled.        

Mr. Griffiths said he wanted more time because he had only recently discovered two secret diplomatic cables from 2009, part of the cache revealed by WikiLeaks, in which American diplomats wrote about Mr. Taylor. He has presented them as evidence, including one cable, dated March 2009, in which the United States ambassador to Liberia is quoted as saying that &ldquo;the best we can do for Liberia is to see that Charles Taylor is put away for a long time.&rdquo;        

The ambassador, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, wrote that &ldquo;should Taylor be acquitted in The Hague or given a light sentence,&rdquo; other options should be considered, like building a case against Mr. Taylor in the United States on charges that might include financial crimes, using child soldiers or even terrorism, to ensure &ldquo;that Taylor cannot return to destabilize Liberia.&rdquo;        

Mr. Griffiths argued that the cable and a second cable discussing what he called &ldquo;sensitive details&rdquo; about the trial, raised doubts about the impartiality and independence of the court.        

While the judges admitted the two cables into evidence, they have asserted that their impartiality was in no way compromised. They have thrown out a request by the defense to investigate the relations between the court and the United States government and to investigate which officers of the court have leaked to American diplomats information about the Taylor trial, its timing and the financing it required.        

Because of the long delays, the special court, which is financed by donor countries including the United States, has faced regular budget shortages, requiring diplomats to request additional contributions to finance the court, as well as Mr. Taylor&rsquo;s defense.        

Prosecutors have said Mr. Taylor amassed a fortune during the war, but he has said that he cannot afford an adequate defense. The court pays more than $100,000 per month for his team of lawyers and researchers.        

Mr. Griffiths has said that the defense team he leads is &ldquo;one of the best resourced teams there&rsquo;s ever been in an international tribunal.&rdquo;        
