
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; President Hamid Karzai said Tuesday that he wanted to bring a Taliban official being held at the Guant&aacute;namo Bay prison back to Afghanistan to join in reconciliation talks.        

His remarks seconded a request by the government&rsquo;s High Peace Council calling for the release of the Taliban figure, Mullah Khairullah Khairkhwa, who has been held at the prison on the United States military base in Cuba since 2002. Mr. Khairkhwa, from Kandahar, reportedly had been the Taliban interior minister and also the governor of Herat Province during the Taliban government.        

&ldquo;If he wants to talk, we welcome him,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai said in response to a question at a news conference. &ldquo;We would talk to him, we would arrange his release.&rdquo;        

American officials declined to comment immediately. But they have expressed reluctance to release Taliban figures held at Guant&aacute;namo ever since one high-profile prisoner, Mullah Abdul Quyam Zakir, was turned over to the Afghans and later ended up back with the Taliban, where he rose to second in command. Mr. Karzai suggested that Afghan officials would be able to win Mr. Khairkhwa&rsquo;s release. A spokeswoman for the American Embassy, Kerri Hannan, said, &ldquo;The United States supports the work of the High Peace Council,&rdquo; but did not comment on calls to release Mr. Khairkhwa.        

Efforts to start reconciliation talks with the Taliban are a high priority of Mr. Karzai&rsquo;s government, which last year formed the High Peace Council, whose 70 members include a dozen former Taliban officials. One of those, Mullah Arsala Rahmani, who now leads the council&rsquo;s political prisoner committee, also called for Mr. Khairkhwa&rsquo;s return.        

Mr. Rahmani said the initiative began when Mr. Khairkhwa&rsquo;s American lawyer, Frank Goldsmith, wrote to Mr. Karzai recently saying that his client would be eager to join the peace process. His e-mail was passed along to the High Peace Council, which recommended asking for his release. As Mr. Rahmani envisions it, Mr. Khairkhwa would be sent to Kabul  but kept there under house arrest.        

&ldquo;He is a very smart guy, a very good Muslim and a good person to help us in our aim, which is bringing peace and stability to our country,&rdquo; Mr. Rahmani said.        

The move is yet another possible point of contention between Mr. Karzai  and American officials. Mr. Karzai also said Tuesday that he was seeking more information on the death of a Taliban detainee at Guant&aacute;namo, Awal Gul, 48, who American officials said died at the prison camp last week after exercising.        

Mr. Gul&rsquo;s body was returned to his hometown, Jalalabad, over the weekend, and a funeral service there on Monday drew several thousand mourners, many chanting anti-American slogans and vowing revenge for what they said was his murder.        

Mr. Karzai also repeated his call, first made during a security conference in Munich on Saturday, for the dissolution of Provincial Reconstruction Teams around the country. The teams, staffed by American and other NATO civilians, are in charge of disbursing large-scale aid and development projects in support of the war effort, with an overall budget in the hundreds of millions of dollars. They are a cornerstone of the NATO strategy in Afghanistan.        

Afghan officials would prefer that such funds flowed through their own government ministries, but American officials have resisted that because of concerns about widespread corruption and a lack of adequate staffing in the ministries to handle the funds responsibly.        

&ldquo;We seriously and insistently want them to be removed,&rdquo; Mr. Karzai said of the reconstruction teams. &ldquo;I hope the international community would deal with us from Afghanistan&rsquo;s point of view, not from the point of view of their own national interest.&rdquo;        

There has been little concrete progress toward reconciliation since the High Peace Council was convened in September after months of political infighting over its composition.        

The group met last month with officials from Pakistan, calling on their country to hand over prominent Taliban political prisoners so they could engage in the peace process as well. The two countries agreed to set up a joint commission on the peace process, but Pakistani officials have made no commitments about releases.        

Among at least eight prominent Taliban members being held in Pakistan is Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who was captured by Pakistani officials early last year, effectively ending what had been negotiations between Mr. Baradar and Mr. Karzai, according to diplomats and officials in Pakistan and Afghanistan. Pakistan&rsquo;s powerful intelligence agency, the ISI, organized his arrest, reportedly carried out in cooperation with the C.I.A., because they were angry that he was negotiating with Afghan leaders without Pakistan&rsquo;s approval.        
Sharifullah Sahak contributed reporting from Kabul, and an Afghan employee of The New York Times from Jalalabad.
