
SEOUL, South Korea &mdash; North and South Korea held low-level, preliminary discussions on Tuesday, their first talks since an artillery exchange in November that killed four South Koreans and brought the countries to the brink of war.        

The meetings, held at the border village of Panmunjom, were intended to prepare the way for more substantive discussions about the artillery attack, the sinking of a South Korean warship and the North&rsquo;s nuclear programs.        

But according to a defense official in Seoul, the North did not bend on two crucial demands from the South, refusing to admit involvement in the sinking of the South Korean ship last March and failing to apologize for the shelling in November of Yeonpyeong Island.        

Still, an hourlong morning session was followed by an afternoon session that stretched well into the evening, and at the request of the North another meeting was set for Wednesday.        

Military tensions after the Yeonpyeong shelling have eased, but diplomatic tensions have not. North Korea has called repeatedly for a variety of talks and exchanges and has requested food aid and fertilizer. Except for the recent restoration of a cross-border hot line, however, the South has not softened.        

&ldquo;Our stance has not changed,&rdquo; said Kim Min-seok, a South Korean Defense Ministry spokesman, speaking to reporters on Tuesday morning as the meetings began. &ldquo;A higher-level military meeting will be possible only if North Korea takes responsible measures for the attacks on Yeonpyeong Island and the Cheonan warship and promises not to carry out any more provocations.&rdquo;        

The conservative administration of President Lee Myung-bak has vowed not to return to the pattern of giving aid to the North in exchange for periods of relative harmony. When the aid runs out or the North&rsquo;s economic situation worsens, the North typically begins a new round of appeals and confrontations as a way to elicit further aid.        

In a television interview last week, Mr. Lee said that this North Korean strategy was a &ldquo;typical tactic, overused in the past,&rdquo; and that it would no longer result in aid or other concessions.        

Many political analysts speak admiringly of the North&rsquo;s ability to manipulate regional and Western governments, mixing desperate appeals for food, military threats and periodic outbursts.        

&ldquo;North Korea documents when other countries flinch,&rdquo; said John S. Park, director of the Korea Working Group at the United States Institute of Peace, a nonpartisan group created and financed by Congress. &ldquo;They study these moments forensically.&rdquo;        

But with the shelling of Yeonpyeong, the usual North Korean push seems to have finally resulted in a South Korean shove. The South cut off all aid, toughened its military rules of engagement and bolstered its military installations on Yeonpyeong and other islands off the North Korean coast.        

&ldquo;If North Korea &lsquo;provokes&rsquo; again, that tactic won&rsquo;t work any more,&rdquo; Mr. Park said. &ldquo;The South Korean mind-set has changed: &lsquo;We&rsquo;re not messing around.&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo;        

The Lee government has insisted that the North demonstrate &ldquo;sincere behavior&rdquo; marked by &ldquo;concrete actions&rdquo; before it will agree to new shipments of aid, engage in substantive talks or consider a resumption of the six-nation talks on North Korean denuclearization.        

Senior officials in Seoul who deal with the North have resisted describing in detail what those actions might include, although Mr. Lee said recently that a reduction of up to 30 percent in the North&rsquo;s military budget would be a welcome signal.        

Also on Tuesday, Robert R. King, the United States envoy on North Korean human rights issues, met with senior South Korean diplomats in Seoul, including the South&rsquo;s chief nuclear envoy, Wi Sung-lac.        
