
ROME &mdash; Prosecutors in Milan said Tuesday that they would seek to try Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi on criminal charges related to prostitution and abuse of office &mdash; but in Italy&rsquo;s unique political climate, the scandal so far has not forced him from office.        

After months of investigations, the prosecutor Edmondo Bruti Liberati said his office planned to request on Wednesday that a judge waive preliminary hearings and call for an immediate trial of Mr. Berlusconi on charges that he paid for sex with a 17-year-old and abused his office by calling the police to intervene on her behalf after she was detained for petty theft in May.        

The scandal has been raging in the Italian news media for weeks, but the growing outrage of many Italians has not translated into political defeat for the prime minister, who holds a narrow majority in Parliament. The center-left opposition is weak and Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s center-right coalition has shown no clear intention of replacing him.        

Mr. Berlusconi has denied wrongdoing and has vowed to fight the charges, saying he will continue governing Italy. To that end, he has pledged a new economic plan to help revive the country&rsquo;s stagnant growth rate.        

The young woman, Karima el-Mahroug, a Moroccan-born nightclub dancer nicknamed Ruby Heart-Stealer,  who has since turned 18, has also denied wrongdoing. She has said that she did not have sex with the prime minister but that he did pay her 7,000 euros, or about $9,500, the first time she attended a party at his villa outside Milan last spring.        

Paying for sex with a minor under 18 is illegal in Italy.        

&ldquo;I think Berlusconi is in a position to move beyond the Ruby scandal media-wise, but I&rsquo;m not sure if he can move beyond it in the courts,&rdquo; said Italo Bocchino, a leader of Future and Liberty, a faction that broke away from Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s center-right coalition last year but largely supported him in an important confidence vote in December.        

Last week, the government passed a contentious tax-restructuring measure championed by the Northern League, the most powerful party in the center-right coalition, which had said it would bring down the government if the effort failed.        

But adding to the political uncertainty, the president of Italy, Giorgio Napolitano, subsequently disputed the plan on technical grounds and said he would not approve the current version.        

In the past, Mr. Berlusconi has emerged largely unscathed from a range of legal thickets. Last month, Italy&rsquo;s Constitutional Court partially lifted his immunity, a ruling that reactivated three other trials against him, including one in which his former tax lawyer, David Mills, was convicted of taking a bribe in exchange for false testimony.        

Last year, a court threw out the case against Mr. Mills, saying the statute of limitations had run out. Also on Tuesday, prosecutors said they would reopen the trial with Mr. Berlusconi as a defendant.        

A large anti-Berlusconi demonstration was held in Milan last weekend and others are planned Sunday in cities throughout Italy.        
