
MOSCOW &mdash; The Russian Foreign Ministry on Tuesday sought to play down the expulsion of a British correspondent based in Moscow, saying that he had violated rules for journalists but that he could return if he agreed to abide by them.        

The ministry offered a peculiar explanation for what led to the decision by border control officers to detain and then deport the correspondent, Luke Harding of The Guardian, after he arrived at a Moscow airport on Saturday.        

It said that even though Mr. Harding had a formal journalist&rsquo;s visa in his passport that had recently been issued, he was not allowed into Russia because he had neglected to pick up a press card from officials that showed he was accredited.        

The ministry has never said that a correspondent with a valid visa could be expelled without warning for not having a press card.        

Mr. Harding, 42, was one of the reporters for The Guardian who wrote about diplomatic cables obtained by WikiLeaks, including some from the United States Embassy in Moscow that gave a harsh assessment of corruption in Russia under Vladimir V. Putin, the prime minister and former president. Mr. Harding has also written about terrorism and other contentious topics in Russia.        

Mr. Harding also broke other regulations, the ministry said Tuesday, though it did not provide details.        

&ldquo;If Harding is still interested in working in Russia while his visa is valid, he needs to settle issues related to his accreditation with the Russian Foreign Ministry,&rdquo; it said in a statement. &ldquo;If Harding complies with these rules, which are the same for all foreign correspondents, there will be no problems with his entering Russia.&rdquo;        

Mr. Harding and his editors have suggested that he was expelled because the authorities were displeased with his coverage. The newspaper gave no indication on Tuesday that Mr. Harding would try to return to Russia.        

&ldquo;We are baffled by the statement issued by the Russian Foreign Ministry,&rdquo; the newspaper said. &ldquo;Failure to collect his press card before leaving urgently on a trip to London is manifestly not a plausible reason for detaining Luke at the airport and refusing him entry to Russia.&rdquo;        
