
ROME &mdash; A defiant Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi said Wednesday that he would continue to govern Italy even as Milan prosecutors filed a request to try him on criminal charges related to prostitution and abuse of office.        

Prosecutor Edmondo Bruti Liberati announced Wednesday that his office had enough evidence to ask a judge to waive preliminary hearings and call for an immediate trial of Mr. Berlusconi on charges that he paid for sex with a 17 year old and abused his office by calling the police to intervene on her behalf after she was detained for petty theft in May.        

Mr. Berlusconi has denied wrongdoing. At a news conference on Wednesday to present an economic plan to revive Italy&rsquo;s stagnant growth, he accused prosecutors of having &ldquo;subversive aims&rdquo; and vowed to fight the charges.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m sorry that these things have offended the dignity of our country, have slung mud on our country and on our government and on me personally, internationally,&rdquo; Mr. Berlusconi said, referring to the prosecutors.        

They assert that Mr. Berlusconi paid for sex with Karima el-Mahroug, a Moroccan-born nightclub dancer nicknamed Ruby Heart-Stealer, before she turned 18, and that he called police to help release her from custody after she was detained for theft in Milan in May.        

On Wednesday, Mr. Berlusconi said he had called police to intervene on Ms. Mahroug&rsquo;s behalf because he had been told that she was the niece of President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt. &ldquo;I intervened as prime minister because I was concerned that there might be an international diplomatic incident,&rdquo; Mr. Berlusconi said, adding that he &ldquo;always&rdquo; helped &ldquo;people in difficulty.&rdquo;        

Ms. Mahroug has said that she did not have sex with the prime minister but that he did pay her 7,000 euros, or about $9,500, the first time she attended a party at his villa outside Milan last spring. Paying for sex with a minor under 18 is illegal in Italy.        

Although the scandal has been raging in the Italian news media for weeks and unsettling a growing number of Italians, it has not translated into political defeat for the prime minister, who holds a narrow majority in Parliament. The center-left opposition is weak, and Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s center-right coalition has shown no clear intention of replacing him.        

Yet the political climate remains uncertain, and no one has ruled out early elections. &ldquo;Every day the risk of a short circuit gets closer,&rdquo; the political columnist Stefano Folli wrote in the financial daily Il Sole 24 Ore on Wednesday.        

In the past, Mr. Berlusconi has emerged largely unscathed from a dizzying number of trials. He has railed for decades against prosecutors and used his private television and media empire to help shape Italian public opinion. Most Italians have little faith in their justice system.        

&ldquo;I think Berlusconi is in a position to move beyond the Ruby scandal media-wise, but I&rsquo;m not sure if he can move beyond it in the courts,&rdquo; said Italo Bocchino, a leader of Future and Liberty, a faction that broke away from Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s center-right coalition last year but largely supported him in an important confidence vote in December.        

Last week, the government passed a contentious tax-restructuring measure championed by the Northern League, the most powerful party in the center-right coalition, which had said it would bring down the government if the effort failed.        

But the president of Italy, Giorgio Napolitano, subsequently disputed the plan on technical grounds and said he would not approve the current version. He is expected to meet with the leader of the Northern League later on Wednesday.        

Besides the so-called Rubygate scandal, Mr. Berlusconi faces other legal hurdles. Last month, Italy&rsquo;s Constitutional Court partially lifted his immunity, a ruling that reactivated three other trials against him, including one in which his former tax lawyer, David Mills, was convicted of taking a bribe in exchange for false testimony.        

Last year, a court threw out the case against Mr. Mills, saying the statute of limitations had run out. But on Tuesday, prosecutors said they would reopen the trial with Mr. Berlusconi as a defendant.        

A large anti-Berlusconi demonstration was held in Milan last weekend and others are planned Sunday in cities throughout Italy.        
