
NEW DELHI &mdash; India and Pakistan announced on Thursday that the two countries would resume peace talks that have been stalled since 2008, when Pakistani militants staged coordinated terrorist attacks in Mumbai, India, killing 163.        

The agreement, announced in simultaneous statements put out by both governments, followed high-level meetings on Sunday between the foreign secretaries of India and Pakistan and appeared to set the stage for high-level, open-ended and wide-ranging talks on a variety of contentious issues from counterterrorism to improving economic relations.        

The renewed talks are likely to be welcomed by the United States, which has been eager to ease tensions between the two countries so that Pakistan can divert troops from its border with India to its frontier with Afghanistan and aid in the American effort to fight Taliban insurgents.        

As part of the agreement, Pakistan&rsquo;s foreign minister, Makhdoom Shah Mahmood Qureshi, will visit India in July to review the progress of the discussions, which will include meetings focused on diffusing tensions over the disputed border region of Kashmir. Each side holds a portion of the territory but claims the entire region, and Pakistan-based militants have waged insurgency inside India aimed at breaking loose the province.        

The peace talks were first initiated in early 2004, after the armies of the nuclear-armed neighbors nearly went to war in 2001, and appeared to be bearing fruit when they were abruptly cut off in the wake of the deadly terror attack in Mumbai.        

Secret talks in 2007 came close to resolving some of the most difficult issues, including the status of Kashmir. But they lapsed as then-president Pervez Musharraf lost his grip on power, and the attacks the following year plunged relations into their worst freeze since the two countries fought a brief war in 1999. The Mumbai attackers belonged to a terrorist group whose main aim was to take over the Indian-controlled portion of Kashmir.        

The two sides have repeatedly tried to resume talks since 2008, but these efforts have foundered as New Delhi had insisted that Islamabad make progress fighting terrorism within Pakistan and put the planners of the Mumbai attack on trial.        
Lydia Polgreen reported from New Delhi, and J. David Goodman from New York.
