
BEIJING &mdash; Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates, on a mission to resuscitate moribund military relations with China, will not arrive in Beijing for talks with the nation&rsquo;s top military leaders until Sunday. But at an airfield in Chengdu, a metropolis in the nation&rsquo;s center, China&rsquo;s military leaders have already rolled out a welcome for him.        

It is the J-20, a radar-evading jet fighter that has the same two angled tailfins that are the trademark of the Pentagon&rsquo;s own stealth fighter, the F-22 Raptor. After years of top-secret development, the jet &mdash; China&rsquo;s first stealth plane &mdash; was put through what appear to be preliminary, but also very public, tests this week on the runway of the Aviation Design Institute in Chengdu, a site so open that aircraft enthusiasts often gather there to snap photos.        

Some analysts say the timing is no coincidence. &ldquo;This is their new policy of deterrence,&rdquo; Andrei Chang, the Hong Kong editor in chief of the Canadian journal Kanwa Defense Weekly, who reported the jet&rsquo;s tests, said Wednesday. &ldquo;They want to show the U. S., show Mr. Gates, their muscle.&rdquo;        

These days, there is more muscle to show. A decade of aggressive modernization of China&rsquo;s once creaky military is beginning to bear fruit, and both the Pentagon and China&rsquo;s Asian neighbors are increasingly taking notice.        

By most accounts, China remains a generation or more behind the United States in military technology, and even further behind in deploying battle-tested versions of its most sophisticated naval and air capabilities. But after years of denials that it has any intention of becoming a peer military power of the United States, it is now unveiling capabilities that suggest that it intends, sooner or later, to be able to challenge American forces in the Pacific.        

Besides the J-20, a midair-refuelable, missile-capable jet designed to fly far beyond Chinese borders, the Chinese are reported to be refitting a Soviet-era Ukrainian aircraft carrier &mdash; China&rsquo;s first such power-projecting ship &mdash; for deployment as soon as next year.        

A spate of news reports allege that construction is already under way in Shanghai on one or more carriers; the military denied a similar report in 2006, but senior military officials have been more outspoken this year about China&rsquo;s desire to build the big ships. China could launch several carriers by 2020, the Pentagon stated in a 2009 report.        

The military&rsquo;s nuclear deterrent, estimated by experts at no more than 160 warheads, has been redeployed since 2008 onto mobile launchers and advanced submarines that no longer are sitting ducks for attackers. Multiple-warhead missiles are widely presumed to come next. China&rsquo;s 60-boat submarine fleet, already Asia&rsquo;s largest, is being refurbished with super-quiet nuclear-powered vessels and a second generation of ballistic-missile-equipped subs.        

And a widely anticipated antiship ballistic missile, called a &ldquo;carrier-killer&rdquo; for its potential to strike the big carriers at the heart of the American naval presence in the Pacific, appears to be approaching deployment. The head of the United States Pacific Command, Adm. Robert F. Willard, told a Japanese newspaper in December that the weapon had reached &ldquo;initial operational capability,&rdquo; an important benchmark. Navy officials said later that the Chinese had a working design but that it apparently had yet to be tested over water.        

On that and other weaponry, China&rsquo;s clear message nevertheless is that its ability to deter others from territory it owns, or claims, is growing fast.        

China, of course, has its own rationales for its military buildup. A common theme is that potentially offensive weapons like aircraft carriers, antiship missiles and stealth fighters are needed to enforce claims to Taiwan, should leaders there seek legal independence from the mainland.        

Taiwan&rsquo;s current status, governed separately but claimed by China as part of its sovereign territory, is maintained in part by an American commitment to defend it should Beijing carry out an attack. Some experts date elements of today&rsquo;s military buildup from crises in the mid-1990s, when the United States sent aircraft carriers unmolested into waters around Taiwan to drive home Washington&rsquo;s commitment to the island.        
 Michael Wines reported from Beijing, and Edward Wong from Xiamen. Elisabeth Bumiller contributed reporting from Washington. Benjamin Haas and Xiyun Yang contributed research.
