
WASHINGTON &mdash; The United States accused one of Lebanon&rsquo;s largest banks on Thursday of laundering hundreds of millions of dollars a month for a multinational drug trafficking organization with ties to Hezbollah.        

The complaint against the Beirut-based Lebanese Canadian Bank was filed under a rarely used provision of the Patriot Act that allows the Treasury Department to publicly identify financial institutions considered &ldquo;primary money laundering concerns&rdquo; and then move to restrict their business dealings in the United States.        

The bank denied knowledge of any wrongdoing, saying in a statement that it would &ldquo;fully cooperate and coordinate with the relevant regulatory authorities in an effort to demonstrate the integrity and transparency of its operations.&rdquo;        

The move comes at a time when Lebanon, a Middle East banking hub, is struggling to overcome one of its worst political crises in recent history, and could exacerbate tensions between the United States and Hezbollah, a powerful Shiite Muslim movement.        

Drug Enforcement Administration officials said the complaint culminated a five-year investigation involving agents in Colombia, West Africa, Europe, the Middle East and the United States. The officials said it shed light on the ways that terrorist organizations increasingly relied on the illegal drug trade to help finance their activities.        

&ldquo;As the number of state sponsors of terror go down, and other financing streams dry up, drug trafficking is filling the void,&rdquo; said Derek Maltz, the D.E.A. special agent in charge of the investigation.        

During a news conference on Thursday morning, Stuart A. Levey, a treasury under secretary, described an elaborate global clunkers-for-cash kind of scheme in which senior managers at the bank used its connections to financial institutions like exchange houses around the world to help launder money for Ayman Joumaa, whom the Treasury Department has declared a drug kingpin. Mr. Levey said Mr. Joumaa, whose assets in the United States were frozen last month by the department&rsquo;s Office of Foreign Assets Control, moved shipments of cocaine from Colombia through West Africa to buyers in Europe.        

The bulk cash from those sales was deposited into accounts at the Lebanese Canadian Bank, and then wired to used car dealers in the United States, who would buy vehicles and ship them to West Africa or other overseas destinations to be sold, the complaint said.        

Mr. Levey said that the bank also helped Mr. Joumaa wire money to collaborators in Asia, who would buy consumer goods that were shipped for sale to countries in Latin America.        

It is unclear, treasury officials said, how much of the profits from those sales was used to support Hezbollah, which the United States formally designated as a terrorist organization in 1997.        

Mr. Levey said several bank officials were linked to Hezbollah officials outside of Lebanon, including in Iran and Gambia.        

Lebanese officials close to their country&rsquo;s robust banking sector said that though the bank was owned by a Maronite Christian, several members of its board &mdash; including senior Shiite leaders &mdash; and more than half its employees were Shiites either sympathetic to, or supportive of, Hezbollah. They said the bank&rsquo;s main clients were Lebanese businessmen who worked in Africa, a majority of them Shiites.        

Political observers were not sure what impact the complaint would have on relations between the United States and Lebanon. It comes one month after Lebanon&rsquo;s government collapsed when Hezbollah and its allies withdrew 11 ministers from the cabinet. The move was part of a protest against an investigation by an international tribunal, which is expected to indict several members of the movement in connection with the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.        

The walkout toppled Mr. Hariri&rsquo;s son, Saad Hariri, from the prime minister&rsquo;s office. His successor, Najib Mikati, who was hastily installed with Hezbollah&rsquo;s support, has yet to appoint a new cabinet.        

The observers said that the American complaint against Lebanese Canadian Bank was likely to be viewed as one more attempt by the United States to cast a harsh light on Hezbollah, which the Obama administration considers to be a militant group propped up by Iran.        
Hwaida Saad and Nada Bakri contributed reporting from Beirut.
