
CAIRO &mdash; President Hosni Mubarak told the Egyptian people on Thursday that he would delegate authority to Vice President Omar Suleiman but that he would not resign, enraging hundreds of thousands gathered to hail his departure and setting in motion a volatile new stage in the three-week uprising.        

The declaration by Mr. Mubarak that he would remain president appeared to signal a dangerous escalation in one of the largest popular revolts in Egypt&rsquo;s history, and some protesters warned that weeks of peaceful rallies might give way to violence as early as Friday.        

The 17-minute speech itself underlined a seemingly unbridgeable gap between ruler and ruled in Egypt: Mr. Mubarak, in paternalistic tones, talked in great detail about changes he planned to make to Egypt&rsquo;s autocratic Constitution, while crowds in Tahrir Square, with bewilderment and anger, demanded that he step down.        

Mr. Mubarak seemed oblivious. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s not about me,&rdquo; he said in his address. When he was done, crowds in Cairo waved the bottoms of their shoes in the air, a gesture intended to convey disgust, and shouted, &ldquo;Leave! Leave!&rdquo;        

The reaction abroad to Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s address was more measured, but also critical. President Obama issued a statement on Thursday night saying that &ldquo;too many Egyptians remain unconvinced that the government is serious about a genuine transition to democracy.&rdquo; European leaders also called for more fundamental change and urged that it happen faster.        

The speech came after a tumultuous day of dramatic gestures and fevered speculation in which the newly appointed leader of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s party said the president had agreed to step down, and the military issued a communiqu&eacute; in which it declared it was intervening to safeguard the country, language some opposition leaders read as signaling a possible coup d&rsquo;&eacute;tat.        

Earlier in the day, even Mr. Obama seemed to believe that Mr. Mubarak would go further, celebrating his belief that Egypt was &ldquo;witnessing history unfold.&rdquo;        

Instead, Mr. Mubarak, 82, a former general, struck a defiant, even provocative note. While he acknowledged for the first time that his government had made mistakes, he made it clear that he was still president and that reforms in Egypt would proceed under his government&rsquo;s supervision and according to the timetable of elections in September.        

Though Mr. Suleiman was already acting as the face of the government, the announcement gave him official duties, albeit ones Mr. Mubarak can revoke.        

&ldquo;I saw fit to delegate the authorities of the president to the vice president, as dictated by the Constitution,&rdquo; Mr. Mubarak said. He added that he was &ldquo;adamant to continue to shoulder my responsibility to protect the Constitution and safeguard the interests of the people.&rdquo;        

He echoed the contention of officials in past days that foreigners might be behind the uprising,  but he cited no evidence to support that allegation.        

&ldquo;We will not accept or listen to any foreign interventions or dictations,&rdquo; he said.        

For hours before Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s speech, jubilant crowds, prematurely celebrating their victory, positioned themselves next to large speakers  for what they assumed was a resignation speech. Men passed out free packages of dates. Protesters parted only for  lines of teenagers chanting: &ldquo;He&rsquo;s going to go. We&rsquo;re not going to go.&rdquo;        

At about 10:45, the crowd quieted as Mr. Mubarak started his speech, which was transmitted via a tiny radio that someone held up to a microphone. As it wore on, the muttering began. &ldquo;Donkey,&rdquo; someone said.        

Soon, angry chants echoed through the square. People gathered in groups, confused, enraged and faced with Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s plea to endorse his vision of gradual reform. Some said his speech was intended to divide the protesters, by peeling off those who thought he had gone far enough. Others said it reflected the isolation of a president they had come to detest.        

&ldquo;Mubarak didn&rsquo;t believe us until now, but we will make him believe tomorrow,&rdquo; said Ashraf Osman, 49, an accountant who joined protesters in the square.        

By midnight, about 3,000 protesters made their way from the square to the Radio and Television Building, which protesters loathe for propaganda that has cast them as troublemakers. The building was barricaded with barbed wire, tanks and armored vehicles. Many protesters said they planned to sleep there, in yet another move to broaden their protests that have so far focused on Tahrir Square and the nearby Parliament building. Some protesters also began gathering outside the presidential palace.        

&ldquo;We must stop these liars,&rdquo; said Mohamed Zuhairy, a 30-year-old engineer, who had joined the crowd. &ldquo;Television must reflect the real power of the revolution.&rdquo;        
Reporting was contributed by Kareem Fahim, Liam Stack, Mona El-Naggar and Thanassis Cambanis from Cairo and Sheryl Stolberg from Marquette, Mich.
