
TEHRAN &mdash; At annual rallies on Friday that marked the anniversary of Iran&rsquo;s Islamic Revolution, Iranians also noted the events taking place in Cairo.        

Hours before President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt resigned, crowds at a rally in Tehran, the capital, added an unusual chant to the normal complement of &ldquo;Death to America&rdquo; and &ldquo;Death to Israel,&rdquo; video broadcast on state television showed.        

&ldquo;Death to Mubarak,&rdquo; went the additional chant.        

Later in the day, the government was quick to offer its congratulations to the protesters in Cairo and other Egyptian cities.        

&ldquo;We congratulate the great nation of Egypt on this victory and we share their happiness,&rdquo; the Iranian foreign minister, Ali Akbar Salehi, said in a statement released to Iranian news agencies. &ldquo;Today, our people in their millions, while honoring the great Islamic Revolution, showed their solidarity with the brave and justice-seeking movement in Egypt,&rdquo; he said.        

Speaking to people gathered in Tehran&rsquo;s Azadi Square to celebrate the 32nd anniversary of the Iranian revolution of 1979, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad welcomed the emergence of what he called a &ldquo;new Middle East, without the Zionist regime and U.S. interference.&rdquo; He stopped short of asserting that the revolts in Tunisia and Egypt had been directly inspired by Iran&rsquo;s Islamic Revolution.        

Addressing the Egyptian people, Mr. Ahmadinejad said: &ldquo;It is your right to be free. It is your right to exercise your will and sovereignty.&rdquo;        

The White House spokesman, Robert Gibbs, noted Friday that the Iranian government had clamped down on news media coverage of the events in Egypt, and that it did not permit its own citizens to freely express their opinions. &ldquo;What you&rsquo;ve seen in the region is the government of Iran, quite frankly, scared of the will of its people,&rdquo; Mr. Gibbs said.        

Doubts remained about the fate of a separate rally in support of the uprisings, proposed by two leaders of Iran&rsquo;s opposition movement, Mir Hussein Moussavi, a former prime minister, and Mehdi Karroubi, a former speaker of Parliament.        

Iran&rsquo;s authorities have stepped up pressure against the opposition in recent days, restricting access to Mr. Karroubi, who is reported to be under virtual house arrest, and arresting people allied with both leaders.        

Iranian officials have expressed contempt for the march proposed by the opposition for Monday, calling the idea &ldquo;divisive&rdquo; and &ldquo;politically motivated.&rdquo;        

Senior commanders of the country&rsquo;s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps have indicated that there will be no tolerance for opposition activity.        

&ldquo;Any incitement will be dealt with severely,&rdquo; a senior commander, Hossein Hamadani, said Wednesday in comments published by Iran&rsquo;s official IRNA news agency.        

The Revolutionary Guards played a central role in the suppression of street protests after the disputed presidential election in June 2009.        

In light of the events in Tunisia and Egypt, many supporters of Iran&rsquo;s opposition have been hoping that the proposed march might revitalize a movement subdued by an effective campaign of state violence, threats, imprisonment of key figures and a blanket ban on access to the government media.        

&ldquo;It has restarted the wave,&rdquo; a 30-year-old woman who supports the opposition said of the request for permission to hold a separate rally.        

&ldquo;They have used the opportunity of Tunisia and Egypt to show that we are still here,&rdquo; she said of the opposition leaders. The woman requested anonymity because of the fear of repercussions from Iranian authorities if she spoke openly.        

&ldquo;Even with all the executions and suppression, the regime has not been able to get rid of us,&rdquo; she said.        
