
JERUSALEM &mdash; A weeklong Jordanian campaign against foreign correspondents for writing about tribal discontent with the monarchy and the political system took a new turn at week&rsquo;s end when the royal court issued a statement attacking the Amman bureau chief of the main French news agency.        

The statement, issued late on Thursday night, focused on two recent articles from Agence France-Presse by Randa Habib, who has been bureau chief in Amman, the Jordanian capital, since 1987. The articles referred to a petition from 36 tribesmen complaining about, among other things, Queen Rania, and alluding to accusations that she had enriched her family and helped obtain citizenship for fellow Palestinians.        

&ldquo;The Royal Hashemite Court objects to the basis of the stories, which are not rooted in facts, but rather rely on hearsay, gossip and unsubstantiated claims, and also to the failure of Ms. Randa Habib to investigate the allegations quoted in her report,&rdquo; the court statement said. In a letter to the news agency the court demanded that Ms. Habib be removed from her post and threatened legal action against her and the agency.        

The articles by Agence France-Presse were similar to those published by many foreign news organizations, including The Associated Press, Reuters, CNNand The New York Times, although one cited a few more specific accusations from the tribesmen&rsquo;s statement.        

Tribes are the backbone of the Hashemite monarchy in Jordan. Any sense that they question its actions is a rare sign of discontent, and the statement attracted international news media attention, especially in light of events in Egypt and elsewhere in the Arab world. King Abdullah II fired his cabinet in response to weeks of street protests here and this week swore in a new government, which promised greater accountability and transparency.        

For the past week articles in the official Jordanian news media complained that foreign correspondents had falsely portrayed dissent in Jordan as part of the regional wave of anti-autocratic movements that began in Tunisia and spread to Egypt.        

&ldquo;You cannot explain the protests in the Arab world without taking into account the bigger picture, which is that America is an enemy of democracy in the area,&rdquo; Hassan Barari wrote in Al Rai, a government-owned newspaper, on Friday. &ldquo;It is worth remembering that these unprofessional journalists whose articles revolve around internal dynamics of the protest are less bold in exposing what the street says about American and Israeli policies in the region.&rdquo;        

Ms. Habib, the Agence France-Presse bureau chief, has been working for the agency in Jordan for 30 years and is the author of &ldquo;Hussein and Abdullah: Inside the Jordanian Royal Family,&rdquo; published last year. A French citizen of Lebanese origin and married to a Jordanian, she is widely respected for her independence and enterprise.        

&ldquo;The only time I have had a government threaten me like this was when Iraq under Saddam Hussein launched two court cases against me,&rdquo; she said in a telephone interview. &ldquo;I understand that the news can be hurtful to some but we don&rsquo;t create the news, we just report it.&rdquo;        

She said the statement by the tribesmen was significant because it had been signed by 36 people. She had declined to publish articles about previous such statements because they had been anonymous.        
