
WASHINGTON &mdash; President Obama heaped praise on the peaceful protesters who deposed Hosni Mubarak on Friday, declaring, &ldquo;Egypt will never be the same,&rdquo; even as his national security team acknowledged that the swift uprising would almost certainly upend American strategy in the Middle East.        

Standing in the foyer of the White House, where just a week before he had started to press Mr. Mubarak for immediate reforms without calling for his resignation, Mr. Obama described the Egyptian uprising as a model of nonviolence and moral force &ldquo;that bent the arc of history.&rdquo; While comparing the 18-day protests to Gandhi&rsquo;s peaceful resistance to British rule, the fall of the Berlin Wall and the student protests that brought down a dictator in Indonesia, he also set out a series of benchmarks that he said he expected the Egyptian military to follow, warning that &ldquo;nothing less than genuine democracy will carry the day.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;That means protecting the rights of Egypt&rsquo;s citizens, lifting the emergency law, revising the Constitution and other laws to make this change irreversible, and laying out a clear path to elections that are fair and free,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Above all, this transition must bring all of Egypt&rsquo;s voices to the table.&rdquo;        

Mr. Obama&rsquo;s tone was optimistic, and he promised the crowd in Cairo&rsquo;s Tahrir Square &mdash; which was listening to his brief broadcast live via Egyptian state television &mdash; continued American support for Egypt. That support, however, is likely to take new forms: Administration officials agreed that the $250 million in economic aid was a pittance compared with the $1.3 billion in annual military aid, and the White House and the State Department were already discussing setting aside new funds to bolster the rise of secular political parties. Under Egypt&rsquo;s current Constitution, alternatives to Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s National Democratic Party are all but banned.        

In his remarks, Mr. Obama promised &ldquo;whatever assistance is necessary&rdquo; to pursue a &ldquo;credible transition to a democracy.&rdquo;        

But as he spoke, White House officials were assessing the longer-term impact of street revolutions that have deposed two dictators in less than a month, starting with the ouster of Tunisia&rsquo;s leader, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali. Middle East leaders from Saudi Arabia to Jordan to Yemen have moved to pre-empt similar uprisings.        

In Israel and Saudi Arabia, both of which depended heavily on Mr. Mubarak, officials were blistering in their criticism of Washington, arguing that the United States abandoned a long-time ally without first building in guarantees that Egypt&rsquo;s revolution could not be hijacked by religious extremists.        

In his final press briefing at the White House on Friday, Robert Gibbs, Mr. Obama&rsquo;s press secretary, told reporters, &ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s important that the next government of Egypt, as we&rsquo;ve said in here many times, recognize the accords that have been signed with the government of Israel.&rdquo; But other officials have acknowledged privately that if Egypt turns into a noisy democracy that includes the Muslim Brotherhood, there will undoubtedly be political debate in Egypt about whether the 1979 peace accord with Israel should remain in force.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t think that there is any real chance the Egyptian military would have any interest in seeing the peace accord walked back,&rdquo; one of Mr. Obama&rsquo;s senior aides said this week. &ldquo;But it&rsquo;s a warning we must issue.&rdquo;        

The Saudis, like Mr. Mubarak himself, portrayed the uprising as the creation of &ldquo;foreign powers,&rdquo; which was widely interpreted as code words for Washington and other Western powers.        

&ldquo;We are astonished however at what we see as interference in the internal affairs of Egypt by some countries,&rdquo; Saudi Arabia&rsquo;s foreign minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, said Thursday, as Mr. Mubarak was still clinging to power. In an unusually direct shot at the White House, he said, &ldquo;We are shocked to see that there are countries pre-empting even the will of the Egyptian people,&rdquo; never addressing the fact that the protests in Egypt seemed both widespread and homegrown.        

While there are few signs yet of protests gathering steam in Saudi Arabia, the government there has taken steps to raise wages and try to keep the contagion from spreading across its own desert.        

Yemen and Syria, according to an analysis circulating in the White House, could be more vulnerable. But even as administration officials worried about how the protests could spread, they seemed to be all but inviting it in Iran.        

White House officials were clearly relishing the discomfort the uprising has created for Iran&rsquo;s leaders.        

On Friday, White House officials noted that the Iranians, who initially greeted the protests in Egypt because they were aimed at a secular leader who had helped isolate Tehran, had changed their minds. They were blocking broadcasts by the BBC, and putting some opposition leaders under house arrest.        

Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. all but urged Iranians to go out onto Tehran&rsquo;s streets, in a repeat of the June 2009 demonstrations: &ldquo;I say to our Iranian friends, Let your people march. Let your people speak. Release your people from jail. Let them have a voice.&rdquo;        

Just a week ago, trying to coax Mr. Mubarak to transfer his powers or leave office, Mr. Obama called the Egyptian leader a &ldquo;patriot&rdquo; who cared deeply about his country. On Friday, after Mr. Mubarak slipped out of Cairo, Mr. Obama mentioned him only once.        

Instead, he focused his comments on the young people in the streets, and a military that &ldquo;would not fire bullets&rdquo; into the crowds that gathered in Tahrir Square, also known as Liberation Square. He struck a decidedly optimistic tone about Egypt&rsquo;s future, repeating lines from his own presidential campaign in 2008, saying that Egyptians could now create a government that &ldquo;represented their hopes and not their fears.&rdquo;        

Even some outsiders who have been critical of the administration&rsquo;s mixed messages during the Egyptian crisis &mdash; from its early declarations to Egypt as &ldquo;stable&rdquo; to its wavering on whether reform could happen with Mr. Mubarak still in office &mdash; said Mr. Obama struck the right tone on Friday. &ldquo;He has done better than his government has done,&rdquo; said Robert Kagan, a conservative scholar and essayist at the Brookings Institution.        

But there are widespread concerns in Washington about the weeks ahead, starting with the worry that once Tahrir Square clears, the military might try to recreate a state it would dominate. &ldquo;It is going to be critical to make sure the military remains true to the transition,&rdquo; Senator John Kerry, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations committee, said in an interview. &ldquo;If that is secured quickly, then I believe the process can flow quite smoothly.&rdquo;        

Mr. Kagan said he thought the risks were relatively small.        

&ldquo;Once the military decided they were not going to kill people in the streets, I don&rsquo;t know what leverage they have. If they tried to re-establish the military dictatorship that Egypt has had for years, it would be pretty difficult.&rdquo;        
