
MELBOURNE, Australia &mdash; Floodwaters appeared to be at or near their peak across much of tropical, northeastern Australia on Wednesday, with inundations affecting 40 towns and cities, as an army general was named to lead efforts to cope with the disaster.        

In the coastal city of Rockhampton, where hundreds of homes have been submerged and more than 100 people are living in evacuation centers, floodwaters reached a long anticipated peak as the Fitzroy River surged to around 30 feet, said Paul Birch, a senior hydrologist at the Bureau of Meteorology.        

&ldquo;I think it&rsquo;s up there for another week,&rdquo; he said. In other areas of the state, waters continued to rise although predicted rains proved too light to worsen the crisis, he said.        

Maj. Gen. Mick Slater was appointed at an emergency meeting of the cabinet of the flood-hit state of Queensland to lead a task force to cope with the recovery.        

&ldquo;This is a disaster on an unprecedented scale, and it is going to take an unprecedented, sustained effort to rebuild regional Queensland,&rdquo; Anna Bligh, the state premier, told reporters at a news conference. &ldquo;Maj. Gen. Mick Slater is an outstanding Queenslander, and I am pleased that he has agreed to lead the Flood Recovery Taskforce.&rdquo;        

Flooding is a seasonal norm in Queensland, but this year&rsquo;s deluges have been broader.        

&ldquo;We&rsquo;ve had big floods before,&rdquo; Ms. Bligh said in an interview with the ABC, Australia&rsquo;s public broadcaster. &ldquo;We&rsquo;re a tropical state. But we&rsquo;ve never had them over so many towns, so many cities, and had so much public infrastructure at risk because of the size of the area.&rdquo;        

More than 200,000 people have been affected since a cyclone brought heavy rains to Queensland in December.        

Rains and floodwaters have destroyed vital food crops, raising the possibility of additional pressure on rising global food prices. The floods also forced much of the state&rsquo;s mining industry to a halt. The Queensland Resources Council has estimated that the crisis has cost the lucrative coal export industry at least $1 billion.        

Analysts predict the disaster will induce a global increase in prices for coal for both steelmaking and power generation.        

Prime Minister Julia Gillard has promised millions of dollars in federal aid to flood victims.        

Snakes Replace Residents        

ROCKHAMPTON, Australia (AP) &mdash; Flood-weary residents of this Australian coastal city and other areas beset by record rains have a new worry: poisonous snakes and crocodiles lurking in the muddy waters of their submerged streets and homes.        

Officials in the town of Theodore, which evacuated all 300 residents last week, were still trying to determine on Wednesday when it would be safe to allow residents to return. The county mayor, John Hooper, expressed particular concern about an influx of venomous snakes, flushed from their habitats and searching for dry ground.        

&ldquo;I&rsquo;m hearing stories that it is bad,&rdquo; Mr. Hooper said of the snakes. &ldquo;And I&rsquo;ve been told they&rsquo;re bloody angry, so people will have to be very careful.&rdquo;        

Rockhampton residents have also reported seeing higher than usual numbers of snakes, Rockhampton Mayor Brad Carter said. Saltwater crocodiles were another worry for people entering floodwaters, as the predators have been spotted in the Fitzroy River, Mayor Carter said.        

&ldquo;There&rsquo;s a lot of snakes &mdash; and I mean a lot,&rdquo; a Rockhampton resident, Shane Muirhead, told the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. &ldquo;Like, every hundred yards you will see a snake, and they&rsquo;re just everywhere.&rdquo;        
