
LONDON &#150; Lawyers for Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, said Friday that he should not be sent to Sweden to face allegations of sexual abuse there because he was now seen as &ldquo;public enemy number one&rdquo; in that country.        

Speaking on the final day of a contentious and hard-fought extradition hearing, Geoffrey Robertson, a lawyer for Mr. Assange, told a court that comments this week by the Swedish prime minister, Fredrik Reinfeldt, meant that his client could not get a fair trial.        

Mr. Reinfeldt, responding to statements by Mr. Assange&rsquo;s defense team earlier this week that suggested Sweden&rsquo;s justice system was flawed, had told reporters the argument was &ldquo;condescending.&rdquo; That and other statements, not specified in court, rendered Sweden &ldquo;toxic&rdquo; for Mr. Assange, his lawyers argued.        

Mr. Robertson also sought to cast doubt on the technicalities of the warrant issued for Mr. Assange&rsquo;s extradition last December, and suggested that the encounters leading to accusations of sexual wrongdoing by two women in Stockholm last summer could not be classified universally as crimes.        

&ldquo;Sexual encounters have their ebbs and flows,&rdquo; he contended. &ldquo;What may be unwanted one minute can with further empathy become desired.&rdquo;        

In her closing argument, Clare Montgomery, a lawyer for the prosecution, gave a robust and sometimes scathing response, eliciting audible intakes of breath in the courtroom, in which she accused Mr. Robertson of minimizing rape. Given that one of the women said she awoke to find Mr. Assange having unprotected sex with her, she could not possibly have given her consent, Ms. Montgomery argued.        

The technical arguments against the warrant were completely unfounded, she said. And referring to the Swedish prime minister&rsquo;s comments, she said that Mr. Assange and his defense team had themselves taken to the media to fight their cause and &ldquo;those who fan the flames of the media firestorm can&rsquo;t be too surprised when they get burnt.&rdquo;        

Judge Howard Riddle told Mr. Assange and his supporters in and outside the courtroom that he would return on Feb. 24 after deliberating on the matter. But he said, with a note of resignation, that whatever he decided would &ldquo;perhaps inevitably be appealed.&rdquo;        
