
ROME &mdash; In the days since prosecutors called for Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy to be tried on charges related to prostitution and abuse of office in a lurid sex scandal, the prime minister has steeled himself for what some predict may be his last political battle.        

But with a weak political opposition and a lack of clear successors to replace him, the battle is not playing out in Parliament, where the prime minister holds a narrow majority, or in the courts, which have not yet ruled on whether to try him. Instead, it is unfolding in the Italian media that Mr. Berlusconi has dominated for decades.        

Ahead of what are expected to be large anti-Berlusconi demonstrations scheduled for Sunday, the prime minister and his loyalists have shifted from defense to attack mode &mdash; taking to the airwaves and the front pages to lash out at the Italian judiciary, the center-left opposition and anyone else who might question the prime minister&rsquo;s personal life.        

&ldquo;Everyone is afraid of elections, so they&rsquo;re trying to fight the battle using lots of media pressure,&rdquo; said Aldo Grasso, the television critic for Corriere della Sera, Italy&rsquo;s leading daily newspaper. &ldquo;The last battle is being fought through the media, because there&rsquo;s no answer from Parliament.&rdquo;        

For nearly 30 years, Mr. Berlusconi has helped shape Italian public opinion through his private Mediaset broadcasting network and Mondadori publishing empire, and, as prime minister, through the Italian state broadcaster, RAI.        

This week, Mr. Grasso said, Mr. Berlusconi summoned the directors of all the Mediaset news programs, as well as the editors of several newspapers that he owns or co-owns, to discuss coverage, a fact Mr. Grasso called &ldquo;extremely serious&rdquo; in that it revealed a collapse of the line between government and the press.        

Indeed, in recent days, Mr. Berlusconi has redeclared his longstanding war on Italian prosecutors, accusing them in one interview on Friday of plotting a &ldquo;judiciary coup&rdquo; against him, and repeatedly lambasting the fact that they had wiretapped the phones of many young women who attended his parties and that the conversations were leaked to the news media.        

&ldquo;Justice, Italian Style: Free to Attack the Prime Minister,&rdquo; ran a front-page headline in Il Giornale, a newspaper owned by Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s brother.        

Mr. Berlusconi and other ministers have repeatedly compared the prosecutors&rsquo; tactics in investigating the prime minister to the &ldquo;The Lives of Others,&rdquo; the Academy Award-winning film about the Communist East German secret police spying on German intellectuals &mdash; which happened to be aired in prime time on Wednesday by RAI.        

At the same time, the RAI board blocked a talk show on a left-leaning channel from airing the final minutes of Nanni Moretti&rsquo;s 2006 film &ldquo;Il Caimano,&rdquo; about a director unable to make a movie about a Berlusconi-like figure because everyone is afraid of offending him. The film&rsquo;s closing scene shows Mr. Moretti as the pseudo-Berlusconi reciting attacks on prosecutors, while demonstrators start throwing firebombs.        

This week, critics howled when a parliamentary committee that monitors the RAI state broadcaster proposed new rules stating that if one talk show discussed a particular theme, like the sex scandal, all other RAI talk shows would have to wait eight days before touching the same topic, a measure Mr. Grasso of Corriere called &ldquo;totalitarian.&rdquo;        

For Sunday, women have organized demonstrations across Italy calling on Mr. Berlusconi to step down, criticizing him both for what they see as the demeaning portrayal of women promoted on his television channels and for the latest sex scandal, in which Mr. Berlusconi is accused of paying for sex with a 17-year-old and abusing his office by calling the police to intervene on her behalf after she was detained for petty theft.        

The prospect of the demonstrations was enough for one former Berlusconi official, Giuliano Ferrara, the editor of the newspaper Il Foglio, to organize a counter event on Saturday, declaring that it was unfair for prosecutors to pry into people&rsquo;s private lives.        

On Friday, the cover of the newsweekly Panorama, owned by Mr. Berlusconi&rsquo;s Mondadori, hit the same theme. Under the headline &ldquo;I Won&rsquo;t Stand for It,&rdquo; it featured photos of Italian women who &ldquo;are proud of their dignity but don&rsquo;t accept puritanical lessons. Because behind the neo-moralism of the demonstrations, there is only the desire to hit Berlusconi.&rdquo;        

Meanwhile, Chi, a popular supermarket tabloid published by Mondadori that routinely shows flattering pictures of the Berlusconi family, featured a cover spread on all the women serving as ministers in the Berlusconi government. The headline read, &ldquo;The left hasn&rsquo;t given such important roles to women and hasn&rsquo;t done anything for their emancipation. We talk with facts.&rdquo;        

Mr. Berlusconi first came onto the Italian political scene in the early 1990s, in the political vacuum created by the fall of the Berlin Wall and &ldquo;Tangentopoli,&rdquo; a huge bribery scandal that brought down the entire postwar political system after one-third of Parliament came under indictment for corruption and illegal party financing.        

Today, the sex scandal may be another big moment for Italy&rsquo;s political order &mdash; only this time around there are showgirls instead of kickbacks, and there is no clear Berlusconi figure poised to govern the country.        

In the absence of a clear alternative, the media wars wage on, and Mr. Berlusconi has the upper hand. &ldquo;People are convinced that he&rsquo;s politically persecuted,&rdquo; Mr. Grasso said.        
