
ALGIERS &mdash; Riot police officers stifled a protest in Algeria&rsquo;s capital on Saturday by hundreds of people voicing the same demands for change that have helped topple two of the region&rsquo;s autocratic governments over the last month.        

Gathering in the central May 1 Square, demonstrators in Algiers chanted &ldquo;Bouteflika out!&rdquo; referring to President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, who has ruled Algeria with a tough hand since 1999, maintaining power through elections that opposition figures say were rigged. The rally&rsquo;s organizers said thousands had taken part, but news agencies and the government here gave vastly differing figures, from a few dozen to thousands.        

Witnesses said thousands of riot police officers with clubs had blocked the demonstrators from carrying out a planned march in the center of the whitewashed seaside capital, which was otherwise tense and deserted on Saturday. By late afternoon, with the last of the demonstrators gone, the square was still sealed off by police officers, and dozens of armored police vehicles remained in the neighborhood.        

It was unclear on Saturday what, if any, long-term implications the protest would have for Mr. Bouteflika&rsquo;s government; outbursts of civil unrest have been frequent here for decades. But the large-scale deployment of the police and recent concessions &mdash; Mr. Bouteflika has promised to lift a longstanding state of emergency here &mdash; show the government is wary of the contagion of unrest in neighboring countries.        

Many demonstrators were arrested Saturday, although there were also conflicting numbers for those detained.        

The government news agency minimized the &ldquo;unauthorized&rdquo; demonstration&rsquo;s significance, quoting the police as saying that only 250 had taken part. But one of the organizers, Said Sadi of the opposition Rally for Culture and Democracy, said that Saturday&rsquo;s event was a &ldquo;great success&rdquo; and that it would not be the last such demonstration.        

&ldquo;When you mobilize 30,000 police in the capital, that&rsquo;s a sign of weakness, not strength,&rdquo; he said. The figure could not be independently verified. But witnesses suggested the police had far outnumbered the protesters.        

&ldquo;There was a march of police, not demonstrators,&rdquo; said a civil servant, standing near the square late Saturday afternoon. He refused to give his name, citing security concerns. &ldquo;The marchers had asked to conduct a peaceful march and it was refused. This is how power here acts.&rdquo;        

With the police still out in force, knots of men watched them silently from doorways in the chill dusk. Among them were suggestions that persistent grievances &mdash; large-scale unemployment, reports of government corruption, heavy-handed police tactics &mdash; had not been mitigated by the demonstration&rsquo;s suppression.        

&ldquo;They can&rsquo;t kill us because we are already dead,&rdquo; said Bilal Boudamous, 29, who said he was out of work. &ldquo;At 30 we are unemployed, we live with our parents, and we have no future.&rdquo;        

Glancing over at the helmeted police officers, he said, &ldquo;They are there to stifle us, to prevent us from doing anything.&rdquo; He had tried to take part in the march, he said, but had been beaten back by officers wielding truncheons.        

Others said with resignation that harsh police interventions were nothing new, even though with all the regional ferment circumstances had changed. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s always been like this,&rdquo; said another civil servant, who gave his name as Mourad. &ldquo;We are used to this. It&rsquo;s not easy to change a whole system. Algeria is not Egypt or Tunisia.&rdquo;        

On Friday, several people were wounded outside the office of the main opposition group by security forces as they were celebrating the resignation of President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt after antigovernment protests there.        

Three weeks earlier, demonstrations in neighboring Tunisia led to the ouster of that country&rsquo;s autocratic ruler, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali and set off a wave of antigovernment protests across the region.        

In Algeria, several antigovernment protests broke out in early January, including some in which demonstrators clashed with members of the security forces. Those protests began after prices rose sharply for flour, sugar and other food staples. In 2009, there were riots in Algiers over high unemployment and housing shortages.        
 Adam Nossiter reported from Algiers, and Timothy Williams from New York. Nada Bakri contributed reporting from Beirut, and Thomas Fuller from Tunis.
