
BAGHDAD &mdash; A suicide bomber attacked a bus carrying Shiite pilgrims home from Samarra on Saturday, killing at least 33  people in the latest of several recent assaults on pilgrims.        

It was the second attack in three days against Shiite pilgrims near Samarra, whose gold-domed shrine was damaged in a 2006 bombing that led to waves of sectarian killings between Iraq&rsquo;s Sunni and Shiite populations.        

The bombing happened at one of about 40 checkpoints that line the road between Samarra and Baghdad, highlighting how easily attackers are able to exploit security flaws at the remote outposts. The checkpoints often cause traffic to back up, leaving vehicles open to attack.        

According to security officials, the bus was stopped at a police checkpoint about seven miles south of Samarra on Saturday afternoon when the bomber strode through the checkpoint and walked up to the vehicle&rsquo;s open front door.        

One report on Iraqi television said the attacker had been speaking with police officers seconds before he detonated his explosive vest.        

There were no claims of responsibility, but security officials quickly blamed Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, a Sunni group, and said the bombing highlighted flaws in Iraq&rsquo;s intelligence-gathering.        

&ldquo;Checkpoints cannot prevent such operations,&rdquo; said Falah  al-Naqeeb, a former minister of the interior and a candidate to become Iraq&rsquo;s next defense minister. &ldquo;We have a problem in our security strategy. It really depends on intelligence to prevent such attacks.&rdquo;        

On Thursday, a car bomb killed nine pilgrims heading to Samarra&rsquo;s Askariya Shrine, where two revered Shiite imams are buried.        

Every year, hundreds of thousands of Iraqi and Iranian pilgrims flock to Samarra to visit the shrine. Saturday was the anniversary of the death of one of the imams, an occasion that drew large crowds.        

After the attack, religious leaders from Samarra asked citizens to donate blood. At the city&rsquo;s main hospital, some of the 28 people wounded in the attack seethed at the government&rsquo;s inability to prevent attackers from striking groups of pilgrims.        

&ldquo;No one is doing anything to stop the killing,&rdquo; said a man who gave his name as Abu Amjad. &ldquo;Why do we always have to be the sacrifice?&rdquo;        

Millions of pilgrims have flocked to shrines in Iraq since the American invasion in 2003, but militants have exploited the displays of faith &mdash; banned under Saddam Hussein &mdash; to sow unrest. Attacks against buses of Iranian pilgrims are common.        

In late January, suicide car bombers struck lines of Shiite pilgrims marching to a revered shrine in Karbala to celebrate an annual Shiite holiday.        

Also on Saturday, the police said that a mass grave discovered a day earlier in northeastern Iraq contained the bodies of as many as 153 men, women and children. Officials said they believed that the victims were civilians who had been executed by Al Qaeda in 2006, when the militant group controlled large parts of the area.        

Security officials said the grave was the largest of the 13 that had been uncovered in Diyala Province.        
Zaid Thaker, Khalid D. Ali, Omar al-Jawoshy and an Iraqi employee of The New York Times contributed reporting.
