
PARIS &mdash; A prominent French television journalist, who has been accused in the past of a faking an interview and receiving embezzled funds, on Wednesday faced a fresh controversy after he was accused of lifting almost 100 pages of material for a new Ernest Hemingway biography from an American author.        

The 400-page biography by Patrick Poivre d&rsquo;Arvor is scheduled for publication on Jan. 19, despite allegations that surfaced this week in a French news magazine, L&rsquo;Express, that the former news anchor had heavily borrowed passages from a French translation of a 1985 book, &ldquo;Along with Youth: Hemingway, the Early Years,&rdquo; by Peter M. Griffin.        

The material was rewritten, but hewed closely to precise details in Mr. Griffin&rsquo;s 258-page book, such as a description of Mr. Hemingway&rsquo;s treatment and surgery for a shooting wound, from the smell of antiseptic and blood in the clinic to the Italian doctor who offered him a drink of cognac as an anesthetic.        

Mr. Griffin, the author of two books on Hemingway, died at 59 in 2002 while at work on a book about Vincent van Gogh. His first book about Hemingway grew out of his dissertation for a doctorate at Brown University and relied on a collection of letters of correspondence from Hemingway&rsquo;s first wife, Hadley Richardson. The book was later translated into French by the Gallimard publishing house in Paris.        

Although Mr. Poivre d&rsquo;Arvor could not be reached Wednesday, he told L&rsquo;Express: &ldquo;I spent a year and a half writing this book and I find it very offensive to be suspected of plagiarism. I naturally relied on documents from numerous existing biographies, a number of them by Griffin, who seemed the best on young Hemingway. But I never reinvented his life.&rdquo;        

Mr. Poivre d&rsquo;Arvor&rsquo;s current publisher, Arthaud, quickly issued a news release that the version obtained by the French magazine had been released in error in December. &ldquo;It was a working draft version,&rdquo; the publisher&rsquo;s news release said. &ldquo;It does not correspond with the final version validated by the author.&rdquo;        

The editor of L&rsquo;Express, Christophe Barbier, insisted though that he had personally received a copy of the Hemingway manuscript in mid-December, displaying a handwritten dedication from Mr. Poivre d&rsquo;Arvor.        

The explanation from Mr. Poivre d&rsquo;Arvor&rsquo;s publisher about a version released in error raised more questions. One of them was whether the author of the book had relied on a ghost writer.        

Oxford University Press, which published Mr. Griffin&rsquo;s  book, is investigating the issue and will not comment until completing a review, according to Christian Purdy, director of publicity for the publisher in New York.        

Mr. Poivre d&rsquo;Arvor was a news anchor on France&rsquo;s main private channel, TF1, from the mid-1980s until 2008. But his image remains a fixture on Canal Plus television as a latex puppet that is host of the popular satirical show &ldquo;Les Guignols d&rsquo;info,&rdquo; or News Puppets.        

He was embroiled in controversy in 1991 when he claimed an exclusive interview with Fidel Castro, using stock press conference footage mixed with his own questions. He also received a suspended prison term for receiving money from funds embezzled by a businessman who paid him to attend dinners in Cannes, France, and the Antilles islands.        
