
CAIRO &mdash; As a new era dawned in Egypt on Saturday, the army leadership sought to reassure Egyptians and the world that it would shepherd a transition to civilian rule and honor international commitments like the peace treaty with Israel.        

Exultant and exhausted opposition leaders claimed their role in the country&rsquo;s future, pressing the army to lift the country&rsquo;s emergency law and release political prisoners and saying they would present their vision for the government. And they vowed to return to Tahrir Square next week to celebrate a victory and honor those who had died in the 18-day uprising that toppled Hosni Mubarak after nearly 30 years of authoritarian rule.        

In an announcement broadcast on state television, an army spokesman said Egypt would continue to abide by all its international and regional treaties and the current civilian leadership would manage the country&rsquo;s affairs until the formation of a new government. But he did not discuss a timetable for any transfer of power, and it was unclear how and when talks with opposition figures would take place.        

The army spokesman said the military was &ldquo;aspiring to guarantee the peaceful transition of power within the framework of a free democratic system that allows an elected civilian power to rule the country, in order to build a free democratic state.&rdquo;        

The impact of Egypt&rsquo;s uprising rippled across the Arab world as protesters turned out in Algeria, where the police arrested leading organizers, and in Yemen, where pro-government forces beat demonstrators with clubs.        

The Palestinian leadership responded by announcing that it planned to hold presidential and parliamentary elections by September. And in Tunisia, which inspired Egypt&rsquo;s uprising, hundreds demonstrated to cheer Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s ouster.        

Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, will travel to Jordan and Israel for talks as both countries deal with the reverberations from Egypt&rsquo;s revolution.        

In Tahrir, or Liberation, Square, some members of the broad movement that toppled Mr. Mubarak vowed to continue their protests, saying that all their demands had not yet been met.        

A long list included an end to the emergency law that allows detention without charges, the dissolution of the Parliament, seen as illegitimate, and for some of the protesters, the prosecution of Mr. Mubarak. About 50 stood in the square on Saturday morning, as the military removed barricades and concertina wire on the periphery.        

But the uprising&rsquo;s leading organizers, speaking at a news conference in central Cairo, asked protesters to leave the square.        

The group, the Coalition of the Youth of the Revolution, which includes members of the April 6 Youth Movement, the Muslim Brotherhood Youth and young supporters of Mohamed ElBaradei, a prominent opposition figure, said that it had not yet talked with the military and that on Sunday it would lay out its road map for a transitional government.        

The coalition said that Ahmed Zewail, a Nobel laureate in chemistry, and other respected figures would work as intermediaries between the youth group and the country&rsquo;s new military chiefs.        

&ldquo;The power of the people changed the regime,&rdquo; said Gehan Shaaban, a group spokeswoman. &ldquo;But we shouldn&rsquo;t trust the army. We should trust ourselves, the people of Egypt.&rdquo;        

Again, there were signs that not all the protesters were willing to give up. During the news conference, a woman yelled: &ldquo;We should all head to Tahrir and stay there, until we ourselves are sure that everything is going as planned! The government of Ahmed Shafiq has to go!&rdquo; Mr. Shafiq is the prime minister. The woman&rsquo;s shouts brought the news conference to a close.        

As the protesters and opposition groups prepared an agenda, they sought clues about exactly whom they were negotiating with. On Friday, Vice President Omar Suleiman said that Mr. Mubarak had authorized the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces to manage the state&rsquo;s affairs, marking the transition from civilian to military rule.        

Mr. Suleiman, a former general who became Egypt&rsquo;s foreign intelligence chief, straddled the two worlds. But Hosam Sowilam, a retired general, said Mr. Suleiman no longer played a leadership role. &ldquo;Omar Suleiman finished his time,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;He&rsquo;s 74 years old.&rdquo; Others were not so quick to dismiss Mr. Suleiman, a close ally of Mr. Mubarak who was mentioned as his successor.        

In interviews, protest leaders said they assumed that the defense minister, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, 75, who was considered a loyalist of Mr. Mubarak, was now the country&rsquo;s de facto leader. On Saturday morning, his convoy tried to drive to Tahrir Square, according to a paratrooper stationed there. But he did not leave his car.        
Reporting was contributed by David D. Kirkpatrick, Anthony Shadid, Mona El-Naggar, Dawlat Magdy and Scott Nelson from Cairo, and Thomas Fuller from Tunis.
