
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (Reuters) &mdash; A Pakistani court on Saturday issued an arrest warrant for former President Pervez Musharraf in connection with the 2007 assassination of Benazir Bhutto, a former prime minister and his rival.        

The authorities did not provide details of their accusations against Mr. Musharraf, who left under the threat of impeachment in 2008 and has been living in exile in London and Dubai.        

In October, Mr. Musharraf apologized to Pakistan for what he characterized as mistakes he made in office, and he said he would return to the country as the new head of a political party in time for elections due by 2013.        

The arrest warrant might keep him from returning to the country, where Ms. Bhutto&rsquo;s husband, Asif Ali Zardari, is now president and struggling to cope with multiple challenges, including a stubborn Taliban insurgency and a stagnant economy.        

Ms. Bhutto, who was an opponent of Mr. Musharraf&rsquo;s rule, was killed in a gun and suicide bomb attack after an election rally in the city of Rawalpindi on Dec. 27, 2007, weeks after she returned to Pakistan following years in self-imposed exile.        

A spokesman for Mr. Musharraf, Mohammad Ali Saif, called the accusation against the former leader baseless, adding that Mr. Musharraf is accused of not providing adequate security for Ms. Bhutto.        

Since Mr. Musharraf has limited support within Pakistan, the arrest warrant probably won&rsquo;t stir up a backlash against the government of this unstable United States ally.        

Mr. Musharraf, who become embroiled in a row with the judiciary and briefly imposed a state of emergency in 2007, has said he realized his popularity plummeted because of some wrong decisions he had made.        

A United Nations report said that no one believed the 15-year-old suicide bomber who killed Ms. Bhutto acted alone, and that the failure to examine her death effectively appeared to be deliberate. But the commission did not say who it believed was guilty.        
