
CAIRO &mdash; As protesters in Tahrir Square faced off against pro-government forces, they drew a lesson from their counterparts in Tunisia: &ldquo;Advice to the youth of Egypt: Put vinegar or onion under your scarf for tear gas.&rdquo;        

The exchange on Facebook was part of a remarkable two-year collaboration that has given birth to a new force in the Arab world &mdash; a pan-Arab youth movement dedicated to spreading democracy in a region without it. Young Egyptian and Tunisian activists brainstormed on the use of technology to evade surveillance, commiserated about torture and traded practical tips on how to stand up to rubber bullets and organize barricades.        

They fused their secular expertise in social networks with a discipline culled from religious movements and combined the energy of soccer fans with the sophistication of surgeons. Breaking free from older veterans of the Arab political opposition, they relied on tactics of nonviolent resistance channeled from an American scholar through a Serbian youth brigade &mdash; but also on marketing tactics borrowed from Silicon Valley.        

As their swelling protests shook the Egyptian state, they were locked in a virtual tug of war with a leader with a very different vision &mdash; Gamal Mubarak, the son of President Hosni Mubarak, a wealthy investment banker and ruling-party power broker. Considered the heir apparent to his father until the youth revolt eliminated any thought of dynastic succession, the younger Mubarak pushed his father to hold on to power even after his top generals and the prime minister were urging an exit, according to American officials who tracked Hosni Mubarak&rsquo;s final days.        

The defiant tone of the president&rsquo;s speech on Thursday, the officials said, was largely his son&rsquo;s work.        

&ldquo;He was probably more strident than his father was,&rdquo; said one American official, who characterized Gamal&rsquo;s role as &ldquo;sugarcoating what was for Mubarak a disastrous situation.&rdquo; But the speech backfired, prompting Egypt&rsquo;s military to force the president out and assert control of what they promise will be a transition to civilian government.        

Now the young leaders are looking beyond Egypt. &ldquo;Tunis is the force that pushed Egypt, but what Egypt did will be the force that will push the world,&rdquo; said Walid Rachid, one of the members of the April 6 Youth Movement, which helped organize the Jan. 25 protests that set off the uprising. He spoke at a meeting on Sunday night where the members discussed sharing their experiences with similar youth movements in Libya, Algeria, Morocco and Iran.        

&ldquo;If a small group of people in every Arab country went out and persevered as we did, then that would be the end of all the regimes,&rdquo; he said, joking that the next Arab summit might be &ldquo;a coming-out party&rdquo; for all the ascendant youth leaders.        

Bloggers Lead the Way        

The Egyptian revolt was years in the making. Ahmed Maher, a 30-year-old civil engineer and a leading organizer of the April 6 Youth Movement, first became engaged in a political movement known as Kefaya, or Enough, in about 2005. Mr. Maher and others organized their own brigade, Youth for Change. But they could not muster enough followers; arrests decimated their leadership ranks, and many of those left became mired in the timid, legally recognized opposition parties. &ldquo;What destroyed the movement was the old parties,&rdquo; said Mr. Maher, who has since been arrested four times.        

By 2008, many of the young organizers had retreated to their computer keyboards and turned into bloggers, attempting to raise support for a wave of isolated labor strikes set off by government privatizations and runaway inflation.        

After a strike that March in the city of Mahalla, Egypt, Mr. Maher and his friends called for a nationwide general strike for April 6. To promote it, they set up a Facebook group that became the nexus of their movement, which they were determined to keep independent from any of the established political groups. Bad weather turned the strike into a nonevent in most places, but in Mahalla a demonstration by the workers&rsquo; families led to a violent police crackdown &mdash; the first major labor confrontation in years.        

Just a few months later, after a strike in Tunisia, a group of young online organizers followed the same model, setting up what became the Progressive Youth of Tunisia. The organizers in both countries began exchanging their experiences over Facebook. The Tunisians faced a more pervasive police state than the Egyptians, with less latitude for blogging or press freedom, but their trade unions were stronger and more independent. &ldquo;We shared our experience with strikes and blogging,&rdquo; Mr. Maher recalled.        

For their part, Mr. Maher and his colleagues began reading about nonviolent struggles. They were especially drawn to a Serbian youth movement called Otpor, which had helped topple the dictator Slobodan Milosevic by drawing on the ideas of an American political thinker, Gene Sharp. The hallmark of Mr. Sharp&rsquo;s work is well-tailored to Mr. Mubark&rsquo;s Egypt: He argues that nonviolence is a singularly effective way to undermine police states that might cite violent resistance to justify repression in the name of stability.        

The April 6 Youth Movement modeled its logo &mdash; a vaguely Soviet looking red and white clenched fist&mdash;after Otpor&rsquo;s, and some of its members traveled to Serbia to meet with Otpor activists.        

Another influence, several said, was a group of Egyptian expatriates in their 30s who set up an organization in Qatar called the Academy of Change, which promotes ideas drawn in part on Mr. Sharp&rsquo;s work. One of the group&rsquo;s organizers, Hisham Morsy, was arrested during the Cairo protests and remained in detention.        
 David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Cairo, and David E. Sanger from Washington. Kareem Fahim and Mona El-Naggar contributed reporting from Cairo, and Mark Mazzetti from Washington.
