
MOSCOW  &mdash;  A week after a British journalist was expelled from Russia, the authorities allowed him to return on Saturday night &mdash;  all but acknowledging that they had made a mistake that had harmed the country&rsquo;s effort to improve its image abroad.        

The Russian Foreign Ministry issued a new visa to the journalist, Luke Harding of The Guardian, to replace the one that border guards summarily annulled after he landed at the airport in Moscow on Feb. 5. Mr. Harding had arrived from London, was detained and put on the next plane back, without explanation.        

On Sunday night, Mr. Harding wrote on his Twitter account, &ldquo;Yes, I&rsquo;m back in Moscow.&rdquo;        

The Foreign Ministry did not offer any immediate comment.        

The expulsion of Western correspondents based in Moscow was not unusual in the Soviet era but has been relatively rare since the collapse of Communism. Mr. Harding&rsquo;s editors suggested that he was being punished for reporting on terrorism, corruption and other provocative issues.        

Mr. Harding was also one of the reporters for The Guardian who wrote about the WikiLeaks cache of American diplomatic cables, including some that had harsh assessments of the Russian government under Vladimir V. Putin, the prime minister and former president.        

The Foreign Ministry at first would not say why it had taken action against Mr. Harding, then said he had broken rules for journalists. It provided one example that did not seem especially plausible: It said that Mr. Harding was deported because he had forgotten to pick up a press credential card the last time that he was in Moscow.        

Other Russian officials speculated that the Foreign Ministry had been blindsided by the F.S.B., the main domestic successor to the Soviet-era K.G.B., which controls border security and might have put Mr. Harding on a blacklist without notifying the Foreign Ministry.        

Whatever the case, the expulsion came as the Kremlin under President Dmitri A. Medvedev has been pursuing a policy of modernization that hinges in part on attracting foreign investment and specialists to Russia.        

Last week, the Foreign Ministry, repeatedly questioned about whether the expulsion had damaged the country&rsquo;s reputation, indicated that it would give Mr. Harding another visa.        
