
ISLAMABAD, Pakistan &mdash; The United States this weekend postponed high-level talks to be held in Washington with Pakistan and Afghanistan, a sign of the displeasure with Pakistan over the arrest of an American official accused of murder.        

The talks scheduled for Feb. 23 and Feb. 24, held annually to discuss the war in Afghanistan, involve foreign ministers and Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton.        

United States officials have said that a variety of visits and assistance to Pakistan were in jeopardy if the Pakistani government did not quickly resolve the case of the American, Raymond A. Davis, an official who killed two motorcyclists in Lahore on Jan. 27 while driving his car.        

The State Department did not give a precise public explanation for the postponement of the talks except to say that &ldquo;in light of the political changes in Pakistan&rdquo; the talks would not go ahead.        

But American officials said the talks were postponed because it was unlikely they would produce anything worthwhile in the charged atmosphere between Pakistan and the United States. The Americans insist that Mr. Davis is protected by diplomatic immunity and that Pakistan is holding him illegally.        

Further, the Pakistani foreign minister, Shah Mehmood Qureshi, who was supposed to attend the talks and has emerged as a central figure in the standoff over the Davis case, lost his job in a cabinet shuffle by President Asif Ali Zardari on Friday.        

Mr. Qureshi told the Pakistani press over the weekend that he had refused a request by Mrs. Clinton to certify that Mr. Davis had diplomatic immunity.        

&ldquo;The kind of blanket immunity Washington is pressing for Davis is not endorsed by the official record of the Foreign Ministry,&rdquo; Mr. Qureshi said, according to the accounts in The News newspaper, and AAJ television. &ldquo;I could not certify him as a diplomat.&rdquo;        

The high court in Lahore, where Mr. Davis is under arrest, has requested a determination from the Foreign Office on Mr. Davis&rsquo;s status.        

Mr. Davis, a former Special Forces soldier, is described by the American embassy as a &ldquo;technical and administrative&rdquo; official. He carried a diplomatic passport at the time of the shooting.        

The presence of American security officials in Pakistan whose duties appear to deal with Islamic extremists as the United States and Pakistan combat terrorism has touched a sensitive nerve among all strands of Pakistani society.        

The Davis case set off a firestorm of protest in Pakistan, making it exceedingly difficult for the unpopular American-backed government of Mr. Zardari to release Mr. Davis under the conventions of diplomatic immunity.        
