
KABUL, Afghanistan &mdash; The heroes in the suicide bombing at the Kabul City Center shopping mall on Monday were not among the police officers or NATO coalition and American Special Forces soldiers who showed up later.        

They were Gul Agha and Lal Mohammed, two poorly paid security guards who had what has lately been one of the worst jobs in Afghanistan &mdash; screening visitors at the door.        

When a suicide bomber stepped through a metal detector, alarms went off and the two guards opened fire, according to witnesses and the building&rsquo;s security manager, Haji Gul.        

What happened in the seconds that followed will probably never be known for sure, but witnesses said there was an exchange of gunfire right before the bomber detonated explosives in his vest. The only people to die were the bomber and the two guards, the police said. Two bystanders were wounded.        

It was at least the fifth bombing in Kabul since Dec. 19, when a seven-month lull in attacks was broken. All of the bombings have been attributed to the Taliban or its Haqqani allies.        

Because the explosives on Monday were detonated inside a vestibule built for security screening, no one was hurt in the dozens of shops full of clerks and a few shoppers, or in the Safi Landmark Hotel, which occupies the other side of the building. The building was heavily damaged a year ago in an attack that killed at least 16 people.        

The shopping center was rebuilt after that attack, the glass in its windowed facade replaced by bulletproof material that breaks away in chunks rather than splintering into dangerous shards.        

&ldquo;The security guards do their jobs at the Safi Landmark. They do their jobs really well; they really fought,&rdquo; said Abdul Raouf, who runs a children&rsquo;s clothing store in the mall. &ldquo;The police will not sacrifice themselves for you, but the security guards gave their lives.&rdquo;        

The Afghan National Police arrived fairly quickly amid confusing reports that another bomber was still alive and armed inside or was expected to attack the crowd outside.        

Trying to keep onlookers back, the police tussled with squads of plainclothes officers from the National Directorate of Security. Some of the officers chambered rounds in their weapons, sending onlookers searching for cover.        

&ldquo;Our police are just ignorant,&rdquo; one shopkeeper said in disgust.        

The NATO-led International Security Assistance Force sent some Polish and Turkish officers and a couple of Americans to the scene, but only as observers. Responsibility for Kabul&rsquo;s security has been turned over to Afghan forces, although NATO keeps a garrison in the city.        

American Special Forces soldiers with &ldquo;X-21&rdquo; patches were the last to arrive, and they scoured the debris. Bearded, heavily armed and in uniform, they refused to speak to reporters. Although it was midafternoon, they were wearing night-vision gear.        

Earlier in the day, the American  in charge of the NATO training mission, Maj. Gen. William B. Caldwell, said at a news conference that the Afghan police had undergone &ldquo;an incredible transformation&rdquo; in the past 15 months.        

As part of a $3 billion effort to train and equip the police, he said, 21,000 officers have undergone literacy training. That meant, he said, that 86 percent of the 117,000 police officers can now read at a first-grade level. &ldquo;They can read and write their names, read numbers and even read some words,&rdquo; General Caldwell said.        
Sangar Rahimi contributed reporting.
