
LONDON &mdash; Three days after Hosni Mubarak resigned the Egyptian presidency, the British government announced on Monday that it would consult with its European allies on a request from the new authorities in Egypt to freeze the assets of &ldquo;several former officials&rdquo; in the Mubarak government.        

William Hague, the foreign secretary, did not name the officials in his statement to the House of Commons, nor did he indicate whether Mr. Mubarak or members of his family were among them. But he confirmed Monday that Britain was ready to act on the request after a review of the issue at a meeting of European finance ministers in Brussels that was scheduled to  continue on Tuesday.        

&ldquo;We will of course cooperate with this request, working with our European and other international partners, as we have done in the case of Tunisia,&rdquo; Mr. Hague said. &ldquo;If there is any evidence of illegality or misuse of state assets, we will take firm and prompt action.&rdquo;        

The British statement came as Mr. Hague, reporting on a trip that took him to several of Egypt&rsquo;s Arab neighbors last week, though not Egypt, said Britain stood ready to assist the new Egyptian leaders in making &ldquo;a successful transition to a broad-based government.&rdquo; Britain&rsquo;s handling of the extensive financial assets and property said to have been built up there by members of the government during Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s 30-year rule seems likely to be an early test of that pledge.        

In recent years, unofficial reports of the wealth accumulated outside Egypt by loyalists of Mr. Mubarak, and by his family, have suggested that Britain and Switzerland have been favored destinations for the large sums &mdash; by some estimates, billions of dollars &mdash; that opponents of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s regime said had been corruptly amassed. The Swiss foreign ministry said Friday that it had moved to freeze assets in banks there that might belong to Mr. Mubarak or his family.        

Combined action on an asset freeze across the European Union would require the backing of all 27 member states, and it would most likely be coordinated with the new military-controlled government in Cairo. Much is likely to depend on the extent of that cooperation, according to several people with experience of past asset freezes involving deposed heads of state, especially in cases like Egypt&rsquo;s where political power has passed, at least for now, to military and civilian officials who have had close ties to Mr. Mubarak for years.        

Few details have emerged publicly of the extent of the Mubarak family&rsquo;s assets in Britain. Gamal Mubarak, Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s 47-year-old son, lived in London for several years while working as a consultant for  Bank of America. Reports from Cairo in recent days have said that he became wealthy working as a go-between for Egyptian and foreign investors seeking favored treatment from his father&rsquo;s government.        

His best-known asset in London is a five-story townhouse on Wilton Place in London&rsquo;s upscale Knightsbridge district, a millionaire&rsquo;s row in a neighborhood long favored by wealthy Middle Eastern families. Real estate agents said that townhouses on Wilton Place have sold in recent times for about $10 million to $15 million.        

Mr. Hague&rsquo;s statement about a pending British move to freeze assets prompted a wave of criticism in Britain that centered on suggestions that Prime Minister David Cameron&rsquo;s government should have acted during the 18-day confrontation that led to Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s resignation on Friday and the takeover by Egypt&rsquo;s military. Mark Malloch Brown, a former senior United Nations official and a junior foreign minister in the Labour government ousted last May, said there was &ldquo;plenty of precedent&rdquo; for the British government to have acted &ldquo;proactively,&rdquo; and not to have waited for a formal Egyptian request.        

Noting accounts of large sums of money belonging to wealthy Mubarak associates and relatives being moved out of safe havens like Britain &mdash; accounts published in Europe during the Egyptian upheaval that he was careful to describe as hearsay &mdash; Lord Malloch Brown said the Cameron government should have imposed a pre-emptive freeze. That, he said, would have allowed the authorities in London and the new government in Cairo to investigate where assets were and whether they had been illegally obtained. &ldquo;By the time the wheels of international law have turned, it&rsquo;ll be too late,&rdquo; he said.        

Jeffrey Robinson, an American journalist who wrote &ldquo;The Laundrymen,&rdquo; a 1990s study of the overseas assets of corrupt heads of state, said in a telephone interview from New York that British and other European banks should have acted years ago on the Mubarak family&rsquo;s assets. He said banks in most Western countries, including Britain, were required by law to verify that money deposited by so-called &ldquo;politically exposed persons&rdquo; &mdash; long lists of whom are kept by the banks &mdash; was not corruptly acquired. In practice, he said, these laws are widely circumvented by bankers eager to handle the large sums involved.        

In the case of the Mubarak family or those acting on their behalf, Mr. Robinson said, the bankers should have questioned how the family of an Egyptian president with a publicly stated salary of barely $1,000 a month could have accumulated so much money. &ldquo;If they didn&rsquo;t know, they should have,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and I can guarantee they did.&rdquo;        
