
CAIRO &mdash; The military officers who have governed Egypt since the ouster of President Hosni Mubarak on Friday have laid out a brisk six-month timetable in which to draft constitutional amendments, submit them to a referendum and elect a new government, stirring debate about the military&rsquo;s long-term intentions.        

Some in the opposition welcomed the timetable as evidence that the officers were eager to turn over power to a civilian authority. But others, noting that the military has so far excluded civilians from the transitional government, questioned whether the speedy schedule might signal just the opposite. They worry that the military might be trying to manipulate events to preserve its power by rushing the process and denying political parties and candidates enough time to organize for a meaningful, fair election that could elect a strong civilian government.        

Two  generals on the governing Supreme Military Council presented the plan &mdash; which calls for writing the amendments in 10 days and holding the referendum within two months &mdash; in a meeting on Sunday night with the revolution&rsquo;s young leaders.        

The meeting appeared to be the military&rsquo;s first significant outreach to the civilian opponents of Mr. Mubarak, and two of the young protest organizers, true to their movement&rsquo;s Internet roots, promptly summarized the meeting in a post on Facebook.        

&ldquo;The first time an Egyptian official sat down to listen more than speak,&rdquo; they wrote of their meeting with the generals, Mahmoud Hijazi and Abdel Fattah. The two young leaders, Wael Ghonim and Amr Salama, also praised the generals&rsquo; attentive demeanor and the absence of the usual &ldquo;parental tone (you do not know what is good for you, son).&rdquo;        

Still, the two reserved judgment about the military&rsquo;s plan, and others in the group said their coalition had yet to make a final assessment of it.        

&ldquo;This meeting was just for the military to tell us about their plans,&rdquo; said Shady el-Ghazaly Harb, one of the revolution&rsquo;s young leaders. &ldquo;We have asked for another meeting this week to tell them about our plans. Then we will see.&rdquo;        

Egypt has effectively been under direct military control since Sunday, when the council suspended the Constitution and dissolved Parliament. And some in the opposition, including the Nobel Prize winner Mohamed ElBaradei, have repeatedly warned that hasty elections could leave the fledgling democracy so weak that it could invite the rise of another military strongman.        

A communiqu&eacute; issued on Monday by the Supreme Military Council appeared to walk a fine line in grappling with a variety of problems in governing a restive Egypt. In responding to a series of strikes by state workers, journalists and the police on Monday, the council issued a forceful exhortation that some read as a veiled threat, although it did not threaten specific penalties.        

A Western diplomat who knows Field Marshal Mohamed Tantawi, the defense minister and leader of the military government, said it was clear that he did not relish his high-profile role and did not want to keep it.        

&ldquo;My strong sense is there is no real desire to prolong this period,&rdquo; the diplomat said. &ldquo;The field marshal does not seem really interested in being the government of Egypt. He would prefer to take the armed forces back, to have their very large and very comfortable arrangement in Egyptian society and let the civilians take charge of government.&rdquo;        

But, the diplomat said, it remained to be seen whether a swift transition to democracy was possible. &ldquo;The issue is whether this is the best thing or not the best thing,&rdquo; he said.        

Some of the young protest organizers who met with the generals said they were troubled that the military seemed cool to the idea of negotiating with Mr. ElBaradei, a more experienced figure whom the organizers have chosen as their point man for talks.        

&ldquo;We tried to tell them they should, but they weren&rsquo;t welcoming to him,&rdquo; said Mr. el-Ghazaly Harb, a 32-year-old surgeon. &ldquo;We hope it is not definitive.&rdquo;        

As it moved to stabilize the country at home, the new military government also lodged formal requests with the European Union and the British government to freeze the assets of all the senior officials of Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s government.        

Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s son, Gamal, a former investment banker and senior official of the former governing party, owns a house in London that is valued at about $10 million.        

The younger Mr. Mubarak has become a focus of criticism since his father&rsquo;s ouster because of the vast wealth he and his friends seemed to have amassed from the privatization of Egypt&rsquo;s state-run businesses.        

One of his friends, the steel magnate and political power broker Ahmed Ezz, made a public appearance on Monday for the first time since the protests began three weeks ago. Once known for his brash, commanding demeanor, he spoke in a television interview in humble tones and sought to distance himself from the violence last week, when gangs of men associated with the governing party assaulted the protesters in Tahrir Square.        
Dawlat Magdy, Mona El-Naggar and Liam Stack contributed reporting.
