
SANA, Yemen &mdash; More than 100 pro-government demonstrators clashed Monday with hundreds of student protesters who were participating in a sit-in at Sana University that called for an end to the authoritarian rule of President Ali Abdullah Saleh.        

As antigovernment protests continued for a fourth straight day, the state-run media reported that Mr. Saleh would cancel a planned trip to the United States at the end of February &ldquo;due to circumstances in the region,&rdquo; referring to the revolution in Egypt.        

In the capital, Sana, the police stepped in to separate the rival groups as pro-government demonstrators &mdash; some carrying posters of the president &mdash; beat the young protesters with sticks near the university&rsquo;s main gate.        

&ldquo;The people want to expel Ali Saleh!&rdquo; students shouted, adapting a chant commonly heard during the demonstrations in Egypt.        

The pro-government group borrowed the same rhythm in responding: &ldquo;The people want to start dialogue!&rdquo;        

Similar clashes occurred in the southern city of Taiz, where pro-government crowds have attacked the hundreds of antigovernment protesters who are camping out in the streets and vowing not to go home until Mr. Saleh steps down.        

At one point, the police in Taiz, unable to control the rival groups as the crowd swelled to more than 1,000 people, fired shots in the air to separate them. At least 21 people were injured, but the young protesters said they would continue to camp out, emulating  the Egyptians who occupied  Tahrir Square in Cairo for more than two weeks.        

Yemen, one of the poorest nations in the Middle East, has become a cause of concern for the United States as the protests have spread because Mr. Saleh has supported the fight against the Yemeni branch of Al Qaeda.        

Monday&rsquo;s protests sought to sustain the momentum of demonstrations on Sunday, the largest yet by young Yemenis. But those protests appeared to mark a rift between the young protesters and established opposition groups that have wrested significant concessions from Mr. Saleh, including the promise that he would yield power in 2013.        

The established groups, whose members did not join the crowds on Sunday or Monday, have said that they welcome the new protests, but they also appeared concerned about what might happen if mass protests took hold in Yemen, a country with a well-armed population. The group&rsquo;s leaders have said they would prefer to move slowly and extract concessions from Mr. Saleh, but many young protesters are impatient for a change in leadership.        

Mr. Saleh has sought to counter the tide of opposition and preserve his three-decade rule by raising army salaries, cutting income taxes by half and ordering price controls, among other concessions.        

The president continues to make concessions. He announced Monday on his Web site that  he would open his office to political, social and youth groups in Yemen to hear opinions and to discuss concerns of citizens.        

However, this still is not what the political opposition is pushing for. There seems to be a back and forth, regarding how much he can give, and how much the political opposition can get.        
Laura Kasinof reported from Sana, and J. David Goodman from New York.
