
MEXICO CITY &mdash; Gunmen on a highway in northern Mexico killed an agent with United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement on Tuesday and wounded another, in an attack that signaled the escalating risk for American officials fighting Mexican crime gangs that move drugs and migrants into the United States.        

The United States homeland security secretary, Janet Napolitano, said in a statement that the agents were assigned to the customs agency&rsquo;s attach&eacute; office at the American Embassy in Mexico City, and that they had been shot in the line of duty while driving between the city and Monterrey.        

The agent who was killed was identified as Jaime J. Zapata. He joined the agency in 2006 and served in Laredo, Tex., before a recent assignment to Mexico City. The name of the other agent was not released, but a statement from the immigration and customs agency said he was in stable condition.        

It was the first time that an employee of the immigration and customs agency had been wounded or killed in the line of duty in Mexico, American officials said.        

Typically American immigration agents are involved in major investigations of trafficking, in conjunction with Mexican law enforcement. And on Tuesday, the American agents were clearly driving into dangerous territory. The police in San Luis Potos&iacute; State said the attack occurred on a main highway about midway between Mexico City, the capital, and Monterrey, the same highway where, a month ago, a group of armed men clashed with the federal police in a running battle that left five presumed criminals dead.        

The American agents&rsquo; destination, Monterrey, a large, wealthy city two hours from McAllen, Tex., has become an epicenter of drug gang battles over the past year as the Gulf Cartel and an offshoot, the Zetas, have fought for control of smuggling routes.        

American and Mexican authorities have warned that roads throughout the area are rife with false checkpoints run by drug cartel gunmen, and recent victims have not been limited to rivals. This week, a senior police intelligence official was found dead in his burning armored car in Monterrey.        

On Jan. 26, two American missionaries &mdash; Sam and Nancy Davis &mdash; were ambushed on a highway between Reynosa and Monterrey. Ms. Davis was killed.        

Mexican government officials have said they are making progress in the area, citing recent arrests. But experts contend that the wave of violence has shown no sign of diminishing.        

While attacks on American law enforcement officials have been rare in Mexico, threats from the leaders of drug gangs have sometimes escalated. The killing of an agent from the Drug Enforcement Administration in Mexico in 1985 led to strained relations between officers on both sides of the border, and between the Mexican and American governments.        
Randal C. Archibold contributed reporting from Mexico City, and Julia Preston from New York.
