
MANAGUA, Nicaragua &mdash; Among the portraits of Nicaragua&rsquo;s most revered guerrilla hero, Augusto Sandino, in his trademark Stetson hat decorating a new exhibit in the central bank here is an unusual genealogical map linking him to another larger-than-life figure here: President Daniel Ortega.        

Their names are the only ones highlighted, in red, as if the only two fruits hanging from the Sandino family tree.        

The lionization of Mr. Ortega, who married into Sandino&rsquo;s bloodline, is increasingly on display in monuments to the nation&rsquo;s revolutionary past.        

Here in the capital, a new museum dedicated to the Sandinista revolution, which toppled the Somoza dictatorship in 1979, puts Mr. Ortega at every front of the war against the contras that followed. North of the city, a separate Museum of the Revolution features a new shrine honoring Mr. Ortega as well.        

And there has been widespread speculation that on Feb. 21, the anniversary of Sandino&rsquo;s death, Mr. Ortega may officially announce his re-election campaign. A Sandinista-controlled Supreme Court gave him the green light to run again, reinterpreting a constitutional ban against consecutive terms or holding office more than twice.        

The election is not until November, but Mr. Ortega and his party seem eager to bolster his chances by embedding him in the country&rsquo;s revolutionary memory and tapping into the nation&rsquo;s guerrilla ethos.        

Along with advertising his family ties to Sandino, the party has posted ubiquitous posters of Mr. Ortega alongside Sandino, and is reviving a 77-year-old hunt for the hero&rsquo;s long-lost remains.        

Unlike his fellow revolutionary leader, Che Guevara, whose exhumed body &mdash; minus his chopped-off hands &mdash; was buried in a mausoleum in Cuba (though some questioned the authenticity of the corpse), there is no grave for Sandino, whose ragtag rebels fought American Marines here during the 1920s and &rsquo;30s.        

While his foe, Gen. Anastasio Somoza Garc&iacute;a, tried casting him as a ruthless bandit, Sandino was unanimously named the national hero just over a year ago by an otherwise gridlocked congress entrenched in a political crisis over Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s re-election bid.        

Founders of the Sandinista National Liberation Front referred to Sandino&rsquo;s writings and named their movement after him. Sandino&rsquo;s bloodline, his remains, his hat, his boots and his writings, scribbled while evading Marines, continue to help shape the national identity.        

But the details of his murder and what became of his remains are among Nicaragua&rsquo;s most enduring mysteries. As Sandinista lore has it, General Somoza&rsquo;s assassins vengefully decapitated and dismembered Sandino in the same method the rebel&rsquo;s generals had mutilated their foes. They then supposedly delivered his head to Washington as a token of loyalty, or so goes the legend.        

Some historians suspect that Sandino&rsquo;s legacy was such a concern for General Somoza that the rebel was reburied to throw off searchers, or incinerated and scattered in Managua so his remains would never fall into the hands of supporters.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think we can find him,&rdquo; said Sergio Ram&iacute;rez, a Sandinista author and a former vice president of Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s.        

Like many other major figures from the revolution, Mr. Ram&iacute;rez has since fallen out with the increasingly Ortega-centric party. But he said that during the 1980s, when he was in the government, it contracted an archeologist to lead a fruitless dig in Managua for Sandino&rsquo;s remains. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a closed chapter,&rdquo; he said.        

But not for Mr. Ortega, who in 2007 vowed to create a search squad to find Sandino. People close to the government and a historian said the Sandinistas recently sent water and sewage officials to investigate a tip from a friend of General Somoza&rsquo;s closest guardsman. It suggested that Sandino&rsquo;s remains were buried in what is now a Managua neighborhood.        

Another recent tip led the party to order cemetery employees to scan the tombs of Somoza guardsmen that had been desecrated by Sandinista revolutionaries three decades ago. Sandino did not seem to be hidden there, but the vandalism and desecration continue, a reminder of the animosities that remain.        

&ldquo;We searched and searched,&rdquo; said a graveyard administrator, El&iacute;as Zapata, a stout former Sandinista special forces soldier. &ldquo;The remains are gone. It&rsquo;s like the hands of Che Guevara.&rdquo;        

In an interview at his chic Managua home, Walter Sandino, one of the guerrilla icon&rsquo;s three surviving grandchildren, vowed not to give up on the hunt.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s poetic to say Sandino&rsquo;s spirit lives throughout Nicaragua, but we want to bury him physically in a cemetery like anyone else,&rdquo; said Mr. Sandino, donning a shirt featuring a tiny silhouette of Sandino on his mule, a twist on the Ralph Lauren logo.        

Walter Sandino rejects detractors who contend that Mr. Ortega sabotaged the Constitution by running again and benefits from the political sponsorship of Venezuela, practices critics say would have been abhorred by Sandino himself.        
(Page 2 of 2)
But for all of Walter Sandino&rsquo;s devotion to Mr. Ortega &mdash; he designed the family tree linking Mr. Ortega to his grandfather &mdash; he is infuriated by the government&rsquo;s failure to find his grandfather&rsquo;s body and create a decent museum in his name.        

Mr. Ortega has not kept a promise to return boots, hat, spurs and weapons believed to be removed by Sandinistas from two Sandino museums during and after the war, said Tom&aacute;s Herrera, who curates a Sandino museum in San Rafael del Norte. Much like another Sandino museum in the rebel&rsquo;s birthplace of Niquinohomo, Mr. Herrera&rsquo;s museum is virtually empty, the dusty floorboards dilapidated beyond repair.        

Walter Sandino, a self-taught historian who was tapped by Mr. Ortega as an adviser on all things Sandino, is hoarding what artifacts he can find at his home in the hope of one day building a permanent museum. Some of the relics are on display this month at the central bank, and other artifacts are believed to be held by the first lady, Rosario Murillo, a Sandino relative.        

&ldquo;This is one of the biggest errors of the revolution,&rdquo; Walter Sandino said, squinting through the smoke of burning incense at a shrine of his grandfather in his home. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s not even a museum. There&rsquo;s no place to learn about Sandino in Nicaragua. It&rsquo;s clear how abandoned we are.&rdquo;        

President Hugo Ch&aacute;vez of Venezuela, who has helped finance Mr. Ortega&rsquo;s government as other countries cut aid out of concern about electoral transparency, may be the best hope of money for a Sandino museum.        

Outside Walter Sandino&rsquo;s house, next to a towering  Sandino silhouette and larger-than-life  statue of Sandino on his mule, he was building a lookout tower to be named after his grandfather&rsquo;s hide-out in the Segovia mountains &mdash; El Chipote. He was constructing it with proceeds from a book about his grandfather, El Libro Sandino, that he said was published with financing from the cooperative that manages Venezuelan aid in Nicaragua.        

The book&rsquo;s prologue is a poem jotted by Mr. Ch&aacute;vez two decades ago while flying over a war-ravaged Nicaragua. In it, he predicts Sandino&rsquo;s soldiers would one day ride alongside the descendants of Sim&oacute;n Bol&iacute;var, the  independence fighter who is revered by Mr. Ch&aacute;vez&rsquo;s government.        
