
The Moroccan government arrested 27 people accused of operating a terrorist cell in Western Sahara led by a member of the local branch of Al Qaeda, officials said Wednesday.        

The group was planning suicide and car bomb attacks against Moroccan and foreign security forces as well as bank robberies in Rabat and Casablanca to finance their activities, the interior minister, Tayeb Cherkaoui, said at a news conference carried by state news media.        

The group&rsquo;s leader, the minister said, was a Moroccan member of Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, which operates in North Africa and has camps in neighboring Algeria, Mauritania and northern Mali. The goal was to set up a &ldquo;rear base&rdquo; for terrorism planning, he said.        

A Moroccan security official said the cell had &ldquo;links with extremists of different nationalities in European countries.&rdquo; The official spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to comment publicly.        

Mr. Cherkaoui gave few details about the timing or location of the arrests, but said the authorities had captured a cache of weapons, including 30 Kalashnikov rifles, two rocket-propelled-grenade launchers and several handguns at three sites around Amgala, an oasis town in a disputed area of Western Sahara. Investigators also seized maps of the border region between Algeria and Morocco.        

Morocco governs Western Sahara, a territory on the Atlantic coast the size of Colorado, but has long faced violent opposition from the Polisario Front, a separatist group based in Algeria. The simmering conflict boiled over in November in the desert city of Laayoune, about 130 miles from Amgala, as knife-wielding gangs attacked unarmed Moroccan security officers, killing 11.        

Analysts feared that the violence &mdash; some of the worst in years &mdash; would contribute to the chaos in the territory and provide an opening for Al Qaeda to establish a greater foothold in the region. The arrests of suspected members of a terrorist cell believed to have Qaeda leadership appeared to confirm some of those fears.        

&ldquo;This is potentially a significant episode because it is indicative of a qualitative shift in terms of Al Qaeda itself and the counterterrorism measures in the region,&rdquo; said Mohammad-Mahmoud Mohamedou, the former foreign minister of Mauritania and an expert on Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb. &ldquo;There has been a show of strength by Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb over the last six months.&rdquo; The group has become increasingly bold since September, he added, when it kidnapped seven foreign contractors, including five French citizens, in Niger. The hostages have yet to be released, and their whereabouts remains unclear.        

In 1991, Morocco and the Polisario reached a cease-fire agreement that included a referendum to decide whether Western Sahara would be independent or remain part of Morocco. But the vote has not occurred in the intervening two decades because the two sides cannot agree on who would be allowed to take part.        
