
MANAMA, Bahrain &mdash; Without warning, hundreds of heavily armed riot police officers rushed into Pearl Square here early Thursday, firing tear gas and concussion grenades at the thousands of demonstrators who were sleeping there as part of a widening protest against the nation&rsquo;s absolute monarchy.        

Men, women and young children ran screaming, choking and collapsing.        

The square was filled with the crack of tear gas canisters and the wail of ambulances rushing people to the hospital. Teams of plainclothes police officers carrying shotguns swarmed through the area, but it was unclear if they used the weapons to subdue the crowd.        

&ldquo;There was a fog of war,&rdquo; said Mohammed Ibrahim as he took refuge in a nearby gas station. He was barefoot, had lost his wallet and had marks on his leg where he said he had been beaten. &ldquo;There were children, forgive them.&rdquo;        

At least two people were killed in the mayhem, according to witnesses at a nearby hospital and news agency reports. Many people were injured in the chaos &mdash; trampled, beaten or suffocated by the tear gas.        

Only hours earlier the square had been transformed from a symbol of the nation &mdash; anchored by a towering monument to its pearl-diving history &mdash; into a symbol of the fight for democracy and social justice that has been rocking autocratic governments all across the Middle East. Tens of thousands of people had poured into the square during the day, setting up tents, giving rousing speeches and pressing their demands for a constitutional democracy.        

By 11 p.m. Wednesday, the square had started to quiet down. Young men sat smoking water pipes, while young children slept on blankets or in tents. At 2:45 a.m. Thursday, the camp was quiet, those awake still reflecting on the remarkable events of the day. And then, the blue flashing lights of police vehicles began to appear, encircling the square. At first there were four vehicles, then dozens and then hundreds.        

Wearing white crash helmets, the police rushed the square.        

&ldquo;Everybody was sleeping, they came from upside and down,&rdquo; said Zeinab Ali, 22, as she and a group of women huddled, crying and angry, in small nearby market.        

The protest had begun on Monday, when young organizers called for a &ldquo;Day of Rage,&rdquo; modeled on the uprisings in Egypt or Tunisia. On that day, the police were unforgiving, refusing to allow demonstrators to gather, overwhelming them with tear gas and other rounds. One young man was killed, shot in the back by the police. A day later, another young man, a mourner, also was killed, shot in the back.        

That galvanized the opposition and under pressure from the United States, the king withdrew his police force from the streets.        

For a time, it appeared that change might  be coming quickly to Bahrain, a tiny nation in the Persian Gulf ruled for more than 200 years by the Khalifa family. The royal family is Sunni while the majority of the nation&rsquo;s 600,000 citizens are Shiite.        

The Shiite community has long complained of being marginalized and discriminated against.        

On Wednesday, as the protesters gained momentum, Shiite opposition leaders issued assurances that they were not being influenced by Iran and were not interested in transforming the monarchy into a religious theocracy. Those charges are frequently leveled against them by Sunni leaders here.        

Still, the leaders of the largest Shiite political party, Al Wefaq, announced that they would not return to Parliament until King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa agreed to transform the nation into a constitutional democracy with an elected government.        

By evening, crowds spilled out of the square, tied up roads for as far as the eye could see and united in a celebration of empowerment unparalleled for the country&rsquo;s Shiites.        

&ldquo;They say you are few and you cannot make changes,&rdquo; said Ali Ahmed, 26, drawing cheers from the crowd as he spoke from a platform. &ldquo;We say, &lsquo;We can, and we will.&rsquo;&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The people want the fall of the regime,&rdquo; the crowds chanted on the darkened square, their words echoing off the towering buildings nearby.        

Late at night, thousands of people remained, hoping to establish a symbolically important base of protest in much the same way Egyptians took over Tahrir Square to launch their successful revolution against Hosni Mubarak.        

But the leadership&rsquo;s newfound tolerance for dissent was a mirage.        
J. David Goodman contributed reporting from New York, and Elisabeth Bumiller from Washington.
