
BEIJING &mdash; Sallying forth into the ancient battleground of extramarital affairs, China&rsquo;s top court appears poised to side with wronged wives against philandering husbands and greedy mistresses.        

Under a draft interpretation of China&rsquo;s marriage law, expected to be issued in coming weeks, mistresses would not be allowed to sue their married lovers for reneging on promises of money, property or goods, said legal experts who have reviewed the language. Nor would wayward husbands be allowed to seek the courts&rsquo; help in retrieving money or goods that they bestowed upon mistresses.        

But wives could sue to recover money or property that ended up in the hands of a &ldquo;little third,&rdquo; the colloquial term for a mistress.        

The top court, the Supreme People&rsquo;s Court, decided to clarify the marriage law after a spate of lawsuits over the exchange of goods, money or property during extramarital affairs, Yang Xiaoxin, a marriage law specialist in Beijing, said in an interview. The draft envisions that either spouse might be unfaithful. But most lawsuits involve a wife&rsquo;s claim to recover apartments, cars or money from a mistress, a trend that has quickened as the Chinese become more sophisticated about their legal rights, he and others said.        

&ldquo;The local courts have received many cases concerning the mistress settlement fee, but the provisions of the marriage law only state general principles,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Similar cases are yielding different verdicts. So the Supreme Court realized it is time to issue an interpretation.&rdquo;        

Typically courts rule in favor of the wives, said Lei Mingguang, a law professor at China Minzu University in Beijing. In a 2009 case in the central province of Henan, for instance, a mistress was ordered to return 330,000 renminbi, more than $50,000, that she had received during a three-year affair. The man&rsquo;s wife discovered the payments after she and her husband reconciled and filed suit &mdash; together &mdash; against the mistress. The court found that that the payments were illegal because marriage law requires couples to jointly decide how to spend their common property, The Peninsular Morning Post, a local newspaper, reported.        

But some courts have split disputed property between the wife and the mistress, especially in cases when the husband pretended to the mistress that he was single. Liu Sen, a lawyer with the DHH law firm in Beijing, said the high court&rsquo;s main goal was to head off suits between unfaithful spouses and their lovers, while reaffirming the other spouse&rsquo;s right to recover misspent common property.        

The new interpretation of the marriage law has been in the works for more than two years. The high court accepted public comments for one month, until Dec. 15. Mr. Yang said he expected a declaration soon.        

Some 20 different provisions cover myriad issues, including how the value of houses or apartments should be split between couples in a divorce. But the adultery provision has grabbed the public&rsquo;s attention and provided fresh grist for the debate about whether materialism is eroding traditional values.        

In November, the Chinese news media rushed to refute rumors that the high court planned to allow the authorities to criminally charge mistresses and force them to pay compensation to their lovers&rsquo; wives. Lawyers promised nothing so dramatic was in store.        

One in five Chinese marriages ends in divorce, but the rate has been ticking upward, especially after divorce procedures were streamlined and a requirement that couples first produce a letter from employers or neighborhood committees was dropped in 2003.        

Some scholars say that philandering is growing in tandem with China&rsquo;s economic and social opportunities, helping drive up the divorce rate. Few statistics exist on affairs, but Chinese women frequently complain that men regard a woman on the side as a perquisite of marriage. One study by the All-China Women&rsquo;s Federation, widely cited in 2001, found 30 percent of wives who divorced had been unfaithful.        

The Chinese news media cite a growing phenomenon of young women willing to take on a rich married lovers for an apartment or a car. How to deal with corrupt officials who have mistresses is a continuing theme.        

The country&rsquo;s top prosecutorial agency said in 2009 that 90 percent of provincial- or ministerial-level officials found guilty of corruption in the past seven years had engaged in affairs, according to China Daily, the government-run English language newspaper. Meishan, a city in Sichuan Province, decided that year to issue a direct edict ordering officials to remain faithful to their spouses.        

&ldquo;On one hand, men who have attained a higher social status want more than one woman,&rdquo; Mr. Lei, the university professor, said. &ldquo;On the other, young girls see a chance to exchange their youth and beauty for a better life, even if it means hurting someone else&rsquo;s marriage.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;The court is trying to protect the stability of marriage and the family,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Basically the court is saying adultery is wrong and nobody should benefit from it.&rdquo;        
Jing Zhang contributed research in Beijing.
