
MOSCOW &mdash; Over the past three days, after the detention of Boris Y. Nemtsov, a prominent opposition figure, at a New Year&rsquo;s Eve rally, a cat-and-mouse game has been unfolding on Moscow&rsquo;s streets, still festooned with holiday decorations.        

Pro-Kremlin youth groups are trying to thwart a vow by opposition members to picket daily outside Moscow City Hall and the jail where Mr. Nemtsov, who was a first deputy prime minister in the government of former President Boris N. Yeltsin, and a few other opposition leaders are being held.        

Under a quirk of Russian law on rallies and protests, so-called individual pickets are legal without permits, which the opposition rarely obtains. Single protesters, standing 30 feet or so apart, may hold signs in public. As the Russian police were interpreting the rules, two protesters standing together were grounds for arrest &mdash; even if they came from opposite sides of the political spectrum.        

Which explains why Alla A. Kuznetsova, a high school chemistry teacher, stood alone on snowy Simferopol Boulevard on Wednesday, looking nervously up and down the sidewalk and hardly concerned with the few dozen police officers milling about.        

With a final glance to make sure no one was around, she screwed up her courage and marched straight up to the police.        

&ldquo;I want to express my own, personal opinion,&rdquo; she announced, adding, &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t want people to come close to me.&rdquo;        

As the sun reflected brilliantly off a million tiny ice crystal mirrors on this deep winter day, she unfolded a paper sign that read, &ldquo;Freedom for Political Detainees.&rdquo;        

No sooner had she done so, however, than a young man flew along the sidewalk seemingly out of nowhere, skidding to a stop on the ice a few feet from Ms. Kuznetsova. With a grin, he held up his own placard, reading, &ldquo;Hard Labor for Nemtsov!&rdquo;        

It is a scene that has been repeated frequently this week. So far, several dozen opposition protesters have been arrested after pro-Kremlin youth activists sidled up to them on the street. Technically, the pro-government activists should be arrested, too, but opposition groups say they do not always end up being formally detained.        

On Tuesday, for example, 24 opposition activists and 10 pro-Kremlin youths were arrested. On Wednesday, the police detained just three opposition activists and a half-dozen or so from the pro-government camp, in part because of the opposition protesters&rsquo; efforts to avoid the youth activists.        

Russian rights advocates and foreign governments alike have been looking at this odd state of affairs in the early days of 2011 with some dismay.        

The White House issued a statement condemning Mr. Nemtsov&rsquo;s arrest, and Amnesty International said Tuesday that it considered him and other opposition leaders prisoners of conscience.        

&ldquo;Yet again, the Russian authorities have failed in their obligations to protect the rights to freedom of assembly, a right guaranteed by the Russian Constitution,&rdquo; Andrea Huber, Amnesty&rsquo;s director for Europe and Central Asia, said in a statement.        

The ban on assemblies represents a step back for Russia, after what seemed to be a thaw in the fall, when the authorities suddenly granted permits for rallies that had been banned for months. But after an eruption of nationalist violence in December, Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin signaled that street politics would once again be severely curtailed.        

Undaunted, at least for now, members of the opposition group Solidarity say they will picket every day until their leaders are released. But the youth groups are making it difficult.        

Soon after Wednesday&rsquo;s action began, young men and women with pro-government youth groups could be seen clinging to the opposition activists, sometimes one-on-one, sometimes working zones on the sidewalk, so they were nearly never alone.        

After the young man moved into the vicinity of Ms. Kuznetsova, a police commander barked, &ldquo;That&rsquo;s it, detain them!&rdquo; But Ms. Kuznetsova slapped her sign shut, folding it in half, just in time. She was not arrested.        

After that, though, a young woman took to trailing Ms. Kuznetsova throughout the hourlong event. &ldquo;Get away from me, daughter,&rdquo; the teacher said again and again.        

The woman said, &ldquo;No, I will stand next to you,&rdquo; adding that it was her right to stand where she liked on the sidewalk.        
