
WASHINGTON &mdash; The Obama administration was trying Thursday evening to head off an imminent vote in the United Nations Security Council that would declare Israel&rsquo;s settlement construction in the West Bank illegal, but would not declare publicly whether it was prepared to veto the resolution.        

The vote is scheduled for Friday.        

President Obama called President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority on Thursday in an effort to delay the vote or offer a compromise, at what administration officials called a critical moment in the Middle East. Advisers to Mr. Abbas are scheduled to meet early Friday, the Palestinian Authority said, to decide whether they would continue to press for the vote.        

The administration has been offering compromise suggestions in an effort to head off the embarrassing choice between vetoing the resolution &mdash; after the Obama administration has criticized Israel&rsquo;s settlement policy for the past two years &mdash; or allowing the split between the United States and Israel to deepen.        

The new White House press secretary, Jay Carney, said Thursday that he would not say whether the United States would invoke its rarely used veto power in the Council. He said that the United States did not &ldquo;accept the legitimacy of continued settlement activity,&rdquo; which he called &ldquo;corrosive not only to peace efforts and a two-state solution, which we strongly support, but to Israel&rsquo;s future itself.&rdquo;        

But the Obama administration has never declared the settlement building illegal, which the Security Council resolution would do.        

Officials say the White House has suggested to both the Palestinian Authority and the Israeli government that the Council instead adopt a watered-down president&rsquo;s statement, which is weaker than a resolution, that would condemn settlements but also call on all sides to resume negotiations.        

That statement would be paired with a Russian proposal for a fact-finding mission on settlements, and a proposed change in how the quartet, the international group that deals with the Middle East peace process, defines the basic building blocks of negotiations ranging from borders to the political status of Jerusalem.        

Israel and the Palestinians have rejected key elements of that compromise package, each for different reasons, according to officials involved in the talks.        

The administration&rsquo;s refusal to explicitly threaten a veto drew intense criticism from both Republican and Democratic lawmakers supporting Israel.        

Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Republican of Florida and chairwoman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, warned that support for a statement condemning the settlements would be &ldquo;a major concession to enemies of the Jewish state and other free democracies.&rdquo;        

Israeli officials were making similar arguments, saying that a failure to veto the resolution would be a major breach at a time when the Obama administration is facing questions about its support for longtime allies in the region. Over the past month, Israeli officials argued that the United States should support President Hosni Mubarak, who was forced to resign a week ago after the street uprising in Egypt.        
