
MOSCOW &mdash; Russia&rsquo;s powerful finance minister, Aleksei L. Kudrin, said in a speech on Friday that economic advantages in Russia were too often granted based on relationships with government officials, and warned that economic reforms would not be possible without political change.        

It was an unusual criticism coming from a technocrat who has worked closely with Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin for more than two decades. Mr. Kudrin is often credited with helping cushion Russia from the collapse of oil prices, and has repeatedly pushed for the country to diversify the economy away from oil and gas.        

The speech, delivered at the Krasnoyarsk Economic Forum, comes amid intrigue over what path Russia will take after President Dmitri A. Medvedev&rsquo;s term ends in 2012. Though Russia&rsquo;s leadership has embraced the broad goal of &ldquo;modernization,&rdquo; there are major differences over whether political liberalization is necessary.        

Mr. Kudrin, who also holds the rank of deputy prime minister, weighed in on that question, saying the coming elections should be &ldquo;just and fair&rdquo; and involve &ldquo;all the leading political forces and representatives of society.&rdquo;        

He went on to say that only credible elections &ldquo;will give the mandate of trust that is necessary to undertake economic reforms,&rdquo; according to a transcript of the speech released by the Russian government late Friday night. &ldquo;If distrust develops, we will not be able to fully achieve our goals.&rdquo;        

In a lengthy speech that touched on many aspects of the Russian economy, Mr. Kudrin reported the third annual drop in foreign direct investment&mdash; down to $12 billion to $14 billion from a high point of $27 billion. Reuters also quoted Mr. Kudrin as giving a harsh assessment of some economic practices in Russia.        

&ldquo;There seem to be rules of the game, but then it turns out they are circumvented,&rdquo; he said, according to Reuters. The news agency also quoted him as saying &ldquo;we have a very weak system of management, including in the government.&rdquo;        

The official transcript released on Friday night did not include those remarks, though it did include allusions to corruption in economic decisions.        

&ldquo;We have some private companies which are closer to the government and the state, than other private companies &mdash; that is, they use administrative support,&rdquo; he said, according to the official transcript. &ldquo;Mergers, acquisitions, access to resources, are often decided in the offices of officials. We must fundamentally change the situation.&rdquo;        

The Krasnoyarsk forum was the site of a memorable speech three years ago from Mr. Medvedev, then a candidate for the presidency, who opened by saying: &ldquo;Freedom is better than nonfreedom. These words are the quintessence of human existence.&rdquo; His presidency has delivered little substantive political change, however, and Mr. Kudrin&rsquo;s words sounded less like an endorsement of either Mr. Putin or Mr. Medvedev than an indictment of the system they preside over.        

The last time Mr. Kudrin ventured so publicly into the political realm was a year ago, when during a television interview he said he no longer associated himself with United Russia, the ruling party, which Mr. Putin leads.        
