
MANAMA, Bahrain &mdash; At exactly 5:18 p.m. Friday, the pro-democracy demonstrators, mostly young men, came to a fork in the road. Turn right, and they would head to a hospital that has cared for protesters. Turn left, and into Pearl Square, the symbolic center of the nation, where the army was waiting.        

The crowd paused, just briefly, to let out a cheer, and turned left. Within minutes they were screaming, &ldquo;Live fire, live fire,&rdquo; as the military began shooting &mdash; from a high-rise building, from a helicopter and from the road in front of the demonstrators. King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa&rsquo;s government had warned them: march and you will be shot. The opposition had warned the king that it would never give up.        

Both sides held fast in a confrontation that continued to escalate by the day as the king, a Sunni, showed his increasing willingness to use lethal force to preserve his absolute authority, and the opposition, mostly from the majority Shiite community, showed that it was increasingly galvanized by that use of force.        

&ldquo;My friend, my brother, he just got shot in the head,&rdquo; said Mazen Al Smeh, 27, as he struggled to catch his breath on the side of the road, his face covered in tears, his hands painted with blood. &ldquo;I tried to take him, but they kept firing. He&rsquo;s dead, he&rsquo;s dead now. We were just here to demand our rights.&rdquo;        

When ambulances arrived for the injured, the army opened fire. When the shooting seemed to stop, a few young men dropped to their knees to pray on the bloodstained road, and the army started to shoot at them, again.        

There are many details that remained unclear on Friday night, including how many died, how many were injured, and what kind of munitions were fired: live ammunition, rubber bullets or both. Doctors at Salmaniya Medical Complex said at least one young man was dead and four or five critically wounded with head and chest injuries.        

What was clear though, was that if the king&rsquo;s goal was to intimidate his critics into staying home, he appears to have miscalculated, at least so far. The politics of the Shiite community &mdash; which already felt disenfranchised &mdash; are deeply and inextricably linked with a faith that reveres martyrdom and holds social justice as a principal value. With each outrage this week, more people turned to the streets, perpetuating the cycle Bahrain now seems caught in, with no obvious way out.        

Friday night, thousands of angry demonstrators gathered outside the hospital, chanting &ldquo;Death to Khalifa,&rdquo; referring to the king.        

&ldquo;We are not going to stop and we are not scared at any time,&rsquo; said Raed Aman, 31, one of the demonstrators who escaped uninjured and was at the hospital checking on his friends. &ldquo;If anybody in my family dies, I will have more power. Even if I lose my life, I will be there every time.&rdquo;        

This small Persian Gulf nation, a strategic ally of the United States, has long strained against the pressure of the political tensions between a Shiite majority and a king and ruling class of the Sunni minority. That tension has been supercharged in recent weeks as demands for democracy, rule of law and social justice have rocked the Middle East with popular movements that have forced the resignation of the presidents of Tunisia and Egypt.        

By Friday night, the royal family appeared to be trying to find a more peaceful solution, with the king authorizing the crown prince, his son, to begin a dialogue with the opposition, but it was unclear if the protesters would accept talks. In an appearance on Bahraini TV, the prince, Sheik Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa, pleaded for calm and offered &ldquo;condolences to the people of Bahrain for the painful days they are living.&rdquo;        

After the violence erupted, President Obama condemned the use of violence by governments throughout the region, including Bahrain, where the United States&rsquo; Fifth Fleet is based. The White House said the president had spoken with the king on Friday evening, urging the government to show restraint, especially against peaceful protesters, and pressing for meaningful reform.        

On Monday, young people began their protests, organizing Bahrain&rsquo;s own &ldquo;day of rage,&rdquo; hoping that peaceful protests could force the evolution of their nation from an absolute to a constitutional monarchy.        

But on that day, the king unleashed his police force, and every effort at demonstrating was met by a wave of tear gas and rubber bullets. By the end of the night, one young man, Ali Mushaima, 21, was dead, shot in the back by the police. The next day, as thousands gathered to mourn, another young man was killed.        
Christopher Drew contributed reporting from New York.
