
WASHINGTON &mdash; At a town-hall-style meeting in Bahrain two months ago, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton got a pointed question from a member of Bahrain&rsquo;s Parliament: was the United States letting Bahrain, a Persian Gulf ally, off the hook for a string of arrests of lawyers and human rights activists?        

The moderator rebuked the questioner for &ldquo;hijacking the mike,&rdquo; but Mrs. Clinton replied anyway. &ldquo;I see the glass as half full,&rdquo; she said, pointing to Bahrain&rsquo;s recent elections. &ldquo;I think the changes that are happening in Bahrain are much greater than what I see in many other countries in the region and beyond.&rdquo;        

When it came to Bahrain, Mrs. Clinton was not the only American diplomat who tended to see the glass as half full. Her rosy assessment, which seems incongruous in light of the army&rsquo;s bloody crackdown on protesters, illustrates how the United States government has overlooked recent complaints about human rights abuses in a kingdom that is an economic and military hub in the Persian Gulf.        

And it leaves the White House once again scrambling to deal with an Arab ally facing a tide of popular discontent. In this case, its calculations are  complicated by signs that Bahrain is being pressed by its  neighbor  Saudi Arabia, the most strategically important country in the region.        

In cables made public by WikiLeaks, the Bush and Obama administrations repeatedly characterized Bahrain as more open and reform-minded than its neighbors, and pushed back when human rights groups criticized the government.        

In a January 2010 cable, the American Embassy in Bahrain  criticized the human rights group Freedom House for downgrading Bahrain&rsquo;s rating from &ldquo;partly free&rdquo; to &ldquo;not free&rdquo; in its global survey of political rights and civil liberties. The cable asserted that Freedom House had been successfully lobbied by a radical Shiite movement, known as Haq, which rejects the government&rsquo;s reform efforts.        

Another cable passed along doubts about a Human Rights Watch report that said the police were using torture in interrogations &mdash; saying it relied heavily on allegations made by members of the same group &mdash; though the embassy did urge the Bahraini authorities to undertake a &ldquo;timely and credible&rdquo; investigation.        

&ldquo;The embassy was feeding this happy talk for years,&rdquo; said Tom Malinowski, Washington director for Human Rights Watch. &ldquo;Bahrain was moving on a genuine reform path for several years, but it did a significant U-turn in the last year, and I think the U.S. government was well behind the curve.&rdquo;        

A senior administration official said Mrs. Clinton was not offering a definitive judgment of Bahrain&rsquo;s record, but praising it for legislative elections a few weeks earlier, which the government, by all accounts, had handled in a free and fair manner. Elections, Mrs. Clinton noted, are only one element of a democratic system. And she addressed, albeit perfunctorily, the arrests of human rights advocates.        

&ldquo;People are arrested and people should have due process, and there should be the rule of law, and people should have good defense counsel,&rdquo; Mrs. Clinton said. &ldquo;We believe in all of that, and we say all of that.&rdquo;        

Still, the chummy tone of her visit, and those of other American officials, has magnified the shock and dismay of American officials over the violence. They are struggling to understand how King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, a monarch described in the cables as &ldquo;personable and engaging,&rdquo;  could have resorted to the kinds of brutal measures that Egypt&rsquo;s government shunned.        

On Friday, President Obama condemned the violence in Bahrain, as well as in Yemen and Libya, where security forces also clashed  with protesters. Saying  that he was &ldquo;deeply concerned,&rdquo;  he urged &ldquo;the governments of Bahrain, Libya and Yemen to show restraint in responding to peaceful protests, and to respect the rights of their people.&rdquo;        

Administration officials said it was not entirely clear, amid the chaos in Bahrain, who was giving orders. The royal family has various factions, suggesting, they said, that hard-liners, rather than the king, could have told the soldiers to open fire. The king said  Friday that he had put his son, Crown Prince Salman bin Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, in charge of a dialogue with protesters.        
Andrew W. Lehren contributed reporting from New York.
