
CAIRO &mdash; A deadly suicide bomb attack outside a Christian church in Alexandria on Saturday has forced the government and religious leaders here to acknowledge that Egypt is increasingly plagued by a sectarian divide that could undermine the stability that has been a hallmark of President Hosni Mubarak&rsquo;s nearly three decades in power.        

As Egypt&rsquo;s Christians headed to church under heavy security Thursday night to observe Coptic Christmas Eve, the nation was struggling to come to terms with a blast that killed at least 21 people, highlighted a long list of public grievances with the government and prompted concerns that national cohesion was being threatened by the spread of religious extremism among Muslims and Christians.        

&ldquo;I have heard this a lot, that this type of incident might be the first in a series, turning Egypt into another Iraq &mdash; that is the fear now,&rdquo; said Ibrahim Negm, the chief spokesman for Grand Mufti Ali Gomaa, the nation&rsquo;s highest religious official. &ldquo;There is a paradigm shift here that says we have to do something about the sectarian issue.&rdquo;        

The bombing, which the authorities said bore the characteristics of an operation by Al Qaeda, has increased the likelihood that Mr. Mubarak, who is 82 years old and has had health problems, will seek a sixth six-year term this year, in order to preserve the status quo. Yet, it is precisely that stability &mdash; or, some say, stagnation &mdash; that many Egyptians now cite as perhaps the nation&rsquo;s greatest underlying problem.        

&ldquo;The regime fooled us for many years with the illusion of &lsquo;stability,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; wrote Magdy el-Gallad, in the independent daily newspaper Al Masry Al Youm. &ldquo;We neither progressed nor has our situation remained stable.&rdquo;        

After the bombing and the ensuing riots, political experts, politicians, commentators, opposition leaders and average citizens said that the very steps taken by the president in the name of stability &mdash; including preservation of an emergency law that allows arrest without charge &mdash; had produced a state with weak institutions, weak political parties and a bureaucracy unable to resolve the social, political and economic problems that helped cultivate extremism.        

&ldquo;It is very clear that the government totally lost control &mdash; of everything,&rdquo; said Muhammad Aboulghar, a professor at Cairo University medical school and a liberal activist. &ldquo;The only control they have is on the security of the president, the group around him, and few other party figures. That&rsquo;s it.&rdquo;        

But for all the criticism it unleashed, the blast appears to have forged a consensus that Egypt, despite its historic tradition of moderate Islamic thinking and multicultural tolerance, has in recent years become overwhelmed by fundamentalist religious identification, a position that until now the government strongly denied.        

That view has reinforced the growing belief that President Mubarak was not ready to surrender the reins of power, people here said. Mr. Mubarak underwent surgery in Germany last year, and appeared frail for months afterward, leading to speculation about who might succeed him. But people who have recently met with him said that he appears to have regained his strength and seems to have no intention of giving up power.        

There is also a belief among those in the political elite, the military, the business community and the governing National Democratic Party that with so much uncertainty &mdash; even before the bombing &mdash; this is not the time for the party to nominate Mr. Mubarak&rsquo;s son, Gamal, to run in September&rsquo;s presidential election.        

&ldquo;If Mubarak disappears tomorrow, you will have the Islamists as the strongest political force in the country,&rdquo; said Mohammed Salmawy, head of the Arab Writers Union. &ldquo;The political parties, even lumped together, do not have the power to take over, and you have the army, which will not allow the country to go into chaos. Worse yet, you might have military Islamic rule because there is no reason to suppose the army is any different than society.&rdquo;        

When the bomb exploded shortly after New Year&rsquo;s Eve Mass, the government moved with unusual speed and certainty. Within hours, President Mubarak made a televised address urging national unity. Muslim religious leaders, like Mr. Gomaa, quickly condemned the attack and reached out to the leader of the church, Pope Shenouda III.        
Mona El-Naggar contributed reporting.
