
ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast (Reuters) &mdash; Security forces in Ivory Coast fired live bullets and tear gas on Saturday to disperse protesters in Abidjan who were calling for the incumbent leader, Laurent Gbagbo, to step down, witnesses said. At least one person was wounded.        

Mr. Gbagbo&rsquo;s rival, Alassane Ouattara, has called for mass protests like those in Egypt as Mr. Gbagbo refuses to leave office despite a Nov. 28 presidential election whose results, certified by the United Nations, show that Mr. Ouattara won.        

Witnesses said that hundreds of youths had gathered on Saturday in Abidjan, the country&rsquo;s main commercial city, but that soldiers and police officers dispersed them.        

The area of the protest, the Abobo neighborhood, has been a center of support for Mr. Ouattara and has often been the scene of violent clashes between security forces and civilians.        

&ldquo;The youths started assembling at the roundabout this morning. The security forces came in armored vehicles and fired tear gas and bullets into the air,&rdquo; said Tieba Doumbia, 30, who owns a small shop nearby.        

A tear gas grenade landed in a local market, forcing dozens of women to flee, he said. There was no immediate comment from the military or the police.        

At least one protester was shot and wounded by a soldier, said one witness, Idrissa Diarrassouba. He also said protesters had looted a large department store owned by a Lebanese businessman seen as close to Mr. Gbagbo.        

There are tens of thousands of Lebanese in Ivory Coast, and some run businesses that range from small shops to large export companies. Many are seen as pro-Gbagbo, and Lebanon&rsquo;s ambassador was one of only two diplomats to go to his swearing in.        

The army imposed a curfew across the country over the weekend that was to be lifted Sunday evening.        

Mr. Gbagbo has defied widespread international condemnation and Western sanctions by clinging to power. He has the backing of a legal body that overturned Mr. Ouattara&rsquo;s victory and of the military, which has crushed dissent.        

West Africa&rsquo;s central bank has cut Mr. Gbagbo off, setting off a liquidity crisis that has forced international banks to close their Ivorian operations. Mr. Gbagbo decreed Thursday that the main ones were to be forcibly nationalized and re-opened on Monday.        

Paramilitary forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo killed at least six civilians in Abobo earlier this month.  At least 300 people have been killed in violence since the disputed election, mostly Ouattara supporters killed by pro-Gbagbo forces, the United Nations says.        
