
MADRID &mdash; Santi Santamar&iacute;a, a chef and restaurant owner who helped raise the international profile of Spanish cuisine but invited controversy by criticizing avant-garde chefs and their techniques, including the use of chemical emulsifiers, died on Wednesday in Singapore. He was 53.        

The cause was a heart attack, said Joan Rosaura, a friend. He said Mr. Santamar&iacute;a collapsed in his new restaurant, Santi, in the Marina Bay Sands casino resort.        

Mr. Santamar&iacute;a was the first Catalan to run a three-star restaurant and as such was in the forefront of a generation of chefs who helped draw the world&rsquo;s attention to Spanish cuisine.        

In recent years, however, Mr. Santamar&iacute;a, who prided himself on using only natural and seasonal ingredients to make Mediterranean-style dishes, caused controversy with his criticism of some of his avant-garde counterparts, who manipulate ingredients with laboratory techniques. He accused them of producing pretentious food they would not eat themselves &mdash; and potentially poisoning diners with chemicals that he maintained did not belong in the kitchen.        

In 2008, Mr. Santamar&iacute;a made his case in a book called &ldquo;La Cocina al Desnudo&rdquo; (&ldquo;The Kitchen Laid Bare&rdquo;), in which he condemned the use of chemical emulsifiers by some chefs.        

Mr. Santamar&iacute;a even called on Spanish authorities to investigate the safety of additives like liquid nitrogen, used by some chefs for instant freezing, and methyl cellulose, a gelling agent. He singled out for criticism Ferran Adri&agrave;, the champion of the avant-garde movement and owner of Spain&rsquo;s most celebrated restaurant, El Bulli, which is also in Catalonia.        

Mr. Adri&agrave; told The New York Times in 2008 that &ldquo;everything that Santi has said about our ingredients is untrue, but it is damaging.&rdquo;        

Mr. Santamar&iacute;a insisted that he was driven not by jealousy but rather by concern about the loss of traditional cuisine and its focus on local and organic produce.        

Mr. Santamar&iacute;a was born on July 26, 1957, in the Catalan village Sant Celoni. He gained recognition in the 1980s after opening a modest establishment in his family&rsquo;s farmhouse, El Rac&oacute; de Can Fabes,  which he gradually upgraded. The restaurant earned its first Michelin star in 1989 and has been a three-star establishment since 1994.        

He went on to open award-winning restaurants in Barcelona and Madrid, before extending his reach to an establishment in Dubai in the United Arab Emirates and most recently his Santi restaurant in Singapore, managed by his daughter, Regina.        

Mr. Santamar&iacute;a also published several other books on cooking and was awarded Spain&rsquo;s National Gastronomy Prize in 2009.        

Besides his daughter, he is survived by his wife, Angels; a son, Pau; and a grandson, who was born this month.        
