
NAIROBI, Kenya &mdash; It is becoming a familiar tale of the Somali seas: A retired couple sets out for the trip of a lifetime, sailing around the world in a relatively small yacht, blogging all the way, sharing adventures of meeting people, seeing exotic locales and experiencing the thrill of being totally free.        

This is what drew  Jean and Scott Adam, an American couple from Southern California who have been sailing the globe for the past six years, to steer toward waters off the Somali coast.        

&ldquo;Djibouti is a big refueling stop,&rdquo; Mrs. Adam, a retired dentist, wrote on the couple&rsquo;s Web site. &ldquo;I have NO idea what will happen in these ports, but perhaps we&rsquo;ll do some local touring.&rdquo;        

But on Friday afternoon, their adventure took a hazardous turn when pirates hijacked their sailboat, with a total of four Americans on board, attacking several hundred miles off the coast of Oman, the American military said. The Adams, from Marina Del Rey, were traveling with two other Americans, Phyllis Mackay and Robert A. Riggle, from Seattle, according to Scott Stolnitz, a longtime friend of the Adams. There has been no radio contact with them since they put out an S O S, officials said.        

A statement by Blue Water Rallies, which organizes group cruising expeditions, said the Adams, Ms. Mackay and Mr. Riggle sailed with their rally from Phuket, Thailand, to Mumbai, India. A close friend of the Adams, Jeff Allen, said Blue Water&rsquo;s so-called Oz-Med section, from Mackay, Australia, to Crete, is considered the most dangerous; the Blue Water statement said the Adams&rsquo; yacht, the Quest, left the rally on Feb. 15 to take an alternate route to Salalah, Oman, leaving the group, which sailed together for security.        

Their case is strikingly similar to that of Paul and Rachel Chandler, sailors from a London suburb seeking adventure in similar waters in 2009. Their boat was hijacked by Somali gunmen, who held them for more than a year.        

The American Navy has pleaded with ship owners to stick to designated shipping lanes when passing through the Arabian Sea, where pirates continue to strike with impunity, despite the presence of dozens of warships. The Navy sometimes provides escorts for convoys and the ships travel in numbers, for safety.        

&ldquo;But we can&rsquo;t track everything, we can&rsquo;t track everybody, it&rsquo;s too large of an area,&rdquo; said Bob Prucha, a spokesman for the military&rsquo;s Central Command, on Saturday. He added that it was &ldquo;common knowledge&rdquo; how dangerous those waters were.        

Mr. Stolnitz said Mr. Adam mentioned that he was aware of the risks of traveling through these waters. Mr. Adam said he had a device on his boat called a SPOT communicator, which can transmit its location to their Web site. During this particular journey, Mr. Stolnitz said, Mr. Adam was going to turn it off, because he had heard that pirates may be able to track the device.        

Maritime analysts in East Africa said that a notorious pirate gang from northern Somalia had captured the Americans and was taking them to one of their many lairs. Somalia has languished without a functioning central government for more than 20 years, and once pirates take hostages back to their dens, there are very few options for a rescue.        

American military officials would not indicate their next move. But the last time Americans were hijacked by Somali pirates, the Navy sent several warships, and a Seals team ended up shooting three pirates dead, capturing a fourth and freeing an American merchant marine captain. All this happened at sea.        

The captured pirate, Abduwali Abdukhadir Muse, was taken to New York and sentenced to 33 years in American prison on Wednesday. Piracy analysts in East Africa said people in Somalia&rsquo;s pirate communities had already begun talking about trying to work out a prisoner swap with the four newly captured Americans in exchange for Mr.  Muse,  something American officials are not likely to approve.        

Ransoms have shot up from a few hundred thousand dollars to now typically $4 million or $5 million. According to Ecoterra International, an organization that monitors piracy attacks, more than 50 captured ships are in the hands of Somali pirates, with at least 800 captives.        

The Chandlers were released in November, after their friends and others paid around $1 million in ransom.        

The Adams had been cruising around the world for more than six years, from New Zealand to Tahiti to the Gal&aacute;pagos to Hawaii, China and India. One of the last posts on the Adams&rsquo; Web site indicated that they were leaving Mumbai for Oman, and then sailing to Djibouti. Their home has been the Quest, a sleek, blue Davidson 58 Pilot House Sloop, since they started an &ldquo;around the world&rdquo; trip in 2004, their blog said.        

Mrs. Adam wrote that she wanted to blog as much as possible, but, &ldquo;Since this trip is a reflection of our life and because life on a moving boat is unpredictable, we expect this trip to hold some unexpected surprises!&rdquo;        
Noah Gilbert contributed reporting from Marina Del Rey, Calif.
