
MANAMA, Bahrain &mdash; Teachers, lawyers and engineers marched into Pearl Square on Sunday, joining an emboldened opposition whose political leaders demanded that the king dissolve the government and fire his uncle, who has held the post of prime minister for 40 years, before they agree to enter into talks.        

After deadly crackdowns and demonstrations over the past week, an anxious calm prevailed, with a standoff continuing between an absolute monarchy determined to preserve its full range of powers and a peaceful opposition demanding a transition to democracy with an elected government and representative Parliament.        

Protesters continued to occupy the symbolic center of the nation at Pearl Square, and by Sunday evening, tens of thousands of people had jammed into the square in the largest of the week&rsquo;s demonstrations.        

The crown prince, Sheik Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa, continued to call for a national dialogue and period of mourning as a step toward reconciliation. But officials with the leading opposition party, the Shiite movement called Al Wafeq, said that with six people dead, one brain dead in the hospital, hundreds injured and many still missing, King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa would first have to convince them that he was willing to compromise after repeatedly unleashing his security forces on civilians.        

The party called for the dismissal of the long-serving prime minister, Sheik Khalifa bin Salman al-Khalifa, and the appointment of an interim unity government.        

&ldquo;You can&rsquo;t send your troops with machine guns, kill people and then expect to start a dialogue,&rdquo; said Abdul Jalil Khalil Ebrahim, one of the 18 party members to withdraw from Parliament in protest over the deaths. &ldquo;The cabinet has to go. This government has failed. How can we trust them in a dialogue?&rdquo;        

The government has repeatedly declined requests for comment or to make an official available for an interview. The crown prince&rsquo;s office also did not respond to an interview request.        

There are three main players besides the king in the royal family, part of the Sunni minority that controls the country. They are the crown prince, known as the most moderate among the group; the prime minister, who is said to be wealthy, but whose power has ebbed as popular anger at him has peaked; and the minister of the Royal Court, Sheik Khalid bin Ahmed al-Khalifa, known as the hard-liner of the three, opposition leaders say.        

At the moment, the crown prince apparently has the upper hand in discussions among the king&rsquo;s close aides, but opposition leaders say that the king has been known to play members of his inner circle against one another and that the dynamic could change at any time.        

With the army removed from Pearl Square, where only two days earlier it opened fire on a group of peaceful demonstrators, and the police withdrawn under intense pressure from the United States, the opposition acted as if it were in a position of strength. Seven opposition parties have called for a demonstration on Tuesday, which Mr. Ebrahim said he believed could draw the largest crowds to date.        

&ldquo;The government has to step down, and the people who killed our people must be punished,&rdquo; said Mr. Ebrahim, a member of the Al Wafeq Council of Representatives. &ldquo;Is it that easy to turn the page? You kill people and then you say you want to talk?&rdquo;        

Members of the opposition, a popular movement centered in Bahrain&rsquo;s majority Shiite community and set off by young people, were elated at their ability to camp in Pearl Square on Saturday night, but also somber over the toll of dead, wounded and missing.        

&ldquo;Our martyrs in our hearts,&rdquo; read a sign carried by teachers from the Duraz School as they marched into the square to join the protesters who had stayed in tents under the stars.        

&ldquo;I can&rsquo;t sleep at night because I want to know, where are our people?&rdquo; said Ahlam Yousef, 32, a middle school English teacher who joined the demonstration. &ldquo;Right now, that is our first demand. I want to know where these people are. I have to know.&rdquo;        

The issue of those unaccounted for has until now been largely overlooked as events careened from violence to hope, as the authorities vacillated between attacking protesters and withdrawing security forces. But by Sunday, demonstrators and opposition leaders were pressing for answers, with reports of about 20 people still missing.        

The government did provide some answers. By midday, about 10 people had been freed from jail, including Abdel Amir al-Basry, 37, who limped into his house in the village of Karranna, his body badly bruised, his right eye black and his ankle possibly broken. He said he had been grabbed by police officers as he tried to flee Pearl Square early Thursday morning, when security forces attacked without warning while thousands of demonstrators slept. He said he had been handcuffed with a hard plastic band, beaten with a club, stomped and punched, and then locked in a jail for several days.        

&ldquo;I want a constitutional monarchy,&rdquo; he said, sitting with his mother, Zeinab Mehdi Mandan, 68, moments after he returned home. &ldquo;I want the government to be for the people, whether they are Sunni or Shiite.&rdquo;        

His mother, who is blind and cannot walk, sat beside him on the floor. &ldquo;What he did, is a good thing,&rdquo; she said of her son. &ldquo;We are demanding and asking for our rights in our country. Let him continue.&rdquo;        

A few blocks away, Salman Abdullah, 27, and his brother, Jaafar, 21, said they were worried about their younger brother, Hussein, 16, who went to a demonstration five days ago and had not been heard from since. They fear the worst because his phone is off and he has never been out of touch for so long.        

&ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know where he is; of course I am worried,&rdquo; Salman Abdullah said. &ldquo;I am scared for him.&rdquo;        
Nadim Audi contributed reporting.
