
CASABLANCA, Morocco &mdash; For Morocco, a kingdom on the western edge of North Africa, the calls for change sweeping the region are muted by a fear of chaos, a prevalent security apparatus and genuine respect for the king, Mohammed VI. Since he took the throne in 1999, the king, who is only 47, has done much to soften the harsh and often brutal rule of his father, Hassan II.        

As in Jordan, demands for the resignation of the government have not touched the king, who is considered by many to be a reformer on the side of the poor. But the demands in Morocco include a desire for a more legitimate democracy, with limits on the power of Mohammed VI, who together with his close advisers controls most of the real power in the country.        

On Sunday, in response to a &ldquo;February 20 Movement for Change&rdquo; that began on Facebook, more than 10,000 people turned out in cities across the country to call for democratic change, lower food prices, freedom for Islamist prisoners, rights for Berbers and a variety of causes, including pan-Arab nationalism.        

In Rabat, the capital, and in Casablanca, the largest city, there were between 3,000 and 5,000 protesters, and there were smaller demonstrations in Marrakesh, Tangier and other cities. All were peaceful, though state radio announced that the rallies had been canceled, perhaps as a tactic to keep the turnout down.        

There were reports of scattered violence on Sunday evening in Marrakesh, where protesters, some of them throwing stones, clashed with the police and attacked a McDonald&rsquo;s, and in the northern town of Larache, where a gas station was set ablaze.        

On Monday, Interior Minister Taib Cherkaoui said that five  burned bodies were found in a bank that had been set on fire by demonstrators in  another northern town, Al Hoceima.        

People in the town said police used tear gas against  protesters Sunday night after they set fire to five cars and threw stones at a  police station following the demonstration.        

Mr. Cherkaoui said that 120 people had been arrested on  Sunday, but minors had been sent home, and that 128 people, including 115  members of the security forces, were wounded in several towns, though he did not  specify the seriousness of any injuries.        

In Casablanca and Rabat, numerous undercover police officers were obvious in the crowd, sometimes photographing protesters. In Rabat, people chanted slogans like, &ldquo;Down with autocracy,&rdquo; and, &ldquo;The king must reign, not govern.&rdquo; In Casablanca, protesters called for the government to resign. One sign said: &ldquo;Democratic Constitution = Parliamentary Monarchy.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;This is a start,&rdquo; said Imane Safi, 18, who was at the demonstration in Casablanca. &ldquo;The Arab world is changing and the Moroccan people need a change in the Constitution for more democracy. We want a country like Britain, with a constitutional monarchy and a strong Parliament that is not corrupt.&rdquo;        

A doctor, 62, said that she was very happy to see the youth movement for change. &ldquo;We hope that civil society will join, and we know it will take time, but we have to work at it,&rdquo; said the doctor, who requested anonymity because she did not want to jeopardize her position. &ldquo;The government is not real, and all key decisions are in the hands of the king and his friends, and people are tired of accepting a lie.&rdquo;        

But an adviser to the king said that he saw an opportunity in the protests to accelerate a movement for needed reform in Morocco, where about 20 percent of the population lives below the poverty line; where the median age is 26.5; and where there is high unemployment, high illiteracy and a level of corruption judged to be more severe than in Tunisia, if below that of Egypt.        

These are some of the same factors &mdash; a large, youthful demographic combined with high unemployment, anger over corruption and the disparities between rich and poor &mdash; that set off the revolts in Tunisia and Egypt.        

But the adviser, who asked for anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly, said that the king was listening, having recently promised to invest $1.9 billion in subsidies to ease high prices for food and basic commodities. Nor will anyone rule out a replacement of the conservative prime minister, Abbas el-Fassi, appointed by the king in 2007.        
(Page 2 of 2)
&ldquo;The king is trying to catch the wind of reform and use it,&rdquo; the adviser said. &ldquo;We have to listen to what people are saying, it&rsquo;s reality. And you have to listen and accelerate change, because these kids want better things, not bad things.&rdquo;        

Saad el-Bazi, 25, another of the demonstrators in Casablanca, noted the softer approach of this king, compared with his father, saying it provided a contrast to Tunisia, Egypt and Libya. &ldquo;If Hassan were still in power, things would be very different here,&rdquo; he said.        

But in fact the pace of the overhaul has slackened in Morocco, because of nervousness about the rise of radical Islam, including Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, and a parallel conservative reaction to change, including a landmark family law promoted by  the king that in 2004 raised the age for women to marry and allowed women to seek divorce. The slowdown was an effort to provide stability, but the current protests may provide a new momentum for change.        

Baudoin Dupret, director of research at the National Center for Scientific Research in Paris, said he viewed the protests as an opportunity for the king to &ldquo;unlock&rdquo; difficult issues like corruption, regionalization and overhauling the judiciary.        

&ldquo;The Arab spring represents an opportunity for Moroccan leaders,&rdquo; Mr. Dupret told the newspaper Le Monde, adding that the king retained legitimacy. &ldquo;He is widely perceived as the &lsquo;king of the poor,&rsquo; active in the social field, to the point that the most critical French-language newspaper had a headline this autumn, &lsquo;Must he do everything?&rsquo; In other words, the challenge may be for the government, but it is more difficult to imagine that it affects the king. To that extent, the system will remain intact.&rdquo;        

The king&rsquo;s adviser warned, however, that the Internet allowed young people &ldquo;to become a citizen of the world, but it&rsquo;s a virtual world,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;You begin to think that the life and experience of others is yours. Yes, we would like to live like the United States and Norway, but we have to get there.&rdquo;        

It is important for the king and his government to get across the message of joint goals, he said, adding, &ldquo;Let&rsquo;s work together to get this. We want this for everybody.&rdquo;        
