
BERLIN &mdash; Chancellor Angela Merkel&rsquo;s Christian Democratic Union party suffered a major defeat on Sunday in an election in Hamburg, with preliminary results showing that the opposition Social Democrats had made big gains and would form the next government there.        

According to preliminary results as reported by public television channels ARD and ZDF, Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s candidate, Christoph Ahlhaus, the incumbent, was decimated in the race for mayor of the city-state, the equivalent of the premier in other German states. Her party&rsquo;s share of the vote was cut to 21 percent, from 42 percent in the 2008 elections.        

The Social Democrats, led by Olaf Scholz, made a big comeback, winning slightly less than 50 percent of the vote, up from the 34 percent in 2008. If the preliminary results stand, the Social Democrats would be able to govern without having to depend on coalition partners.        

It was the first of seven regional elections this year, and the conservative Christian Democrats tried to play down the results.        

&ldquo;It has no consequences for the federal level,&rdquo; said Ekhard von Klaeden, a leading Christian Democrat and adviser to Mrs. Merkel. &ldquo;The people of Hamburg were completely preoccupied with local issues.&rdquo;        

But Hermann Gr&ouml;he, the general secretary of the Christian Democrats, told supporters in Berlin that the results &ldquo;were a big and painful defeat.&rdquo;        

The Free Democrats, Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s pro-business junior coalition partners, won 6.5 percent of the vote, compared with 4.8 percent last time. That would mean they could re-enter the regional legislature; the minimum required for a party to join any legislature is 5 percent.        

Analysts said it could signal the slow reversal of negative opinion polls for the Free Democratic Party leader, Guido Westerwelle. The Free Democrats, who won nearly 15 percent of the vote in the 2009 federal election, had plunged to under 5 percent in the polls over the past six months.        

The big winners were the Social Democrats and their leader, Sigmar Gabriel. In all the opinion polls on the federal level, the Social Democrats have been lagging behind Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s conservative bloc by as much as 12 percentage points.        

Although voters in Hamburg, one of the world&rsquo;s largest shipping ports, were focused on local issues like education and unemployment, the vote on Sunday could set the temperature for the six forthcoming regional elections, and Mr. Gabriel was in jubilant mood. &ldquo;It is an historic result,&rdquo; he said in Berlin. Referring to the next round of regional elections, he said, &ldquo;Our time is coming.&rdquo;        

But analysts were careful not to put too much emphasis on the Hamburg elections. &ldquo;They are very regional,&rdquo; said Nils Diederich, a professor of political science at Free University in Berlin. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s very early days yet. One thing you must never do is write off Mrs. Merkel.&rdquo;        

The Green Party won 11 percent of the vote, which its leaders said was a disappointment.        

In what is billed as a &ldquo;super election year,&rdquo; leaders of the main political parties said Hamburg would test the credibility and popularity of Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s center-right coalition. Analysts said the Hamburg result, and more importantly, the outcome of next month&rsquo;s election in the prosperous conservative state of Baden-W&uuml;rttemburg, would give some indication to Mrs. Merkel of the direction in which voters were moving.        

At a time when Germany enjoys strong economic growth, low unemployment and a big surge in exports, Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s coalition is positioning itself as the government that can sustain such prosperity and growth but also defend Germany&rsquo;s interests in the European Union. Mrs. Merkel, with support from President Nicolas Sarkozy of France, has proposed a &ldquo;competitiveness pact&rdquo; in an effort to get all 17 euro-zone countries to coordinate policy on a wide range of issues.        
