
BERLIN &mdash; Defying calls for his resignation, Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle went on the offensive Thursday in a speech aimed at quashing dissent while warning of a drift leftward if supporters failed to rally around his Free Democrats party.        

In a spirited 80-minute speech punctuated by applause but also by heckling, Mr. Westerwelle sought to bolster Chancellor Angela Merkel&rsquo;s center-right coalition, which has been dragged down in opinion polls by the Free Democrats, her partners since October 2009.        

&ldquo;We liberals will fight. I will fight because Germany deserves better than a left-wing majority,&rdquo; Mr. Westerwelle, who is also deputy chancellor, told delegates at the party&rsquo;s annual New Year&rsquo;s assembly in the opera house in Stuttgart, the regional capital of Baden-W&uuml;rttemberg.        

Opinion polls show a significant rise in support for the opposition Greens and Social Democrats while the Left Party, which is socialist in outlook, retains a large following in eastern Germany and has made inroads in the western states.        

The Free Democrats, who won almost 15 percent in the 2009 federal elections, have since plummeted to below 5 percent in the latest opinion polls. This in turn has damaged overall support for Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s government, with her backing declining to about 37 percent, a 10 percentage point drop since her re-election in 2009.        

But Mr. Westerwelle, praised even by his political opponents as a gifted orator, hit back Thursday. &ldquo;Public opinion is not the measure of our policies,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Our policies are measured by our ideals, our beliefs and our values.&rdquo;        

With his eye on crucial regional elections in the coming months, which will test the popularity of the party but particularly Mrs. Merkel&rsquo;s coalition, Mr. Westerwelle defended his party&rsquo;s record in the government. Responding to criticism that extends to his own party members that he has failed to carve out a prominent identity and role for the Free Democrats, he told delegates that the Free Democrats remained Germany&rsquo;s  only genuine liberal party  &mdash; in the traditional, 19th-century sense of a commitment  to smaller government, a simplified tax system and reward for achievement, in contrast with the opposition parties.        

&ldquo;Germany is doing better today than before the last national election,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;There is no country in the world that has come out of the financial crisis as well as Germany. We liberals had the courage to do what was right, even if we weren&rsquo;t congratulated for it every day.&rdquo;        

However, since joining the government in 2009 after 11 years in opposition, the Free Democrats have supported more state supervision over the banks. The party has expanded the Development Ministry, which it  leads, after saying in its 2009 election campaign that it wanted to abolish it or merge it with the Foreign Ministry in order to reduce bureaucracy. And it has failed to push through any major tax reforms.        

Analysts said one of the main reasons Mr. Westerwelle had become so unpopular was that he had been unable to fulfill the expectations of his voters, the majority of whom are middle-class professionals or entrepreneurs.        

&ldquo;The expectations were just so high when the Free Democrats entered the government in 2009,&rdquo; said Gero Neugebauer, a political scientist at Free University in Berlin. &ldquo;No wonder the disappointment among its supporters is so great. It is all very well attacking the opposition and raising the specter of a left-wing government, but what about the substance? The forthcoming regional elections will show if Mr. Westerwelle can reverse the party&rsquo;s fortunes.&rdquo;        
