
TUNIS &mdash; The Tunisian revolution that overthrew decades of authoritarian rule has entered a delicate new phase in recent days over the role of Islam in politics. Tensions mounted here last week when military helicopters and security forces were called in to carry out an unusual mission: protecting the city&rsquo;s brothels from a mob of zealots.        

Police officers dispersed a group of rock-throwing protesters who streamed into a warren of alleyways lined with legally sanctioned bordellos shouting, &ldquo;God is great!&rdquo; and &ldquo;No to brothels in a Muslim country!&rdquo;        

Five weeks after protesters forced out the country&rsquo;s dictator, President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, Tunisians are locked in a fierce and noisy debate about how far, or even whether, Islamism should be infused into the new government.        

About 98 percent of the population of 10 million is Muslim, but Tunisia&rsquo;s liberal social policies and Western lifestyle shatter stereotypes of the Arab world. Abortion is legal, polygamy is banned and women commonly wear bikinis on the country&rsquo;s Mediterranean beaches. Wine is openly sold in supermarkets and imbibed at bars across the country.        

Women&rsquo;s groups say they are concerned that in the cacophonous aftermath of the revolution, conservative forces could tug the country away from its strict tradition of secularism.        

&ldquo;Nothing is irreversible,&rdquo; said Khadija Cherif, a former head of the Tunisian Association of Democratic Women, a feminist organization. &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t want to let down our guard.&rdquo;        

Ms. Cherif was one of thousands of Tunisians who marched through Tunis, the capital, on Saturday demanding the separation of mosque and state in one of the largest demonstrations since the overthrow of Mr. Ben Ali.        

Protesters held up signs saying, &ldquo;Politics ruins religion and religion ruins politics.&rdquo;        

They were also mourning the killing on Friday of a Polish priest by unknown attackers. That assault was also condemned by the country&rsquo;s main Muslim political movement, Ennahdha, or Renaissance, which was banned under Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s dictatorship but is now regrouping.        

In interviews in the Tunisian news media, Ennahdha&rsquo;s leaders have taken pains to praise tolerance and moderation, comparing themselves to the Islamic parties that govern Turkey and Malaysia.        

&ldquo;We know we have an essentially fragile economy that is very open toward the outside world, to the point of being totally dependent on it,&rdquo; Hamadi Jebali, the party&rsquo;s secretary general, said in an interview with the Tunisian magazine R&eacute;alit&eacute;s. &ldquo;We have no interest whatsoever in throwing everything away today or tomorrow.&rdquo;        

The party, which is allied with Egypt&rsquo;s Muslim Brotherhood, says it opposes the imposition of Islamic law in Tunisia.        

But some Tunisians say they remain unconvinced.        

Raja Mansour, a bank employee in Tunis, said it was too early to tell how the Islamist movement would evolve.        

&ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know if they are a real threat or not,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;But the best defense is to attack.&rdquo; By this she meant that secularists should assert themselves, she said.        

Ennahdha is one of the few organized movements in a highly fractured political landscape. The caretaker government that has managed the country since Mr. Ben Ali was ousted is fragile and weak, with no clear leadership emerging from the revolution.        

The unanimity of the protest movement against Mr. Ben Ali in January, the uprising that set off demonstrations across the Arab world, has since evolved into numerous daily protests by competing groups, a development that many Tunisians find unsettling.        

&ldquo;Freedom is a great, great adventure, but it&rsquo;s not without risks,&rdquo; said Fathi Ben Haj Yathia, an author and former political prisoner. &ldquo;There are many unknowns.&rdquo;        

One of the largest demonstrations since Mr. Ben Ali fled took place on Sunday in Tunis, where several thousand protesters marched to the prime minister&rsquo;s office to demand the caretaker government&rsquo;s resignation. They accused it of having links to Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s government.        

Tunisians are debating the future of their country on the streets. Avenue Habib Bourguiba, the broad thoroughfare in central Tunis named after the country&rsquo;s first president, resembles a Roman forum on weekends, packed with people of all ages excitedly discussing politics.        

The freewheeling and somewhat chaotic atmosphere across the country has been accompanied by a breakdown in security that has been particularly unsettling for women. With the extensive security apparatus of the old government decimated, leaving the police force in disarray, many women now say they are afraid to walk outside alone at night.        

Achouri Thouraya, a 29-year-old graphic artist, says she has mixed feelings toward the revolution.        

She shared in the joy of the overthrow of what she described as Mr. Ben Ali&rsquo;s kleptocratic government. But she also says she believes that the government&rsquo;s crackdown on any Muslim groups it considered extremist, a draconian police program that included monitoring those who prayed regularly, helped protect the rights of women.        

&ldquo;We had the freedom to live our lives like women in Europe,&rdquo; she said.        

But now Ms. Thouraya said she was a &ldquo;little scared.&rdquo;        

She added, &ldquo;We don&rsquo;t know who will be president and what attitudes he will have toward women.&rdquo;        

Mounir Troudi, a jazz musician, disagrees. He has no love for the former Ben Ali government, but said he believed that Tunisia would remain a land of beer and bikinis.        

&ldquo;This is a maritime country,&rdquo; Mr. Troudi  said. &ldquo;We are sailors, and we&rsquo;ve always been open to the outside world. I have confidence in the Tunisian people. It&rsquo;s not a country of fanatics.&rdquo;        
