
KAMPALA, Uganda &mdash; President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda was re-elected to a fourth  term in a presidential election on Friday,  the country&rsquo;s electoral commission announced Sunday.        

Mr. Museveni won a little more than 68 percent of the eight million votes cast, the electoral commission said. Kizza Besigye, a retired army colonel  and a former close confidant of the president, received about 26 percent.        

Dr. Besigye rejected the official results, saying that opposition parties would consult on what their next steps might be. But unlike before the voting on Friday, he did not call for protests, of the kind staged over the last two months in Egypt and Tunisia. Dr. Besigye had predicted large demonstrations if the election results appeared to be fraudulent.        

With the rest of the opposition vote split between six other challengers, only two of whom received more than 1 percent of the votes, it was uncertain how much support there would be for a challenge to the official results.        

International observers said that while the voting had been largely peaceful, it had also been riddled with sporadic irregularities and accusations of corruption.        

&ldquo;The electoral process was marred with avoidable administrative and logistical failures,&rdquo; the European Union&rsquo;s election observer team said in a statement on Sunday, adding that the failures had led to &ldquo;an unacceptable number of Ugandan citizens being disenfranchised.&rdquo;        

Dame Billie Miller, the head of the Commonwealth observation team, said that the &ldquo;commercialization of politics,&rdquo; including &ldquo;distribution of vast amounts of money,&rdquo; was &ldquo;most disturbing.&rdquo;        

The Besigye campaign said that its own tally of the election results was &ldquo;very different&rdquo; from the official figures and that the campaign&rsquo;s accounting would be released soon.        

&ldquo;We categorically reject the outcome of the elections,&rdquo; Dr. Besigye said at a news conference. &ldquo;We reject the leadership of Yoweri Museveni.&rdquo;        

Mr. Museveni was a rebel commander when he seized power in 1986, declaring in his inaugural address that &ldquo;the problems of Africa, and Uganda in particular, are caused by leaders who overstay in power.&rdquo; Uganda abolished term limits in 2005, but also legalized multiparty politics.        

In the presidential election in 2006, Mr. Museveni received 59 percent of the votes. On Friday, he did particularly well among voters in the underdeveloped, rural parts of the country, where the bulk of the population live.        

Many people attribute his popularity to his charisma &mdash; he rode on a motorcycle during the 2006 election and recorded a rap single last year &mdash; as well as his image as the only candidate capable of keeping the country peaceful. But his support among the youth and Uganda&rsquo;s elite appeared to be diminishing, because Dr. Besigye did well here in Kampala, the capital.        

The streets of Kampala were quiet and calm on Sunday, with no celebrations of the president&rsquo;s re-election.        
