
BUDAPEST, Hungary &mdash; Normally, European Union member states start their six-month rotations as holders of the presidency in a political glow, with high hopes of shaping the European agenda and increasing their stature. But for Hungary, which took up the post at the start of the year, the spotlight has been harsher.        

The country&rsquo;s prime minister, Viktor Orban, has faced a new blizzard of accusations that his brand of nationalist politics is undermining press freedom and victimizing Western European companies.        

At a news conference on Thursday in the gilded splendor of the Hungarian Parliament, Mr. Orban bluntly conceded that it was &ldquo;a bad start&rdquo; &mdash; and came out fighting.        

The criticism reflects wide unease about Mr. Orban, who is back in power after an eight-year absence and has rapidly established a tight grip on politics here. But more deeply, it draws from European worries that the bloc has few tools to police its core values if younger democracies threaten to stray toward populism.        

At the news conference, Mr. Orban took on those who criticize his controlling moves by likening him to Vladimir V. Putin of Russia &mdash; and even Alexander G. Lukashenko of Belarus &mdash; and accused France and Germany of insulting Hungary by criticizing a new media law that greatly expands the state&rsquo;s power to monitor and penalize private news outlets.        

&ldquo;From 1998 to 2002, the Western press said I was reminiscent of Hitler and Il Duce,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Now they compare me with Putin and the Belarussian president. I will leave up to you to decide if it is progress or not.&rdquo;        

From a lectern emblazoned with the slogan &ldquo;Strong Europe,&rdquo; Mr. Orban characterized negative comments about the media law as an &ldquo;insult.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Without precise knowledge and understanding of the text of the media law, not one single state, nation, France included, has the right to criticize and ask Hungary to do anything,&rdquo; Mr. Orban said. &ldquo;So I would like to ask the French government to return to the level of reality and rational discussion.&rdquo;        

The center-left and liberal groups in the European Parliament expressed their alarm.        

&ldquo;We cannot allow Hungary or any other government to drive a coach and horses through the fundamental values of the European Union,&rdquo; Martin Schulz, leader of the center-left, said in a statement that also raised the possibility of placing sanctions on Budapest. Such an outcome is unlikely, because it could result only from a clear breach of European law.        

Mr. Orban became famous as one of the architects of Hungary&rsquo;s overthrow of Communism, and spent a year at Oxford University in England, paid for by the financier and pro-democracy philanthropist George Soros.        

He won his first round as prime minister in 1998, riding on an appeal to Hungarian nationalism while cultivating his image as a churchgoing father of five and devotee of soccer. He is renowned both for his political charisma and for his almost cultlike leadership of the main center-right party, Fidesz. He returned as prime minister last April, after Fidesz won a landslide victory.        

While Hungary&rsquo;s transition to democracy was remarkably nonviolent, its politics have been volatile. And its economy &mdash; a star performer in the 1990s &mdash; has weakened, now trailing many others in Eastern Europe. The financial crisis has brought high unemployment and poverty, particularly in rural areas.        

Last year Mr. Orban rejected the idea of new loans from the International Monetary Fund, instead embarking on what Gy&ouml;rgy Matolcsy, minister for national economy, described as &ldquo;unorthodox measures&rdquo; to regain control of public finances.        

Among them is a one-time crisis tax on big corporations, a move that prompted complaints to the European Commission from 13 West European corporations, which said they had been unfairly singled out.        

Mr. Orban dismissed suggestions that foreign businesses had been singled out, saying that a Hungarian bank and energy company were among the hardest hit.        

&ldquo;On economic policy, Orban has been compared to Vladimir Putin or even Hugo Ch&aacute;vez&rdquo; &mdash; the president of Venezuela &mdash; &ldquo;because of his economic nationalism and revolutionary rhetoric,&rdquo; said Andras Bozoki, professor of political science at Central European University in Budapest. &ldquo;I think this is an exaggeration.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;He is an opportunistic populist who has been mainstreaming far-right issues,&rdquo; he added. &ldquo;In the meantime, Orban perhaps tends to see himself as &lsquo;new Ataturk&rsquo; or &lsquo;new De Gaulle,&rsquo; who might be judged as dictator by his contemporaries but for whom history would justify his actions.&rdquo; Speaking Thursday, Mr. Orban suggested that he might give the vote to ethnic Hungarians living abroad &mdash; a move that critics say would help entrench his political majority.        

But he acknowledged that he might have miscalculated by bringing forward the media law just before Hungary fell into the European Union spotlight. The legislation lays down obligations for the media, including balance, and submits it to the authority of a council appointed by the Parliament that can impose fines.        

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe has criticized the law, and the European Commission president, Jos&eacute; Manuel Barroso, plans to raise the issue in a meeting with Mr. Orban in Budapest on Friday.        

Mr. Orban told reporters that the main elements of the law exist in other European nations and that there was no reason for the commission to suggest changes in Hungary if it did not ask other countries to amend their statutes. But he did leave the door open to amendments if the commission insisted.        
bu
