
MANAMA, Bahrain &mdash; The United States military undermined efforts to improve relations with Bahrain&rsquo;s Shiite majority and understated abuses by the Sunni royal family, according to one present and one former American government adviser and a Bahraini human rights advocate.        

As Bahrain&rsquo;s leaders struggle to hold back a rising popular revolt against their absolute rule, Washington&rsquo;s posture toward the Shiite majority, which is spearheading the opposition, could prove crucial to future relations with this strategically valuable Persian Gulf nation. The United States Navy&rsquo;s Fifth Fleet is based here, helping ensure the flow of oil through the Strait of Hormuz and the gulf, and safeguarding American interests in this volatile region.        

Over the years, the military, according to the advisers and the human rights advocate, believed that King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa and his court were reform-minded leaders who could advance democracy and preserve stability. That narrative contrasts sharply with the experience of the Shiites, as documented by human rights groups and some of the military&rsquo;s own advisers.        

&ldquo;The problem has been that we have been doing everything we can to cuddle up to the Khalifas and have been consciously ignoring at best the situation of Bahraini Shiites,&rdquo; said Gwenyth Todd, a former political adviser to the Navy in Bahrain from 2004 to 2007 who was also an adviser on Middle Eastern and North African affairs at the Pentagon and the White House. &ldquo;We could find ourselves in a very bad situation if the regime has to make major concessions to the Shia, unless we change our tone.&rdquo;        

Ms. Todd, who was assigned as an informal liaison between the Navy and the Shiites, was dismissed from her duties in December 2007 in a formal letter that cited &ldquo;unauthorized contact with foreign nationals,&rdquo; &ldquo;financial irresponsibility&rdquo; and &ldquo;disclosure of classified information.&rdquo; But an American official who is familiar with the details of her case and is still working in Bahrain confirmed the details of Ms. Todd&rsquo;s experience with the Navy and the details she provided, including a glowing letter of recommendation written by a high-ranking Navy official in 2009.        

The government advisers and Nabil Rajab of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights said that over the years, the United States military was reluctant to believe the degree of the royal family&rsquo;s discrimination against Shiites in politics, employment, housing and human rights. Mr. Rajab said that he was invited to speak in Washington and was told by two senators that the military encouraged them not to meet with him, or even to host him. He did not want to identify the senators because he thought it might embarrass them.        

&ldquo;The military here always took a position against the human rights community,&rdquo; Mr. Rajab said. &ldquo;The U.S. did not build up any good relations with the opposition. They always categorize them as fundamentalist or extremist in their reports, in order to justify their political position in support of the government.&rdquo;        

In Bahrain, as in Egypt and Tunisia, the United States finds itself again torn by its desire to preserve relations with autocratic leaders who back American foreign policy interests and by the danger of further alienating Arab public opinion by failing to promote democracy. At the moment, feelings toward the United States are neutral, and in some circles even positive, but they could slip toward hostile, opposition advocates said.        

&ldquo;If the United States does not modify its policy now to take into account the Shia, there is a danger that worries me, if we are seen as backing the government to the end,&rdquo; said a United States government official in Bahrain who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the news media.        

A spokeswoman for the Fifth Fleet disputed criticism that the Navy discouraged attempts to engage with Bahrain&rsquo;s Shiite community. &ldquo;The U.S. Navy has a longstanding relationship of more than 60 years with Bahrain,&rdquo; the spokeswoman, Cmdr. Amy Derrick-Frost, said in an e-mail. &ldquo;We enjoy an active community relations program with the entire Bahraini community regardless of religion or ethnicity.&rdquo;        

Some former American diplomats in Bahrain said that it was possible the American military at times over the years sought to limit contacts between military personnel and Shiite community members to prevent service members from accidentally blundering into delicate political situations.        
Nadim Audi contributed reporting from Manama, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.
