
BRUSSELS &mdash; Two days of meetings of European Union ministers meant to address broad themes of change in the Middle East were dominated by short-term issues, particularly the possibility of increased migration from North Africa if regional unrest grows.        

The ministers issued a statement on Monday saying that the union &ldquo;condemns the ongoing repression against demonstrators in Libya and deplores the violence and death of civilians.&rdquo; It offered a &ldquo;new partnership&rdquo; with countries committed to political and economic reform.        

But more immediate and urgent concerns were expressed by Italy and Malta, which fear any increase in what was, even before this year&rsquo;s spreading revolts, an unmanageable flood of migrants.        

Italy&rsquo;s foreign minister, Franco Frattini, warned that the crisis in Libya could set off an &ldquo;unimaginable&rdquo; movement of population because of the large number of non-Libyan citizens in the country, which has been a magnet for Africans looking for jobs and possibly a passage to Europe.        

&ldquo;Those who spoke of hundreds of thousands&rdquo; of people crossing into Europe &ldquo;are not exaggerating,&rdquo; Mr. Frattini said. &ldquo;We have already seen what happened in Tunisia.&rdquo; More than 3,000 Tunisians have landed on the Italian island of Lampedusa, just off Sicily, in recent days, leading the Italian government to declare a humanitarian emergency.        

Libya holds considerable leverage over the European Union because of the migration issue. It told the 27-nation bloc last week that it would reconsider its cooperation on illegal migration if the Europeans continued to encourage pro-democracy protests in the country, according to Hungary, which holds the union&rsquo;s rotating presidency.        

In recent years, Europeans have sought close contacts with Tripoli to try to stem the flow of migrants. The collapse of an effective government could produce &ldquo;chaos and anarchy,&rdquo; said one foreign minister, speaking on ground rules of anonymity.        

At times, the meetings addressed some of the deeper issues raised by the unrest. The British foreign secretary, William Hague, described the moment as a &ldquo;major test, a historic test for the E.U.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;Clearly if we can succeed in bringing more democracy and more stability to North Africa and the Middle East that will be the greatest achievement for the E.U. since enlargement,&rdquo; he added, referring to the bloc&rsquo;s expansion to bring in former Communist states. &ldquo;If we don&rsquo;t succeed, the dangers to the E.U. of instability or extremism on our frontiers are immense.&rdquo;        

Meanwhile the Finnish foreign minister, Alex Stubb, suggested the imposition of a visa ban and asset freeze on the leaders of the Libyan government, though no decisions on that issue were made Monday.        

Belgium&rsquo;s foreign minister, Steven Vanackere, suggested that European parliamentarians  should help countries like Egypt develop a parliamentary system.        

Catherine Ashton, the E.U.&rsquo;s foreign policy chief, was due to fly to Egypt on Monday.        

&ldquo;Europe should be judged by its ability to act in the short, medium and longer term in our neighborhood,&rdquo; she said before leaving Brussels for Cairo.        
