
BAGHDAD &mdash; A suicide bomber on Monday detonated a truck packed with explosives outside a police headquarters just north of Samarra, killing 12 officers and wounding 20 others, a local official and a law enforcement official said.        

The attack demonstrated that the police and security forces remain a target of insurgents despite the significant drop in violence across Iraq in the past year, and highlighted the tenuous security situation in and around Samarra, a predominantly Sunni city 60 miles north of Baghdad that is home to a Shiite shrine.        

Around 9:30 a.m., the bomber rammed the truck through a checkpoint at the headquarters in Qasr al-Ashiq, five miles from Samarra. The bomber then detonated the truck near a crowd of officers, said the local official, Mohamed E&rsquo;laian, who heads the security committee for Salahuddin Province.        

&ldquo;I was standing at the front of the compound where the bar was located and suddenly a white pickup truck filled with empty chicken cages got closer to us,&rdquo; said Mohamed Hillan Athab, a 35-year-old police officer stationed at the headquarters. &ldquo;First, we thought, he is a farmer and lost his way. But then he drove faster, and once he got close he detonated the car.&rdquo;        

Mr. Athab added: &ldquo;It was a huge explosion. I didn&rsquo;t feel anything at that moment, then I was at the hospital.&rdquo;        

Another police officer said he tried to stop the truck by shooting at it.        

&ldquo;We opened fire on him with pistols but he drove faster and hit the front bar and then blew himself up,&rdquo; said the police officer, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak with journalists.        

A battalion of emergency police officers from the southern city of Amara was stationed at the headquarters.        

Officers from the predominantly Shiite cities in Iraq&rsquo;s south often travel to Samarra to bolster security  during Shiite pilgrimages to the city&rsquo;s golden dome, one of Iraq&rsquo;s most revered Shiite shrines. The dome was destroyed by insurgents in 2006, setting off months of violence between Shiites and Sunnis in which tens of thousands of people were killed.        

The recent pilgrimages, which commemorated the death of the imam Hassan al-Askari, for whom the  mosque is named, were marked by violence.        

On Feb. 10, a car bomb exploded near a procession of pilgrims south of Samarra, killing nine people, including one child, and wounding dozens more.        

Two days later, a suicide bomber attacked a bus carrying pilgrims, killing at least 33 people.        

There were no claims of responsibility for those attacks, although officials blamed Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia, a Sunni group.        

On Monday,  Mr. E&rsquo;laian blamed Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, who was re-elected to a second  term in December but has yet to name ministers of security and the interior.        

&ldquo;The delay of naming security ministers is the main reason of security breaches,&rdquo; Mr. E&rsquo;laian said. &ldquo;It will keep on going and negatively affect the situation unless qualified people are in charge and are loyal to the country and not just certain sides.&rdquo;        
Yasir Ghazi contributed reporting from Baghdad, and an employee of The New York from Samarra, Iraq.
