
LOS ANGELES &mdash; Jean and Scott Adam shared a dream through 15 years of marriage: to retire, build a boat and sail the world. And that is precisely what they did, heading out in 2004 from Marina Del Rey, Calif., on a custom-built 58-foot yacht for a permanent vacation that brought them to exotic islands and remote coastlines: Fiji, Micronesia, China, Phuket.        

&ldquo;And now: Angkor Wat! And Burma!&rdquo; Mrs. Adam wrote just before Christmas, her blog post bustling with characteristic excitement.        

The dream came to a brutal end on Tuesday when the Adams and their crew &mdash; Phyllis Macay and Robert A. Riggle of Seattle &mdash; were killed by pirates off the coast of Somalia in one of the most violent episodes since the modern-day piracy epidemic began several years ago, American officials said.        

It is not clear why the pirates killed their hostages, either accidentally during a firefight or possibly out of revenge for the Somali pirates killed by American sharpshooters in a hostage-taking in 2009.        

United States naval forces had been shadowing the hijacked yacht, called the Quest, and as soon as they saw a burst of gunfire on board, American Special Operations forces rushed to the yacht in assault craft, shot one of the pirates and knifed another. But all four hostages were already dead or fatally wounded.        

Few people who travel the high seas these days are unaware of the dangers from pirates, though it seemed a risk the Adams were willing to take in the spirit of adventure and excitement. &ldquo;She said to us, &lsquo;If anything happens to us on these travels, just know that we died living our dream,&rsquo;&nbsp;&rdquo; said Richard Savage, Mrs. Adam&rsquo;s brother-in-law from her first marriage. &ldquo;They were aware that this kind of thing has risks. But they were living their dream.&rdquo;        

Still, in a decision that troubled friends and family members, the Quest had departed from a convoy of yachts that was assembled to ward off attacks by pirates in those waters &mdash; such maritime convoys are known as rallies &mdash; to go off on their own into some of the most dangerous waters in the world.        

Mr. Adam took a security course last year from Blue Water Rallies, the organizer of the rally he had been on, and friends said he often turned off his G.P.S. instrument because pirates had learned to use them as homing devices.        

&ldquo;They were not risk-seekers,&rdquo; said Vivian Callahan, who had sailed with the Adams as a crew member over the years. &ldquo;They were very well aware of the dangers and I can&rsquo;t imagine them straying from the rally unless conditions were very serious."        

The Adams had been married about 15 years. They had both been married once before. He had a daughter, she had two sons.        

Before their retirement, Mrs. Adam was a dentist in Marina Del Rey, a graduate of dental school at the University of California, Los Angeles. He worked as a film production manager, on such films as &ldquo;The Goonies&rdquo; and &ldquo;Deliverance,&rdquo; before leaving the business to attend divinity school; he received a master&rsquo;s of divinity in 2000 and a master&rsquo;s of theology in 2010.        

Indeed, for the Adams, this was as much a voyage of faith as it was one of adventure. They would load the Quest up with tons of Bibles and distribute them as they traveled the world.        

&ldquo;They would stop in these small islands and connect with the church there, which were in isolated places and really welcomed them,&rdquo; said Richard Peace, a professor of ministry at Fuller Theological Seminary. &ldquo;Scott would preach at times for them and being a doctoral student, he would teach in Bible colleges. This was really a major part of their travels.&rdquo;        

Still, friends said that the Adams were not on a mission of proselytization.        

&ldquo;They were very much in love and shared both a love of the sea and a love of God&rsquo;s word,&rdquo; Samantha Carlson, a fellow sailor, said in an e-mail to friends. She added: &ldquo;They were NOT proselytizing or converting anyone.&rdquo;        

Ms. Macay and Mr. Riggle signed on to the Quest as crew members late last year, providing needed assistance and companionship on these voyages, which are often rigorous and lonely. Both Mr. Adam, 70, and Mrs. Adam, 66, were in relatively good shape, though Mrs. Adam battled with intense bouts of seasickness.        

&ldquo;She certainly didn&rsquo;t let that stop her,&rdquo; Mr. Savage said, adding with a laugh, &ldquo;It&rsquo;s kind of bizarre.&rdquo;        
Adam Nagourney reported from Los Angeles, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Nairobi, Kenya. Reporting was contributed by Eric Schmitt and Elisabeth Bumiller from Washington; William Yardley from Seattle; Jennifer Medina from Marina del Rey, Calif.; Ian Lovett, Noah Gilbert and Ana Facio Contreras from Los Angeles; and J. David Goodman from New York.
