
BERLIN &mdash; Defying calls by the opposition for his resignation, the German defense minister, Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg, said Tuesday that he would hold on to his job despite his admission that he had submitted a faulty dissertation for his doctoral degree.        

&ldquo;I made serious mistakes,&rdquo; he said Monday night at a campaign event for the Christian Democratic Union in Kelkheim, in the state of Hesse.        

&ldquo;Over the weekend I had another look at my doctorate thesis,&rdquo; Mr. Guttenberg, 39, told the audience of around 600 conservatives. &ldquo;I lost sight of the sources in one of two places. I wrote this piece of work myself and I stand by it, but I also stand by the rubbish I wrote.&rdquo; He said he was giving up the title of doctor, calling the decision to do so &ldquo;painful.&rdquo;        

Opposition political parties and several academics have accused Mr. Guttenberg of plagiarizing multiple sections of his dissertation for the Ph.D., which was conferred on him by the University of Bayreuth in 2007. Even the conservative newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung was stinging in its criticism of Mr. Guttenberg, accusing him of having &ldquo;inflated&rdquo; his r&eacute;sum&eacute;.        

Mr. Guttenberg originally dismissed the allegations of plagiarism as &ldquo;absurd.&rdquo; On Friday, though, he told a handpicked group of journalists that he would not use the title of doctor until the University of Bayreuth had carried out its own assessment of his law dissertation. That did not assuage his critics.        

On Tuesday, there was relief among conservatives that Mr. Guttenberg had spoken out, and officials said they hoped the controversy was over. Chancellor Angela Merkel&rsquo;s office said Mr. Guttenberg&rsquo;s decision to give up the title of doctor was &ldquo;the right one.&rdquo;        

With six regional elections taking place this year, the chancellor&rsquo;s conservative bloc can ill afford the taint of scandal or the loss of popular politicians, of whom Mr. Guttenberg is one. The Christian Democrats were routed in elections last Sunday in Hamburg, where the conservatives were removed from power and suffered their worst results in decades.        

Stefan Mappus, the Christian Democrat who is premier of Baden-W&uuml;rttemberg and is fighting to remain in power, said Tuesday that Mr. Guttenberg would play &ldquo;an important role&rdquo; in the election campaign there. Elections take place in Baden-W&uuml;rttemberg at the end of March.        

But leading opposition Social Democrat lawmakers said the plagiarism scandal had not ended.        

&ldquo;The defense minister suffers from the loss of a sense of reality which comes just before stepping down,&rdquo; said Thomas Oppermann, the Social Democrats&rsquo; parliamentary whip.        
