
ROME &mdash; Governments around the world scrambled Tuesday to evacuate their citizens from an increasingly chaotic Libya, chartering military and civilian planes and, in the case of Britain and Turkey, mobilizing military ships.        

The British foreign secretary, William Hague, said in a statement that many of the hundreds of British citizens inside Libya were stuck &ldquo;in Tripoli airport without immediate flights out of the country, following flight cancellations, closures of airspace and difficulties securing permits from the appropriate authorities.&rdquo;        

Mr. Hague said that landing clearances were urgently being sought for a charter flight within 48 hours and that the frigate Cumberland had been sent toward Libya from the eastern Mediterranean &ldquo;in case it is required to play a role in assisting British nationals.&rdquo;        

As a revolt grew against the four decades of authoritarian rule of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the United States also continued to urge its citizens to depart. The American Embassy in Tripoli, which ordered all nonessential personnel and family members to leave the country on Monday, could not be reached for comment. It was not immediately clear how many Americans were in Libya, which imposes strict visa requirements.        

Turkey, which mutually halted visa requirements with Libya last year, has more than 25,000 citizens in the country, most working in its booming construction sector.        

A Turkish Foreign Ministry spokesman said 2,141 Turks had returned since Saturday, after Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan spoke to Colonel Qaddafi to ask for their safe passage.        

Turkey sent military ships to escort two passenger boats headed to Benghazi, Libya&rsquo;s strife-torn second city, the Foreign Ministry said in a statement, and two more ships were scheduled to follow.        

Turkish Airlines expected Libyan approval shortly to send three planes to Tripoli and seven to Benghazi to help repatriate Turks, the Foreign Ministry spokesman said.        

Like Britain, Egypt, France, Germany and Italy, the Netherlands also sent charter military and civilian planes for its citizens. The Netherlands sent a Navy frigate in case Libya closed its airspace, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, Bengt van Loosdrecht, told Agence France-Presse.        

European countries were not of one mind about the level of alert. The German foreign minister, Guido Westerwelle, advised German citizens in Libya to leave, while his Italian counterpart, Franco Frattini, said that although Italy was helping those of its citizens who wanted to leave, they were not obliged to go.        

According to the Italian Foreign Ministry, an estimated 1,500 Italians live in Libya, which supplies a majority of Italy&rsquo;s natural gas and has many economic ties to Italy. Eni, the Italian firm that is Libya&rsquo;s largest foreign energy company, began evacuating workers on Monday.        

In a measure of the close relationship, Colonel Qaddafi called the Italian prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, to assure him that &ldquo;Libya is fine,&rdquo; Reuters reported, citing Libya&rsquo;s official Jana news agency.        

On Tuesday night, the first flight chartered by the Italian Foreign Ministry landed at Fiumicino airport in Rome, carrying 280 to 300 Italians. Many worked for Italian companies in Libya and appeared to have been instructed by their companies not to comment on the unrest. But their anxiety was still palpable.        

&ldquo;It&rsquo;s not an easy situation,&rdquo; said Fabio Bendia, 37, a Sicilian who works as a contractor for Eni about 100 miles outside Tripoli. &ldquo;While we were driving to the airport, a protester with a machete stopped us on the street.&rdquo;        

Another passenger described a scene of desperation at the Tripoli airport.        

&ldquo;The airport was frightening,&rdquo; said Nicola Cozzi, who has worked in Libya for three years as a technician for Sirti, an Italian telecommunications company. &ldquo;It&rsquo;s a small airport, and there were between 3,000 or 4,000 people there. We had to jump over people to get to our plane. It was totally chaotic.&rdquo;        

Enzo Presutti, 45, who also works for Sirti, said, &ldquo;The company told us to stay locked in our residence&rdquo; on the outskirts of Tripoli. &ldquo;We were locked there for two days,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;hearing shots at night.&rdquo;        

&ldquo;They were saying they were the Eastern tribes who were protesting, but it&rsquo;s not true,&rdquo; Mr. Presutti said. &ldquo;They reached as far as the city center. We could hear cars passing by and firing shots in the middle of the night.&rdquo;        

China evacuated 83 workers from Tobruk to the Egyptian border, where Chinese Embassy officials took them to the border town of Serum, the BBC reported.        
Rachel Donadio reported from Rome, and Sebnem Arsu from Istanbul. Gaia Pianigiani contributed reporting from Rome, Scott Sayare from Paris, and Victor Homola from Berlin.
