We first heard about Rewinery through a stray tweet from Instagram co-founder (and fellow Brazilian) Mike Krieger. Because it was late at the office, and we were working on culling TechCrunch Disrupt finalists, we thought that having three bottles of wine delivered to TechCrunch headquarters sounded like just about the best thing in the world .Except we (okay, who the fuck am I kidding here with this we shit? I) didnt quite fully understand the magnitude of disruption in the getting alcohol delivered to you quickly space. Rewinery was sold out! Okay I guess thats a good sign for them and probably a good thing for me too because Ive been making Disrupt decisions sober (were still looking at applications, so apply here if you get inspired by this, BTW).And because Rewinery cares about customer service they me sent the wine anyways, this morning. And after trying a sample glass or four with my teammates weve decided that this is probably the best startup in the whole world, barring that one that lets you connect with friends and family and share photos and stuff. And also that other one with the birds. That one is pretty good.Because who the heck doesn’t like to get drunk for cheap good wine? If you live in San Francisco (and soon NY, Boston, Seattle, Dallas and New Orleans), the service allows you to order a threesome of local boutique wines and have them delivered to you in about an hour. And because of some weird thing they do with the labels, pricing is at a 60% discount at $40, or at $35 if you tweet, Facebook share, or Google+ the site, which probably explains Kriegers tweet.  Founded by Brazilians Joana Kollier and Paulo Lerner, Rewinery has been around for two months and is obviously seeing a lot of demand Im guessing, as they ran out of wine late last night (they usually go until 2am). But seriously though, this mother helps people get quality drunk, quickly, whatd you expect?Almost too good to be true if you think about it.Editors note (wow, I can really write that shit legitimately now): This is an homage to another post that was seriously the most beautiful writing we had on the site today. I cant even begin to do it justice.
