Ive seen plenty of apps get yanked from Apples App Store in my day, but the news of an app called iKamasutra getting that same treatment really has me scratching my head. I wont rehash the entire story, but heres the gist of what happened:Apple pulled the iKamasutra from the App Store in February, and after a bit of sleuthing, creator Naim Cesur of NBITE managed to contact someone in Apples verification department. According to that Apple employee, the app was removed because of a suggestive app icon and a preponderance of detail in the images used (including the use of brown hair).Cesur and his team dutifully updated the apps with a revamped icon and less detailed imagery, and resubmitted it. And then they waited.Its worth noting that iKamasutra is hardly a stranger to this sort of thing. Shortly after creator Naim Cesur first submitted it for inclusion in Apples App Store in 2008, reviewers shot it down for featuring pornographic and obscene material, an interesting claim for an app that seemed to have sexual positions acted out by Keith Haring characters. The app was rejected yet again around the time when Apple introduced age restriction controls for apps, but was finally admitted into the store around December 2009.Meanwhile, Google too quickly yanked the iKamasutra app from the Google Play Store, and the end result was only slightly less unpleasant. After the app was pulled the team soon discovered the rationale behind the decision  according to an email from the Android Market Support team, the app violated the sexually explicit material provision of the content policy.NBITE eventually made the decision to trick out the Android version with the same toned-down visuals, and re-release it as a separate app in the Google Play Store where it remains. Meanwhile, theyre still being shut out of Apples walled garden.I had to see what all the fuss was about. With iKamaSutra unavailable from the iOS App Store, I turned to two of the three remaining versions of the app still in circulation  the original version in the Windows Phone Marketplace, and the similarly updated version found in the Google Play Store. I downloaded them, fired them up, and started digging.And what did I happen to find? Putting some mildly annoying music aside, not too much. Looking at the uncut version, I can sort of understand where Apple is coming from with regard to the offending gray lines. Theyre mainly there to add a bit of anatomical detail  think faces, the curves of someones back, a collarbone  but Apples original umbrage probably stems from the fact that they also delineate the occasional breast or buttock.But the bowdlerized version available in the Google Play Store is said to feature the same set of images in the updated version of the iOS app, and theres nothing explicit to be found here  just plenty of vague silhouettes enjoying each others company.Would I show them to my mother? Probably not. Would she be unduly disgusted or disturbed by seeing them? Absolutely not.From my vantage point, NBITE has complied with everything that Apple has asked of them (and more). Brown hair? Fixed. Potentially suggestive gray lines? Gone. So what exactly is Apples problem with the app now? Well, when Apple finally responded to the Cesur and the NBITE team, it was to say that there were too many Kama Sutra apps in the App Store.The thing is iKamasutra has been in the App Store for years, and has racked up something like 8 million downloads in that time (Cesur tells me that it wouldve easily exceeded 9 million by now had it not been pulled). That there are plenty of Kama Sutra apps in the App Store isnt really a question, and there are indeed plenty of lousy ones. Theres an argument to be made for good apps that happen to fall under that category though, and from my brief experience with it, iKamasutra certainly seems to be one of them.I suspect the real issue here is one of subjectivity. Even with age controls in place, Apple will never, ever let explicit content into the App Store, but I have to wonder about the criteria that Apples reviewers are using to judge cases like this one. I dont doubt that Apples review crew is doing what theyre doing for the sake of protecting their users, but I dont think enacting a sort of blanket policy is the way to go. Alternatives are surely tough to come by considering the sheer number of apps that require their attention, but a case like this raises some valid concerns about the consistency of the review process.
