Today Facebook co-opts the best thing about Myspace pages  rapid music discovery  by prominently adding a Listen button to musician Pages right next to the Like button. When clicked, the artists jams will start to play in your most frequently used Facebook music streaming app such as Spotify or MOG. If you havent authenticated any music apps, Facebook will prompt you to set up the one thats most popular with your friends, or around the world.Now with just a single click of an immediately visible button, visitors to Facebook Pages can sample an musicians sound and decide if they want to Like them. The button will help artists get more people to fall in love with their recorded music, and while streaming royalties are small, it could get inspire people to buy high margin t-shirts and concert tickets.The Listen button has just been rolled out to all musician Pages (try it here on Radioheads Page), but will only be available from the web for now. Hopefully a mobile version that fires up your native streaming apps is on the way. Down the line, Facebook could even add a similar Watch button to TV show and movie Pages that would launch Hulu or Netflix. While most engagement with Pages happens in the news feed, these buttons could make sure Page visits to media entities actually turn into media consumption.Depending on what streaming service you use youll hear a slightly different playlist. Spotify plays through the five most popular songs of an artist in a row, whereas Rdio starts playing a mix of songs through an artists radio station. Other apps like Slacker, Earbits, and Deezer are all compatible. I think Spotify has the right idea playing the most popular tracks first, and other apps might do well to put an artists best foot forward as well.Some developers might not be singing along with the latest feature, though. Musician profile apps like BandPage, ReverbNation, and FanRx have classically been the way you listen to music on a artists Facebook Page. But those apps are buried under one more click deep through app tiles located directly under the Listen button. In fact, BandPages app often labels itself listen. Facebook downplayed the threat when I asked, but if someone wants to hear a band right away, theyre likely to click the new Listen buttons and traffic to musician profile apps could suffer.
Overall, this is a smart build-out of Facebooks music partnerships from f8, and the synchronous Listen With feature it added in January. This could make Facebook Pages your first stop when you want to check out a new band. Its a great experience because now it doesnt matter what app you or a band prefers. You just go to their Facebook Page, find the Listen button thats in the same place every time, and crank it up.
