The OUYA could change the gaming scene. The low price Android gaming set-top box has the makings of something great. But as the old saying goes, content is king and without killer titles, the OUYA will have a hard time attracting consumers and developers alike. Enter OnLive.The two companies took to the interwebs this morning to announce OnLive will ship with OUYA. This means the little Android device will have access to first-run traditional gaming titles at launch. OnLives library currently includes Assassins Creed Revelations, L.A. Noire, The Darkness II and a ton more. Having access to this deep library will likely give the OUYAs creators a bit more time to court Android devs to make exclusive titles for their new gaming device.OUYA is rethinking the console business, making waves by using standard technology to make gaming for your living room accessible, affordable and more innovative than ever, wrote OnLives general manager Bruce Grove this morning on the companys blog. In OnLives case, we pioneered a groundbreaking, cloud-based system that instantly delivers games to any device on demand.Along with announcing OnLive, OUYA also revealed the latest design of its gaming controller. Dont worry about the colored buttons, the company noted on its Kickstarter page that theyre just placeholders. We wont leave out colorblind gamers.  , they said.OUYA is the latest Kickstarter superstar. With 5.5M in preorders on Kickstarter and 12 days to go, the device is exciting gamers and developers alike by bringing Android gaming to the living room. The company behind the product aims to bring it to market at just $99, a relative bargain in the space with the Xbox 360 and PS3 retailing for $199 and $249, respectively. Since the device is powered by a quad-core Tegra 3 SoC, the device should be able to produce quality graphics, too. However, in order to be successful, the OUYA needs killer games, which is something OnLive can provide in large quantities at launch.This is has been a good week for OnLive. Just days ago the gaming company helped the $99 Vizio Co-Star Google TV device sell out in just 12 hours. OnLive, and with that, alternative gaming systems in general, has had a hard time breaking consumers away from the big three gaming companies, but it seems, at least after this week, that times could be changing.
