After years, yes years, in various states of stealth mode, Seattle-based personalized news aggregation startup Wavii is finally launching to wide scale public consumption. Backed with a list of angel investors that reads like a whos who of todays tech industry  Ron Conway, Aydin Senkut, Mitch Kapor, Dave Morin, Shawn Fanning, Keith Rabois, Max Levchin, Paul Bucheit, Rick Marini, Joshua Schachter, and Mike Arringtons CrunchFund to name just a few  Wavii is built upon some big ideas, and naturally is going to be greeted with some high expectations. Will it possibly be able to live up to them? In short: Maybe yes, maybe no.But first lets talk about what exactly it is.Wavii provides a personalized feed of the news and current events that are relevant to you. The company likes to summarize what they do as making Facebook out of Google. You sign into the app, which is available on the web and on the iPhone app store, using Facebook connect. Based on the information gleaned from your profile there, Wavii will suggest topics or news providers that you should follow such as celebrities, publications, topics, companies, politicians and the like.Thats when Waviis magic is meant to start. The app provides a feed, based on your interests, full of things that have happened recently that matter to you. And any one of the items presented within the Wavii news blurb can be clicked on to bring up more information about a certain person or topic.Seeing Wavii in action is really impressive. The app combs the increasingly huge world wide web to bring together truly relevant data, something that anyone who has used a major search engine to look for information on breaking news knows is a really hard problem to solve (so many duplicate articles, so much spam, so much garbage.)Wavii has brought together a 25-person staff full of big data and machine learning experts, many of them alums from Amazon and Microsoft, and CEO Adrian Aoun tells me that the company has patents filed around the technology that makes its product possible. If youve ever tried to glean what you missed over the past few hours by scrolling through your Twitter stream, youll totally get how Wavii can be very useful. Will anyone really use it? As a reporter, Id personally love it if people found more places to source their news. But the reality is, most of us have a collection of favorite websites  Twitter, Facebook, Google News and Google Reader, The New York Times, Techmeme, TechCrunch (wink wink), for example  and thats where we get our information. Those established sites already have a huge advantage over any newcomer who tries to grab more attention. And its not like Wavii doesnt have direct competition from similarly sized startups as well  Trap.it and Uberpaper are just the first that come to mind, and there are many more where those come from. Getting traction right now is going to be a tough battle.Another issue, and an admittedly more idealistic one, is that Wavii is not pitching back into the principles of the open web that made its own app possible in the first place. When I asked Aoun if the company was planning on making its personalized feeds available via RSS, his answer was non-committal  if the users demand it, Wavii will consider it, maybe. And what happens if all of Waviis top news sources decide to join the paywall bandwagon? First of all, we dont think thats going to happen, Aoun said. Hes almost certainly right, but when youre thinking about building a long-term business  and gaining some good graces within the journalism community on top of which youve largely built your product  it could make sense to have a more thoughtful strategy.In summary, make no mistake: Waviis smart engineering and executive leadership, savvy IP strategy, and bold-faced-name investors should make sure that it will not be forgotten in the tech startup scene. The news aggregation space may be too crowded  and Waviis approach may be too broad  for the company to gain any real traction. But this is a solid effort, and it certainly wont be the last you hear from the company  or the very smart, and very plugged-in, people behind it.
