The Facebook Ecosystem Crunchup is closer than we think  just a little more than one week away! We have revealed the agenda and have announced a couple of Facebook all-stars, all of whom will be joining us on August 3rd at the beautiful Fox Theater in Redwood City. Those announced so far include Facebooks VP of Engineering Mike Schroepfer, Director of Product Management Peter Deng and Director of Developer Products Doug Purdy. There will be fireside chats, three panels ranging from topics on how to design and grow modern mobile apps to whats next for Facebooks platform, and even a special product tour by Doug Purdy.We are excited to let everyone know that following the Crunchup will be an official Office Hours and Happy Hour with Facebook. Of course, drinks will be served and you will get the chance to speak and mingle with the Facebook team. After our Office Hours, our annual summer party at August Capital will take place on the gorgeous Sand Hill Road.Check below for more details and grab your tickets while you can.The agenda thus far.Facebook Ecosystem CrunchUp12:00 PM Registration and Lunch1:00 PM Welcome1:10 PM Fireside Chat with Mike Schroepfer – Vice President of Engineering – Facebook1:40 PM Product Tour – Peter Deng – Director of Product Management – Facebook1:55 PM Panel: Designing and Growing A Modern Mobile App2:20 PM Break2:40 PM Product Tour – Doug Purdy – Director of Developer Products- Facebook3:05 PM Panel: Whats Next For Facebooks Platform3:30 PM Panel: Social Ads: Whats Working, Whats Not, and Wheres Everyone Else?4:00 PM Office Hours and Happy Hour with FacebookAdditional information below.Facebook Ecosystem Conference at the Fox Theater
August 3, 12:00 – 5:00 pm
Fox Theater
2215 Broadway Street, Redwood City CA 94063, Map
12:00 – 1:00 Registration and lunch
1:00 – 5:00 Facebook Ecosystem CrunchUp
Get Tickets @ Eventbrite: $180 based on availability. Tickets INCLUDE admission for one (1) to the August Capital party and expedited fast-pass door entry. You DO NOT need to purchase a separate August Capital Party ticket if you purchase a CrunchUp ticket. Tickets are non-transferable, based on availability. Limited seating for the CrunchUp. #crunchup7th Annual Summer Party at August Capital
August 3, 5:30 – 9:00 pm
2480 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park CA 94025, Map
Get Tickets @ Eventbrite: $50 based on availability. Tickets to be released weekly in batches. Stay tuned to TechCrunch for releases as they sell out quickly. #tcaugustcapitalIf you would like to sponsor the CrunchUp and the party at August Capital contact Leslie Hitchcock at sponsors@techcrunch.com
