Editors note: Jeremy Toeman is a founder of Dijit Media, a startup whose vision is to create the ultimate “hyperpersonalised social TV guide” mobile experience. Jeremy has over 11 years experience in the convergence of digital media, mobile entertainment, social entertainment, social TV and consumer technology working with companies like Sling Media, Mediabolic, Boxee, Clicker, VUDU, and more. Follow him on Twitter @jtoeman.Escape.Yes, thats it, escape, thats whole secret right there.  Some say entertainment but I believe that is merely a subset of escape, as an experience.  And to be clear, I do agree that people choose to watch television as a form of entertainment.  But when you consider a typical 4+ hour session of watching TV in a typical North American household, I think its a little beyond being entertained.Why are reality shows so popular?  Especially the trainwreck ones?  You escape your life to watch someone elses  oh, and the other person seems to be fighting more than you, more likely to end up in jail than you, and you are certainly, definitely, positively never ever going to get voted off some island.  Escape!Swing around to the other end of the spectrum, shows like Planet Earth on Discovery. You escape by watching hours of beautiful scenery and animals floating by. Plus the occasional alligator eating anything it wants doesnt hurt either. Its dreamlike in a way. Escape!Now on to technology and the race to the future of TV.  So far, the future bodes poorly. Based on the three key pillars of the future of TV, as we define it today:Smart TVs: Rather than turning on TVs and escaping into the programming, Smart TVs take time to boot up, then let users escape into the menus. Where they navigate and navigate and navigate to find some piece of content they want. And then they do it again, and again, and again. Its interruptive, frustrating, and far from escape (in a word: sucky).  And hence will have to evolve (or more hopefully in my opinion, devolve) into less smart and more simply connected TVs.Social TV: Instead of letting users escape into their shows, Social TV mandates that users pay attention to Twitter, Facebook, or some dedicated wonderful app, all for the benefit of chatter with other users. While this certainly does contribute to the social connection factor, which is a key attribute of the overall TV content lifecycle, its hard to see how this becomes sticky in the long run. Social TV needs to put less demands on a real time interaction, and instead find ways to create community, conversation, and discovery in a more passive, asynchronous fashion.Second Screen: Thanks to second screen apps, instead of escaping away from interactivity, users can, in some way, play along with the show they are watching. Im as much of an IMDB/Wikipedia nut as they come (then again, Ive been known to watch DVDs while listening to the directors commentary tracks), but even I dont feel the need to know who every actor is, what other parts theyve played, and what other nuance about each and every scene happened.  And I certainly dont think it needs to happen while Im watching.  Yes, I like many others pull out a second screen device (hint: iPad) frequently while watching TV.  And just like many others, Im using it to play Draw Something (another form of escape), not read obscure trivia (effort/work).  The moment someone pulls out their phone or iPad to interact with the show they are watching, they stop watching the show.My newest golden rule of creating TV technology and experiences is this: If the product doesnt take escape into account in a major way, it is utterly doomed to fail.So to TV, device, service, and app makers  think about how people really do watch TV. They arent changing, no matter how much you try to force it down their throats. Yes, you can get some limited adoption, and hopefully thatll be enough to build a business around. But more likely is itll be a novelty, gimmick, or fad, and wont last as many seasons as Fletchs amazingly disappointing talk show.
