Its been a while since weve heard from the social fitness mavens at Fitocracy  theyve been doing plenty of behind-the-scenes work, and now theyre ready to share the fruits of their labor. After spending over a year hunkered down in private beta mode, the RPG-esque exercise tracker and 500 Startups graduate has finally opened its doors to the general public.Heres their gist, if you havent heard it already  after a workout, you log all of your exercises and receive points for them. Earning enough points will cause you to level up, while earning points in certain exercises unlocks new achievements. The service also includes quests for the particularly motivated, along with a strong social component to get users commiserating and sharing workout tips.In short, it aims to rewire the way users think about exercise, and Fitocracy CEO Brian Wang tells me the formula has struck a chord with nearly 300,000 users.The team kicked things off yesterday when they launched a revamped version of the Fitocracy site  all of the fitness-tracking functionality remains the same, but has been redesigned to feel cleaner and more spacious. Theres also a more pronounced focus on the users and the content they create, as profile pictures are now prominent and user exercise logs are bigger and more streamlined. According to Wang, its all meant to build user engagement, which should come in handy for their future plans to generate more revenue (all of which are on the down-low for now).Heres my thing though  while the revamped website is a nice touch (albeit with a few kinks that need to be worked out), the new Fitocracy iOS app is really where its at. You see, the Fitocracy of yore only really worked well if you were using a computer to do all your exercise logging. The problem is, of course, its very unlikely that youre packing your laptop to the gym everyday.When Fitocracy tiptoed into the mobile space with a phone-friendly version of the website, it was (and still is) a decidedly barebones affair. The sites basic mechanics still worked, but absent was the ability to interact with Fitocracy’s dedicated community of exercise junkies. It was sort of like exercising in an echo chamber  you got the physical benefits of working out, but you were unable to see how much harder you pushed than your schlubby best friend.The new iOS app is a considerable step forward, and finally lets users get full functionality out of the service without having to dash to a computer. The track button placed prominently along the apps dock, and the act of adding a new set of, say, diamond pushups, is a breeze.That button is also bounded by options to view your friend feed and the groups youre part of  what makes Fitocracy Fitocracy is that strong social component, and its great to see it find its way to the mobile side of the service. Want to keep tabs on your rival and his huge exercise score? Feel free. Would you rather shoot an encouraging messaging to a buddy whos been having a tough time lately? Go right ahead.Oh, and did I mention that the app is pretty damned handsome too? Fitocracy users have probably jumped on it already, but the app is now live in Apples App Store.
