Social enterprise company Jive has been providing a social collaboration product to businesses for some time now; and many customers have been using the platform as an intranet of sorts, says Jive. But today, Jive has taken what customers have liked with its existing internal social networks, and packaged up right capabilities and services with the launch of a dedicated social intranet for the enterprise.As you may know, Jive is one of the giants on the social enterprise space. Modeled to offer Facebook-like features to enterprises, Jive’s software combines computing with social collaboration to offer fully-featured, internal social networks for businesses. Its suite of applications help businesses collaborate on a variety of tasks, including holding discussions, communication, sharing documents, blogging, running polls, social networking features and more.While it sounds outdated, Jive says that many businesses rely on traditional, stale intranets for company-wide communication and team collaboration. Jive is hoping to disrupt this space by offering a more social intranet platform that includes gamification elements as well as a deep integration with Microsoft applications.The Jive, collaborative intranet includes document creation and editing, content sharing, search as well as intelligent recommendations and filtered activity streams. The platform also integrates with Microsoft Outlook, Office, and SharePoint; has enterprise-level controls for security, privacy, permissions and compliance; and supports access from the Blackberry, Android, iPhone, and iPad.And powered by Bunchball, Jive is adding gamification to its products, including its internal social networks for companies as well as intranets. So now managers can create and implement role-based missions and challenges, status levels and badges, team-based goals and competitions, receive real-time feedback, and coordinate fulfillment of virtual or physical rewards. In fact, the module tracks over a hundred specific Jive actions that can be used to define challenges and determine user rewards.Jives new feature enables customers to design incentive programs, or missions, for different types of users and groups within a Jive network. Game mechanics can be personalized to motivate and reward people based on precise user segmentation including geography, roles, or departments.For Jive, tackling social intranets makes sense considering the companys existing solutions were already being used for the same purpose. But other companies like Yammer and even Box are also playing in the space and will provide formidable competition to Jive.
