It was only a few days ago that we brought in co-founders Unity Stoakes and Steven Krein to discuss their new startup Academy, StartUp Health. Its an entirely free, long-term program that is aiming to equip developers, designers, medical professionals and entrepreneurs with the skills and resources necessary to transform the healthcare industry. Hearing this, and knowing that the medical industry more so than most is in dire need of some innovation, we simply couldnt resist checking out the inaugural class launch, where ten new healthcare startups came together in NYC to build out their companies and change the way we take care of ourselves. As youll see in the video, we had a chance to chat out the new services and companies with a few of the entrepreneurs, but there are actually ten startups in all stages of development working under the StartUp Health umbrella. Hesky Kutscher, for example, has a company called MotherKnows, which has raised $1.7 million in Series A from First Round Capital, Charles River Ventures, Giza Ventures, and Band of Angels. The service keeps all of your childrens medical records in a safe, secure, online space where you can access them at any time, for any reason. Could come in handy when your kid gets some random stomach bug on vacation. George Zamanakos is building a remote monitor (currently in stealth) to help physicians assist with high-risk pregnancy without the mother ever having to leave her home. Oh, and hes doing it for much, much cheaper than anything thats currently on the market. Another startup called BrainPaint, founded by Bill and Cora Scott, gives clinicians and therapists the ability to use neurofeedback in training patients brains to be more adaptive and healthy. Not only is the process cost-effective, but Cora said that the results are normally permanent. Meanwhile, Bronwyn Spira, with the help of her husband Mark Lieberman, is building a mobile company called Force Therapeutics for physical therapists that will transform the way they deliver care to their patients.Some of the entrepreneurs in Startup Healths first class are very young, as tech entrepreneurs tend to be, with one even leaving Harvard to come transform healthcare. Faheem Zaman, a Thiel Fellow, is making home care more accessible just in time for baby boomers to migrate into the core demographic. The company is still in stealth mode so we dont know too, too much just yet, but as with all of these healthcare startups, well be keeping you in the loop as they grow. To learn more about any one of the Startup Health entrepreneurs and companies, click here. 
