Lets say youre in a serious relationship, but you work all the time and youre long-distance. How do you stay close to the other person? Ive personally had this situation for the last year and a half. My girlfriend and I use Skype, email, our phones, Facebook, and everything else we can to stay connected. Weve even been using Instagram as a two-person social network to share photos about what were up to each day.But now theres an app to solve this exact problem. Its called Pair, and its packed with the features you see in private social networks like Path, but designed for two people.The interface starts out deceptively simple. You start by taking a photo of yourself, and then shooting a quick video on your phone (iOS only for now), that you send with the invite to your significant other.Once they pair with you, youll be put into the app together. The interface is organized like text messages. You appear on the left, your partner on the right. But youll get an impressive range of options for how to stay in touch. Theres simple messaging, videos and photos (complete with the option to touch them up in Camera+). But theres also a thinking of you button, which is a simple notification thats most similar to Facebooks classic Poke.And, theres a draw feature. So you can scribble all the silly pictures and sweet little ditties that you want.The Y Combinator-backed company also provides a bunch of other smart and subtle features. A button at the top lets you turn on Facetime with a single swipe. A feature called thumbkissing shows your partners thumbprints whenever theyre touching the screen, and both phones will vibrate if your thumbs are on the same place. You can also create shared to-do lists and set reminders for birthdays and anniversaries. A Moments section contains all your shared photos.The main downsides, at least in the opinion of my girlfriend, are the following: you cant unselect photos, you cant create captions, the text from multiple messages gets mushed together and makes you look like a babbling loon. And thats not all, in her opinion (at this point Im just transcribing the rants that she left for me in the app).The search feature is nice. But would be way more useful if they enabled photo captions. Who the fuck searches for text blurbs? If I used search, itd probably be to locate a photo. And if Im using an app called Pair with one other person, isnt it implied that Im thinking of that person? Otherwise, why wouldnt I be posting my brilliance to Facebook?Maybe she needs to start blogging about tech startups or something. And cofounder Oleg Kostour tells me that theyre aware of these issues and working on them. But it doesnt matter. Because despite all her complaints, this app is way better than our kludged Instagram setup and Skype and everything else. Get used to it, honey!
