The Yakuza, Chinese Triads and more. Theres just so many more mafias for Benchmark-backed mobile gaming studio Red Robot Labs to infiltrate.So the gaming company, which has made a huge bet on location, said its partnering with Next Media to enter Asian markets. (Yes, Next Media is the Hong Kong-based owner of that Taiwanese animation subsidiary thats become infamous for its off-key and often totally bizarre news shorts on Tiger Woods and more.)Next Media is investing $5 million to build titles on the companys R2 gaming platform while Red Robot is using the deal to bring its flagship title Life is Crime to Asia. Red Robot already has more than $10 million in funding from well-known investors including Benchmark Capital, Playdom co-founder Rick Thompson, former Facebook vice president Chamath Palihapitiya and Shasta Ventures.Chief executive Mike Ouye, who has a social gaming-heavy background with stints at Playdom and Crowdstar, says that Next Media will be the first of many developers to build on the companys platform. Like many gaming companies, Red Robot is trying build a platform that will make it less vulnerable to the hits-based nature of the gaming industry.Started at the beginning of 2011, Red Robot has so far tried to rethink mafia-themed role-playing games for mobile phones. Unlike other comparable mafia-themed RPGs like Storm8s iMobsters, Funzios Crime City or Addmireds iMob, Red Robot put a heavy emphasis on including location. Players can battle each other over local turf and rise up to become a regional mob boss. With gaming veteran and former EA vice president Pete Hawley as chief product officer, the games art also had a lot of polish compared to other titles at the time.After launching at Penny Arcade Expo last fall, it came out with a strong start on Android and has held in the top 25 grossing on Googles platform. On iOS, which is far more lucrative and competitive at the same time, its a different story. The game is in the 200s or so on the grossing lists.A debut in Asia could change things, however. Revenue per user in markets like Japan and Korea often outstrip what a developer might see in Western countries. Life is Crime will come to Hong Kongs market today, and then to Taiwan and Japan shortly.And for absurditys sake, here are a few of Next Medias greatest hits. ?
