There are two sayings on the back of every Apple product: Designed By Apple in California and Assembled in China. These statements attempt to say that even though the products might be assembled in a different country, Apple is an American company  a fact Apple proclaimed loudly today with a new web page titled Creating jobs through innovation.Apple has been under fire lately regarding its overseas manufacturing partners. Apple hired the Fair Labor Association to conduct voluntary audits of the final assembly partners, including Foxconns massive Asian facilities. But consumers and activists alike arent buying it. Its a smokescreen, they say. Foxconn will just hide the children and give everyone a new pillow prior to inspectors arrival. This has rightly put Apple on the defensive.To a growing minority Apple is viewed as just another unethical company employing cheap overseas labor to assemble its wares while filling its coffers with the savings. Groups are calling for radical but compassionate actions to improve the working conditions in China and abroad. Apple will not deny its products are assembled by Foxconn and others, but its still an American company and responsible for a large chunk of jobs in America. Apple is essentially stating today that even though your iPhone was made in China, the company supports American households as well.The page launched by Apple today breaks down employment numbers. There are 47,000 people employed directly by Apple in the U.S. There are Apple employees in all 50 states. iOS developers account for 210,000 jobs in the U.S., Apple says.There are also 257,000 employees in support roles at different companies. As Apple notes, this number is comprised of many jobs, including employees at Corning making the iPhone glass, and the FedEx man delivering your MacBook Air. Apple also includes third party consumer sales staff, transportation professionals and healthcare associates in this estimate (dont forget about the bloggers!). This estimate no doubt came from a standard employment multiplier applied to Apples base employment and U.S. expenditures.Apple goes on to state that there are 27,350 Apple Store employees in 44 states, 9,700 U.S.-based AppleCare Advisors with 2,000 of them working out of their homes. As Apple says, they directly and indirectly employ a lot of Americans. But they should. Theyre the most valuable company in the world with more cash on hand than many entire countries.Im not part of the pitchfork-wielding mob randomly shouting outside Apple Stores. Apple doesnt employ the people that build its products; Foxconn and others pay those peoples wages. I think the idea of an ethically-built iPhone is a pipe dream  but I am also glad there are people naive enough to believe in it.Massive entities like Apple need accountability. Unyielding affection leads to corruption. Fanboys need haters to bring the conversation back to reasonable territory. For every MG Siegler, there needs to be a Mike Daisey. The call to build an ethical iPhone will fail, but it will also improve the working conditions and wages for hundreds of thousands of assembly workers. In fact, Foxconn raised the base workers salary just days before the first inspectors arrived last month.Theres a movement in America to bring the country back to its manufacturing roots and Apple is one of the prime examples, thanks to its recent success. Lets get Americans to build products used by Americans, the movements activists yell. But thats not how a global company like Apple, General Motors, IBM, or Nike survives. The same plants contracted by Apple are also used by HP, Dell, Sony, Amazon and nearly every other consumer electronic brand. Apple will never build a manufacturing facility in Americas heartland to manufacture and assemble iPhones. Chinese factory-cities have a head start of decades and billions in investment, and America isnt going to catch up by putting up a few poky facilities here and there.Apple is on the defensive. This page proves it. But the company is also one of Americas greatest success stories. Three guys started Apple 35 years ago and it is now the worlds most valuable company. Apple added 7,800 jobs in 2011. Its growing and helping Americans grow as well. The point they are trying to make is that while iPhones may not be made in America, Apple was, and though it has to rely on China to get you your iPhone for less than a grand, its still giving back to the country that made the company possible.The Future Of FoxconnOur own John Biggs spent several days at Foxconns massive Shenzhen campus. Read about his experience here. Its worth your time.
