One year after the infamous Fab.com reset from a social network for gay men to a powerhouse design shopping site, CEO Jason Goldberg is taking a look back on the companys progress. Staying true to the startups one thing as he calls it (design, obviously), the company has grown to more than 2.5 million members, up from 1.5 million at the end of last year. Thats 67 percent growth in the first two months of 2012, Goldberg notes.And last month was Fabs best yet, beating out both the holiday sales of December and the pre-holiday rush which contributed to Novembers record-breaking month.While Fab doesnt break out exact sales figures for these time frames, the company tells us theyre now on their way toward $100 million in revenue this year, to give you an idea.Fab is seeing some decent engagement among its users, too. 25,000 customers have made five or more purchases on the site, and repeat customers account for two-thirds of the companys business.Facebook referrals are helping to drive some of that business  Fab says that its social shopping integrations now account for 15 percent of its daily traffic, and Facebook visits have doubled since December.But perhaps more important than social, is mobile. Today, more than 40 percent of Fabs usage comes from its mobile apps, launched in October. And heres something else: mobile shoppers purchase more often and with bigger basket sizes than Fabs web shoppers do. Why is that? Maybe because Fabs mobile applications are always on hand, and notify you when those addictive, time-sensitive flash sales are about to start? The notifications draw you into the app with a sense of urgency that feels (at least in this shoppers opinion), more enticing than when browsing Fab on the desktop.Then theres the latest feature to hit Fab.com: the weekly shops, which went live in January before arriving on mobile in February. These shops allow customers to browse storefronts which are organized around product categories, as opposed to by designers. Already, the shops impact is being felt, as they contributed more than 10 percent of Fabs sales in February.For the company, this sales growth has led to growth of the Fab team itself. This time last year, Fab had four full-time employees in New York. Today, it has over 200 people working in N.Y., Berlin, Pune and Deinze.Fab.coms pivot reset, is one of those success stories other startups hope to learn from. So whats the secret? That goes back to that one thing Goldberg referred to.The team scrapped its 150K-member social network so it could focus on the intersection of these three things: what they were most passionate about, what they believed they could realistically be the best in the world at, and what they were certain they could develop into a big business in a market ripe for destruction. At the end of the day (or rather, the nightand the wine), they realized their one thing is design.It sounds like such a simple formula, but finding that thing  and then executing well on it  is something thats easier said than done.As for whats next for Fab? Golberg says the company has Amazon-scale plans:We’re building a business for the decades, he says. This is just one year into working on it and nine months into operating it.
