They say when it rains, it pours. Thats not usually a good thing, but when its raining money, things are a little different. That was the case at Kickstarter yesterday, where they had their biggest day of funding ever, beating the record set the day before yesterday.It was also the day that marked the first Kickstarter project to break $1,000,000 in funding. And the day that marked the second project to hit that number. And New Yorks city council endorsed the site as a way to highlight community projects that need funding. Oh, and theyre on Portlandia.Definitely the biggest day in the sites history, then. Theyve commemorated it with a great blog post that might just make your Friday a little better. It also brings up a few new and interesting questions regarding how the site should or will be used. But first, watch the Portlandia clip:Double Fine, whose adventure game drove much of the funding sum (and is up to nearly $1.5M alone as of this writing), is different from many projects weve seen. Often Kickstarter is thought of as a venue for people with very limited means but a good idea to execute that idea. The Elevate Dock is a good example of this.But Double Fine is an established game studio with office space, employees, and many products under its belt? Why should it go to Kickstarter? Well, Tim Schafer explains that in the video, at least for this project: no publisher would go near a point and click adventure game, but they knew at least some people wanted it. Reasonable enough.The question, really, is why we even question it. If people want to make something, and people want to fund it, why shouldnt it be on Kickstarter? The easy stuff  cool accessories or small devices that need a little capital to get started  are just the first wave. Why not pothole repair on a neighborhood street? Why not a new coffee shop? Why not a feature film? Some of these have been tried, no doubt, and perhaps failed  but the principle is sound. If you want to make it, and others want you to make it, this is a way for you to connect.Congratulations to the Kickstarter, Elevation Dock, and Double Fine teams. Great way to end the week.
