Yelp built its ad business by attracting users that know what they want, just not who to buy it from  exactly when ads are most effective. Thats why I find todays VentureBeat piece by Rocky Agrawal titled Yelp advertising is a rip-off for small advertisers to be ridiculous. His sources say Yelp charges a $600 CPM, or 1,000-times the standard online CPM rate.Yes, these ads are expensive, especially for low-end restaurants. But for lawyers, dentists, jewelers, and mechanics with a high lifetime average revenue per customer, turning someone searching for their services on Yelp into a loyal customer is no rip-off, it can drive big ROI.Yelp sits at the end of the purchase funnel in the demand fulfillment stage. Users often already have a need for a business services and are prepared to spend. They go to Yelp to determine which service provider will get their money. When a user searches for dentists in San Francisco, Yelp local ads let advertisers put their own search result with a link to their Yelp profile at the top of the results.For restaurants, a conversion could bring in $20 to $50 in revenue, and that customer will eat somewhere else tomorrow where they could get hooked. For a high CPM to provide ROI, restaurants need lots of customers to be swayed by their ads and turn into regulars. Yelp local ads might not work for them.However, for more expensive financial, medical, automotive, real estate, travel, home, and professional services, these stakes are much higher. A single visit from a customer could earn an advertisers hundreds of dollars, their long-term business could be worth thousands, and theyre unlikely to switch if satisfied. If their local ads on Yelp net them just a few or even 1 new customer, they could earn significant long-term ROI.Agrawal compares Yelp ads to Facebook ads, which doesnt make sense because Facebook users arent actively looking for the service the advertiser is selling. He also says Yelp is overcharging advertisers. Its only overcharging if the ads dont produce results, not just because theyre priced much higher than less-targeted display ads.If you want proof that Yelp provides value to advertisers, just look at Yelps S-1 filing to go public. It notes the massive growth and return-customer rate for its local ads business:from the quarter ended December 31, 2010 to the quarter ended December 31, 2011, the number of active local business accounts increased by 109% from approximately 11,300 to 23,700. Of the approximately 23,700 total active local business accounts for the quarter ended December 31, 2011, approximately 15,800, or approximately 67%, were existing advertisers from which we recognized local advertising revenue in the immediately preceding 12-month period. (Page 56)Yelp had a 67% return advertiser rate, and that would have been much higher if it hadnt DOUBLED its local advertiser count in that year. If Yelp ads are such a rip-off, why are advertisers coming back for more? Yelp cant say because its in its pre-IPO quiet period. It shouldnt need to, though. It charges justifiably high CPMs, and is going to IPO, because its ads appear at the perfect time. And they work.
