I just donated $40 to Wikipedia, because I promised myself I would every time I poked fun at its holiday donation drive and then just never got around to it. Did you know that you could actually donate during the off-season (Via the covert Donate to Wikipedia link at the far left of each individual entry page)? I didnt, before I asked Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales whether it was possible to donate in the off-season. Spoiler alert, it is.My 40 bucks got me, in addition to the very sweet Thank You letter below, the satisfaction of paying duly for something I use all the freakin time.Dear Alexia,You are amazing, thank you so much for donating to the Wikimedia Foundation!This is how we pay our bills  its people like you, giving five dollars, twenty dollars, a hundred dollars. My favourite donation last year was five pounds from a little girl in England, who had persuaded her parents to let her donate her allowance. Its people like you, joining with that girl, who make it possible for Wikipedia to continue providing free, easy access to unbiased information, for everyone around the world. For everyone who helps pay for it, and for those who cant afford to help. Thank you so much.I know its easy to ignore our appeals, and Im glad that you didnt. From me, and from the tens of thousands of volunteers who write Wikipedia: thank you for helping us make the world a better place. We will use your money carefully, and I thank you for your trust in us.Thanks,Sue Gardner
Wikimedia Foundation Executive DirectorThis year the Wikimedia Foundation raised $20 million during its high gear donation drive, to cover a total budget of $28.3 million  the deficit is made up in grants and off-season donations. Money raised is spent on things like servers, bandwidth, maintenance and staff. Here are the financials if you want to dig deeper.During the online encyclopedias blackout protest of SOPA, many off us felt the pang of You dont know what youve got until its gone when we wanted to know something about, lets say, Exponential Growth and that info wasnt readily available. Google would be a bunch of spam if not for Wikipedia.I personally use Wikipedia more than I use makeup, multiple times a day. And I spend a good amount of money on makeup, AT LEAST $40 on a mascara/lippy combo.What do you use Wikipedia more than? Do the math 
