This funny little piece of email just got forwarded to me From: ****, ***
Date: February 3, 2012 10:11:04 AM PST
To: Greg Barto [@ TechCrunch]
Subject: NapQuestHey GregIt is one of our goals to get a nap room set-up in every location. Basically, its a closed room where we would put a chaise or couch, darken the windows and allow people to nap as the [sic] like. This is high on the priority list for Arianna and your office is one of the few where we dont yet have it in place.When I visited your office on Wednesday, I looked around. It strikes me that the room (3rd office from the back corner) might be a good choice?There are currently a couple of desks in there we would need to remove. Then I would purchase the furniture and arrange to have the window glass tinted.What do you think? I just need your agreement to move ahead and I will coordinate making it happen. Let me know.Thanks,**** ****
Sr. Facilities Manager, PA/SF
Corporate Services, AOL Inc.
395 Page Mill Road Palo Alto, CA 94306After making a bunch of nap room jokes and laughing uncontrollably like a hyperactive child around the office, Ive finally figured out why this high Arianna priority (LOL) strikes me as so funny  other than the fact THAT IT IS ACTUALLY CALLED NapQuest.This is Silicon Valley, where we herald founders like Jack Dorsey for working 16 hour days (at not one, but two! companies). People at startups are never not working.Silicon Valley absolutely, positively doesnt need a nap room because in theory we dont sleep, let alone nap (and if we do need to nap  like in an emergency  we take that shiz home, far far away from hungry competitors!).Please Aol Mr. Sr. Facilities Manager, take that money and buy us a bunch of Diet Coke to drink late at night or that great beef jerky we used to have or a copyediting slave intern or passes to Burning Man or anything but a room specifically designed for being less productive.Oh sure, it could be worse. At least theyre not trying to install one of these things. Update: PandoDaily founder Sarah Lacy weighs in on the tragic potential fate of her old office.Image: Roger Jegg  Fotodesign-Jegg.de
