The Occupy movement, or rallying cry, or whatever you want to call it, is by its nature decentralized. By refusing to come together under one banner other than the word Occupy, theyve both diluted their message and allowed it to spread more quickly. You dont need an Occupy license to occupy a banks lobby in Kansas City, but at the same time theres a natural question of whether one occupation is related to another.Political considerations aside, the point is that Occupy might benefit from a recognizable face. On this front, some faction of the movement has decided to do a little branding, but in keeping with the democratic, bottom-up nature of the organization (or rather disorganization), theyve opted to run a contest and let the official logo be selected by popular vote. Its a great application of web technology to an interesting problem, and will probably prove to be a memorable case study in an increasingly common phenomenon: the necessity of branding an emergent movement or pattern on the internet.Its something that has already been faced by, for example, Anonymous. Like Occupy, Anonymous is necessarily decentralized and in a way leaderless  but there are obviously leaders and centers, like @anonops and a few other official sources. But then theres the Guy Fawkes mask and the empty suit, both certainly symbols of Anonymous by common consent, though whether they emerged naturally or were simply in the right place at the right time (and whether theres any difference between those two) isnt clear.Or think about the SOPA/PIPA protests. While everyone seemed to figure out a good way to express the concept of censorship on their site or avatar, the lack of a single unifying phrase, graphic, or general brand (loosely speaking) was conspicuous, considering the extraordinary cross-cultural and cross-community agreement on the issue.Which brings us to Occupy. The logos being submitted are the usual mix of free fonts, corporate-looking nonsense, and the occasional good idea. For the record, I like the one at top left, and these:But Im suspicious of the whole concept. The problem to me is not Occupy-specific. Its simply that emergent phenomena dont respond well to efforts to define them. The reason no single visual metaphor appeared for SOPA was because there was no naturally propagating icon around which people could gather. There was no burning monk, no Kent State photograph, no graphic or sketch or person that naturally expressed and associated itself with the movement. The closest thing was the censor bar or redacted text, which was sort of good enough but didnt adequately encompass the ideas behind the opposition.With Occupy as well, I think that efforts to create an identity for it will fail, because identity only emerges from collective action. It happens naturally or it doesnt happen at all. I think this will be demonstrated more frequently over the next few years as activism, social change, and more everyday things as well become memetic and emergent. A logo will be picked for @occupy and for use on official communiques, whatever that might mean to them. But what Occupy and Anonymous and STOP SOPA and all the rest need isnt a logo, its a symbol. Those arent quite as easy to come by.[hat tip to GigaOm for setting me thinking]
