AngelList was founded back in 2010 as a community for startups  part social network, part communication tool  designed to connect first-time entrepreneurs with respected angel investors. At the time, veteran venture capitalist and angel investor  Mark Suster said that it was one of the most important contributions by the Web to angel investing to come along in awhile. He elaborated in a TechCrunch post in February. Many agreed, and some disagreed.Regardless, AngelList got hot in 2011, and Naval Ravikant and Babak Nivis startup community was oft-talked about as a service with potential to transform dealflow and give young entrepreneurs access to hard-to-reach investors  with value proposition being evident on both ends, for founder and investor. In the latter half of the year, they partnered with Seedcamp, which combines an early-stage seed investment fund with a world-class mentoring program for European entrepreneurs, and opened up their data set to access by developers with the launch of its API.The introductions were many last year, and to get the year started off right, AngelList is giving users a chance to review all the craziness that 2011 had to offer, as it this weekend soft-launched its 2011 Yearbook. The Yearbook offers the public an opportunity to get a more detailed look at AngelLists activity over the course of last year, with CrunchBase data to boot. The top line numbers show that it was indeed an active year for the community, as 500 startup joined with more than 10 introductions facilitated by each, 2,500 investors joined the community, resulting in a total of 12,500 introductions during 2011.  AngelLists Yearbook allows users to drill down into the data by category (Education, Health Care, Hardware, Mobile, etc.) and by location (Silicon Valley, New York, LA, etc.), which gives one a great opportunity to parse the communitys data set in manageable chunks. The Yearbook also features an addictive Shuffle, which will take you to the landing page for a randomly-chosen startup. You can then view their profile from there.From the Yearbooks main page, if one selects a startup, youll be able to view the name of the company, their tagline and category, the team, and most recent news. On the right side of the page, theres a timeline with relevant info presented chronologically, complete with funding information pulled from TechCrunchs very own CrunchBase. Its a fantastic resource, which gives AngelList fanatics a great way to see year-in-review information, along with relevant funding information  whos funding, how much theyve invested, and when. Look out, its a great resource, but also a dangerous time sink. For more, check out the Yearbook in action here.
