The top executives in todays largest corporations not only travel in style, but they have access to an absurd array of perks while they travel, from awards and complimentary products to discounts on just about everything. On the IPO road show for his company VarsityBooks (now part of eFollet.com), serial entrepreneur Eric Kuhn remembers being amazed by witnessing firsthand the rates and privileges that top executives at the underwriting investment banks received. After leading VarsityBooks to be twice-listed as a public company on NASDAQ (the only company Im aware of to do so), Kuhn got out in 2006 and started FoundersCard in 2009  determined to bring the same rewards and opportunities to entrepreneurs and founders  the true risk-takers and value-creators, he says.Kuhn wanted to create a dedicated community for entrepreneurs, which would provide them with the kind of exclusive rates, elite programs, and networking opportunities that are traditionally reserved for top executives at public companies. Capitalizing on the success of Im-more-exclusive-than-you programs like American Express Centurion Card, also known as the black card, Kuhn made FoundersCard into an invite-only membership community for entrepreneurs and founders known for its eponymous card shown above. FoundersCard is now entering its second year in existence and today has over 5,000 members, who, for an annual fee of about $495, receive discounts and deals from a whole mess of businesses, like 10 percent off of everything at AT&T, 10 percent off Groundlink cabs, instant Silver access on Virgin Atlantic (and the ability to fast-track to Gold after buying two first class tickets), 50 percent off domains at Hover, and a free account at Shoprunner  to name a few. In total, the startup has about 96 companies offering its members benefits, including 44 lifestyle companies, 16 travel companies, and 36 business companies.But not wanting to stink of too much exclusiveness, FoundersCard has set up its admissions so that any entrepreneur is welcome to apply. Of course, what good is that if you dont feel like youre part of a club? The company says it is careful to admit only those that it thinks will benefit from its offers and actually get something useful out of them in busy, high travel-rate lifestyles. Meaning that FoundersCard currently accepts about 70 percent of its applicants. Its actually a tough balance to strike, and so far they seem to be doing it fairly well.As to how its membership breaks down, FoundersCard has given TechCrunch its own exclusive look at its cross-section: Today, aggregate, 55 percent of their members are in technology, 16 percent in entertainment, 6 percent in fashion, 9 percent in finance, with the rest falling into that pesky Other category. In addition, 32 percent are in the angel-backed phase of funding, 18 percent have self-funded ventures, 5 percent are part of public companies, and 32 percent are part of venture-backed startups. The average age of members is 35, 94 percent are the founder (or a C-level executive) at their companies, 67 percent are men, 33 percent are women, average net worth is $1.7 million, average company size is 17, and just for good measure, their average number of Twitter followers is 10,000. (In terms of revenues, members companies break down as such: 8 percent have under $1 million, 41 percent between $1 million and $10 million, 24 percent between $10 million and $25 million, 18 percent between $25 million and $100 million, and 9 percent have over $100 million.) Next up in 2012 for FoundersCard? Turning what domestic traction its been able to gain into an international business. This year, the startup plans to begin catering to more businesses around the world, and is specifically looking to expand its hotel network (which now includes approximately 111), as it will be adding 50+ new properties (like Four Seasons, Viceroy W Hotels, Mandarin Oriental, Kimpton, and Park Hyatt) in over 20 new locations, including Anguilla, Berlin, Istanbul, Munich, Melbourne, Prague, Vienna, Zurich, and more. In fact, on Friday, FoundersCard launched a deal with Cosmopolitan Vegas. Because FoundersCard monetizes based on membership fees, it doesnt charge commission or take lead generation cuts from the discounts and deals it offers on hotels, which allows it to offer better ongoing rates and upgrades (and flexible cancellation policies) than most.Now, if youre like me, some of these fancy deals wont exactly apply to you, as I dont find myself jetting to Dubai on business as frequently as Id like. But, 15 percent off TaskRabbit and 20 percent off Zipcar, for example, and perks on Virgin flights and credit from GiltCity? You can see why, especially when the membership rates drop to $295 when you are recommended to FoundersCard by a current member, these fees quickly pay themselves off. Plus, you get to feel like youre an exclusive member of a hip, young entrepreneurs club  and that right there is priceless. Or just a reason for geeks to feel special, the jurys still out.Alex Payne, the guy formerly responsible for developing the Twitter API and current Co-founder and CTO of Simple told us he was into it from the get-go: Ive needed to do a ton of travelling for work and family over the last 18 months, and the discounts on hotels and airfare have really helped make that less painful. FC does a great job curating the discounts they offer; if Im travelling to an unfamiliar city, I know I can rely on the hotel options to be pretty high-quality.Micah Baldwin Co-founder and CEO of Graphicly, too, is a fan: Ive been a member of FoundersCard since it first launch  and its been amazing in helping us at Graphicly keep costs low while growing our business. I spent almost 200 days on the road in the first year of Graphicly, and it was amazing to have a benefit like this with me, he said.Some others, who wished to remain anonymous said that, while they werent sure that FoundersCard was worth the price of admission for tiny companies not raking in the revenue, they did throw some good parties. Networking events with other founders of the same brood are always good for business, even if youre not in the air for 200 days a year. And maybe thats a lesson for Groupon: Even if you cant make them loyal with discounts and deals, theres always the opportunity to just throw a good party.FoundersCard has been growing steadily, but its looking to up its services big time in 2012. Its something worth checking out, especially as theyve been making a big effort to begin supporting and catering to their international members  and will continue with big international expansion in the coming year. Even if an entrepreneurs club sounds unappealing to you, its not hard to understand the draw. Early adopters always want access to the private beta, and for people who are already taking years off their lives just by being entrepreneurs, why shouldnt they get an extra bag of peanuts on their flight to Bangalore?For TechCrunch readers interested in applying, head over to founderscard.com/membership and use the referral code FCRUNCH12, where you will be eligible for lifetime guaranteed annual rate of $295 (40 percent discount off standard $495 rate). But remember: Mo money, mo problems.
