After writing for NBCs Parks and Recreation for the past couple years (hes about to start a writing gig for HBOs Eastbound and Down), and authoring the sarcastic but brilliant and hilarious @HumbleBrag, Harris Wittels has decided to bring his talents to TechCrunch. This year, he will be hosting the Crunchies Awards, and bringing his chiding humor. If youre not familiar with Humblebrag, he scours Twitter in search of  braggadocio wrapped in humility. Im willing to bet at least one of you has been retweeted. If so, post them in the comments below. We want to see.Not only is Wittels hosting, but Jack Dorsey, Kevin Rose, Marissa Mayer, Kevin Systrom, Reid Hoffman, Ron Conway and many more will also be joining us, many of them presenting awards themselves. This is going to be one night you wont want to miss. We have just released our last batch of tickets. If you would like to come to the Crunchies Awards, make sure to go here to get them, and get them quickly since they tend to sell very fast. And theres still time to vote for the best startups, apps, investors, and founders of the year. Voting ends at midnight on Sunday.Like always, an after party will follow the ceremony, where we will be joined by all of our guests and winners. There will be a fully hosted bar, hors d’oeuvres, a casino game room, and other fun entertainment and surprises. The award show is taking place next Tuesday, January 31st, at 7:30pm.Lastly, in all fun, would you like to get mentioned by Wittels on stage? If so, make sure you tweet out your best humblebrags between now and the start of the show using the #crunchies and #humblebrag hashtags, and you may be chosen. Below are some examples to get you started.See you all at the Crunchies!Meeting w/ Dutch prime minister, pizza at table next to Eric Schmidt, then Sean Parker's party. "Surreal" is only way to describe #Davos. Matthew Prince (@eastdakota) January 26, 2012Its kind of insane though, the world is at the brink of depression, military conflict and ecological collapse and me in a bra is global news Andrej Pejic (@Andrej_Pejic) December 16, 2011Akward moment: boarding a sold-out flight & hearing flight attendant announce the in-flight movie is one of mine: #Dolphin Tale. ashley judd (@AshleyJudd) January 12, 2012why am i so good at flirting when im not trying to flirt Joshua Decker (@JoshPointO_) December 13, 2011
