4 months after it launched its Twitter-style asymmetrical Subscribe feature, Facebook and its Journalist Program Manager Vadim Lavrusiks efforts to weaken Twitters stranglehold on breaking news are paying off. The company just announced that thousands of journalists now use Subscribe, including 50 reporters from The New York Times and 90 from the Washington Post. If Facebook can get your favorite journalists publishing through Subscribe, youll have less need for Twitter. Next I hear its setting its sights on getting celebrities and entertainment tastemakers onboard.Additionally, Facebook released some best practices for how journalists can maximize the engagement (Likes, comments, and shares) on their posts.Though very late to the game, Facebook has been deeply incentivizing use of its asymmetrical Subscribe feature. Facebook makes it easy to accumulate Subscribers. It publishes a news feed story to your friends when you Subscribe to someone, and offers suggestions of People to Subscribe to in its sidebar (check out your personalized Subscription recommendations here). Theres an embeddable Subscribe button for websites available, and Facebooks Comments Box plugin shows links to Subscribe to commenters.An informal opt-in poll of 25 journalists using Subscribe found they grew their Subscriber count by 320% in November 2011. I concur. In the last month my Subscriber count has shot up from 2,500 to over 13,000  much larger than my follower count even though Ive been on Twitter for years. Unfortunately theres still no way to publish to subscribers without blasting your friends too, so I dont publish my articles to my subscribers as often as Id like.Subscribe poses a very real threat to Twitter. With time it could severely reduce the growth potential and unique value of Twitter by bringing its functionality and content to Facebooks more popular network. To make that happen Facebook needs to convince prominent publishers across verticals to at least syndicate their content to the news feed. Thats why Facebook has a whole outreach team dedicated to marketing Subscribe to the worlds top individual content producers.The raw, unfiltered Twitter feed is still better suited for breaking news journalism. However, the fact is most people dont need an entire social network just for following their interest graph. As more journalists, musicians, actors, and athletes allow Facebook Subscribers, the feature will be good enough and more convenient. Twitter may need to fight back by stepping up its outreach and trying to persuade its top personalities not to use Subscribe. But with the Facebook news feeds connection to 800 million users, thats going to be a hard sell.Now the stats and best practices. While these are specifically about journalist, anyone can use these tips to make their Facebook posts more popular:So according to Facebooks research, the optimal post would be: Hey my awesome subscribers, click this link to read breaking news coverage of this controversial topic. What should I cover next? lolz. [photo thumbnail]
