This morning, online photo sharing site Flickr joined the growing number of web companies protesting the SOPA and PIPA legislation, which now include Google, Wikipedia, Reddit, Mozilla, and others. For a 24-hour period, starting today, Flickr is letting its members darken their own photos in an effort to raise awareness about the proposed, highly damaging legislation. But thats not all  Flickr is going a step further, and will allow users to darken other members photos, too. Now thats what censorship really feels like.For those unaware, living under rocks, etc., Congress is considering two bills, the PROTECT IP Act (PIPA) in the Senate and the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) in the House, which would effectively censor the web. Theyre the result of seriously misguided attempts to fight online piracy, which, if enacted, would eliminate due process and fundamentally change how the Internet works.Flickrs solution for awareness-raising is one of the more creative ones weve seen. Instead of taking its whole website down, as Wikipedia did, its allowing members to practice, and feel the effects of web censorship directly. Anyone can darken their own photos, but the kicker is that others can darken your own photos, too. Thats something that hits closer to home than web banners, blog posts, and cute videos.  Now, even if youre trying to ignore the news of SOPA (hey, I can live without Wikipedia for a day!), youll know how it feels when powers beyond your control take away content you should have access to.Well kind of.According to Flickrs announcement, members can only darken up to 10 photos, then the option will be taken away. (I guess they didnt want big-time SOPA supporters spending all day blacking out its entire archive of photos? Too bad.) And since Flickr also offers a paid service used by professional photographers, there is an opt-out mechanism so your photos wont be darkened, which you can choose from any photo.Even though Flickrs joining of the SOPA fight came at the last minute  early morning on protest day itself  its good to see another big name involved. For more information on SOPA, check out TechCrunchs previous coverage here.Update: As of 2 pm PT on 1/18/12 Flickr members darkened 219,644 photos and these blacked-out photos have received up to 1,034,896 views.
