Apple has built a search engine for apps. Its called iCloud  or more technically, its one aspect of the overall iCloud service. Using it, you can search through every app you have installed on your iOS device or have ever purchased in the past. And its available on your iPhone, iPad or iPod Touch right now.The average smartphone user has 64 mobile apps installed on their mobile device. Im ahead of the curve. I have around 400. Its pushing nearly 7 GB of storage. Granted, many of these apps were installed for testing purposes only  they arent used daily by any means. But my real problem is that Im not inclined to remove apps I dont use. They just sit there on the phone, abandoned, languishing on the back screens. I could delete them, but I dont. You knowjust in case.But the promise of iCloud, as I see it, is that these apps can disappear from the iPhones homescreen, but never have to fully disappear from reach. They can be recalled through a simple search.Note to Android users: This whole post is about Apples iCloud. Android has cool ideas, too. I love my Nexus S. But Android is not being addressed in todays article. That search mechanism already exists. For now, its tucked away under a couple of screens within the iPhones App Store app. Its neither an everyday necessity for the average user or functional enough for a power users needs. But its there, and somewhere at Apple HQ, its being improved.Today, its easier to flip through your screens to find your apps, especially if you only have 64 of them (or less). Worst case scenario: you cant remember which folder you tucked the app in, so you flip to the left side of the homescreen and use Spotlight Search to find the app in question instead.But lets extrapolate out to a few years into the future. A few years of downloading and abandoning apps on our backscreens. A few years of iPhone upgrades, with hundreds of leftover apps syncing to new devices. Why not delete the unused apps? Why not perform regular app cleanups? Because users are lazy. Im lazy. I dont want to. I have better things to do. So does everyone. And so the apps continue to sync from one device to the next, forgotten.We need a new metaphor for search. Homescreens, app folders and Spotlight Search will not be enough. We need a cloud-hosted index of searchable apps.A number of companies are working towards this end. (See: Chomp, Quixey, Do@t, Xyologic, Appolocious, AppsFire, Kinetik, and Crosswa.lk, for example). There are a lot baby steps being taken here, and the occasional leap. Build a search engine like Google, but for apps! Include rankings and user reviews! Use keywords from app descriptions! Make it social! All good ideas. But not enough.And anyone whos just building an app search engine app without some other larger business behind it, could easily get trounced on by Apple in the coming months.To see what I mean, check out the bare-bones iCloud app search engine thats on your iOS device right now (assuming youre on the latest version of iOS):Look at your results. There, all your apps matching your keywords. Ranked by  how?  Im not 100% sure, but it looks like time of installation. Its certainly not update date or alphabetically.This iCloud app search engine is only partial functional, though. Like Spotlight, it only looks at the apps titles, not descriptions, for keywords. It doesnt know how much youve used an app or how youve rated it. Sometimes, it would show me which apps were installed versus which are available on the cloud. Sometimes it got buggy and showed all apps as having the iCloud download button, even if they were installed on the device.But its there. And its only a matter of time before iCloud search is integrated with Spotlight Search and Siri, via APIs. Well soon be calling up our preferred apps using natural language, both in typed-in queries and in spoken ones. We wont need to know whether the app is currently on our phone. iCloud will know. Siri will know. We may not even need to initiate the download ourselves. Our phone will do that for us.In addition, our homescreen clutter will be gone. Apps will delete themselves after periods of non-use unless you configure them as locked. Maybe there will be an auto organize option for our homescreens, which arranges apps based on usage.With the exponential growth of the mobile application ecosystem, this is one of the only possible ways to manage the entirety of a users app archive in the months ahead. Many of todays apps are cloud-enabled, but this will be a cloud-enabled phone.Maybe Im dreaming? But if Apple cant get it done, someone should. (Android? Windows Phone? An app developer? A startup?) The mobile ecosystem is still young enough to be entirely disrupted by someone with a new idea for parsing the new web of apps. Today, I believe its Apple thats the closest to implementation, given the glimpse its given us with iCloud. But who knows? We could still be surprised.
