There has been a great quantity of vitriol corroding the social web over the last few days, a reaction to Googles decision to optionally integrate Google+ features into their search. The complaint, as I understand it, is that some searches bring up Google+ results before they bring up results the complainants feel are more relevant.Heres the thing. Google certainly has an agenda here. But its not a destructive agenda, its merely Google-centric. Twitter made a Twitter-centric decision when they reduced their search profile last year, and Facebook has made Facebook-centric decisions almost exclusively since its creation.Google is a datavore. All it wants to do is collect data, organize it, and then deliver it to people, peppered with ads and the occasional sales commission. Viewed from this perspective, the new social search is simple  innocuous. The biggest crime Google has committed is giving it such a cumbrous name.Search, plus Your World (difficult to parse, more difficult to use in conversation) is about richer, deeper data related to your search terms, culled from your social contacts, than would normally appear in a search. And naturally, when it isnt relevant, it isnt applied: a social search for my name pulls my Google+ profile into the search boxs pole position, which I agree is a bit much  put it above, maybe?  but a search for pasta puttanesca gets me some recipes. So non-social searches, which compose a huge proportion of Google queries, are unaffected. That alone beggars the allegations  makes them seem whiny and out of proportion with the problem itself.Though there is, no doubt, a problem. A search that is ostensibly social-focused should be pulling information primarily from Facebook and Twitter, right? I agree. Yet it doesnt. And peoples accusing fingers jumped up to point at Google, though the problem isnt Googles. The service is incomplete  thats inarguable. But there is no malevolence to its incompleteness, and Im not convinced that its Googles responsibility to make it complete. (Except for co-opting non-letter operators. Thats ridiculous, Google.)Like I said, Google is a datavore. It eats data and it breathes services. When it has no data to eat, it is useless. What data does Google have from your friends on Facebook, the people you follow on Twitter? That data must be volunteered by the services which control it, and as Google pointed out saucily in response to recent criticism, those services are not very accommodating. The new search type is a deep search, providing rich data. What rich data does Facebook share? What deep search does Twitter permit? Google cant produce something it doesnt have, and what it does produce isnt destructive to search  and if it were so, it can be turned off with a click. The suggestion that people wont do this is at best poppycock, and at worst  flimflam.If Google had access to this information, it would present it to the user  based, as always, on a proprietary calculation of relevance. Are people really suggesting that Google is suppressing relevant results, results that make the service better, in order to feature Google+ more prominently? Google wants to provide socially-determined search. Facebook and Twitter want you to do that kind of social search within their sites. These objectives are fundamentally at odds. Google went live anyway with its incomplete product, something it has done a dozen times before, and the only data it has available to scrape is its own. It would like Facebook and Twitter to provide data for it to pass on. How much they provide is up to them.The objectives of these three big billy goats gruff, I said, are at odds, and it wont do to say that Google should have access to Facebook data, or Twitter shouldnt be providing recent tweets to display under someones handle in search. No one gets priority, because theyre all just companies trying to make a buck. The question is which one is going to eventually succumb to the will of the other. I dont think itll be Google, who can make puppy dog eyes and say its not our fault they dont want to share with us. And I dont think Facebook even has the option  the logistics of putting their data out there are a nightmare, and the data would be frustratingly incomplete anyway. So Twitter, which unsurprisingly is complaining the loudest, will be the bough that bends.As for the passive promotion of Google+ elsewhere in search (in the people and places box, for instance), thats not very different from everywhere else it appears. Are they obligated to put follow on Twitter and subscribe on Facebook? I suspect they are able to but decided those things would be out of place among search results that so plainly exclude information from those services. They might be waiting for Twitter to come with an olive branch. Should it be the other way around? That, I think, is a matter of opinion.Theres nothing controversial about competition. Google has started a new service that gives social data prominent placement. Ironically, the fact that people are complaining that it is not integrative enough (as opposed to Twitter and Facebook initiatives, which are often not integrative at all, and sometimes deliberately exclusive) testifies to Googles adherence to their promise of even-handedness. Id like to say that Google has offered a carrot and Twitter responded with a stick. But Google understand the power they have, and really, theyre using the carrot to beat on Twitter. Is that power a monopoly? The areas in which Google can be said to have a monopoly are vague and nebulous. This is certainly adjacent, but placing the issue correctly is one of great importance in the debate. I think it falls outside that area, which to me begs the question, but no doubt the discussion will continue, and Googles actions will have repercussions further down the line.
