Music streaming service MOG is today announcing partnerships with mobile, audio and video equipment manufacturer JVC as well as with Aha by HARMAN, an interactive platform that brings web content to the automobile. The companies will begin using MOGs APIs to integrate the music service into their platforms and products. The first result of the new partnerships is MOGs launch on Subaru vehicles.Aha, which lets drivers access web content through their radios, considers itself the fourth band of radio, alongside FM, AM and satellite. On upcoming Subaru models, Aha will deliver a number of services, including the on-demand streaming music from MOG and Rhapsody, Internet radio from SHOUTcast, Slacker and CBS Radio, podcasts, audio books, traffic reports, Twitter and Facebook updates, Yelp recommendations and more. The service works through an iPhone or Android app which will integrate with future Subaru vehicles. (Exact models were not announced, but the company was demonstrating MOG in a 2013 Subaru BRZ).Currently, Aha is available in aftermarket auto sound systems and as a free iPhone app. Prior to the Subaru launch, the iPhone app will be updated with more stations and content. Aha will release its Android counterpart around the same time.Aha also has newly announced partnerships with Honda and Kenwood. Those join Pioneer, which began integrating Aha into its products last year. At present, Aha says that Subaru and Honda integration is planned to include MOG, while Kenwood and Pioneer is likely.In addition to the forthcoming Subaru integration via Aha, MOG is also now working with JVC Americas Corp., a subsidiary of the JVC Kenwood Corporation. The company will be integrating MOG into its aftermarket head systems as well, including JVCs four new AV Multimedia products being released in 2012.MOG launched its API platform called MOG Fusion, which is designed for use by consumer electronics and auto manufacturers, at last years CES. Its other, previously announced partners include BMW, MINI, Airbiquity, Tweddle and Visteon.
