Following media mogul Rupert Murdochs arrival on Twitter this week, wife Wendi Deng (@wendi_deng) showed up shortly afterwards, tweeting alongside her husband, flirting with comedian Ricky Gervais, politely declining to engage with the man who attacked Mr. Murdoch with a pie, pushing @rupertmurdoch to take down a questionable tweet (which he did), and generally being a spicy character worthy of a Twitter follow.Only one problem: that wasnt Wendi Deng Murdoch.According to the @Wendi_Deng Twitter account this morning, she was just having a bit of fun and is definitely not married to Rupert Murdoch. In other words, it was a parody account. She (he?) says shes a nobody, not even an aspiring comedy writer.While parody accounts are a dime a dozen on Twitter these days, what made Wendi Dengs notable is that it actually passed through Twitters verification process somehow  the process that determines that an account on Twitter is maintained by the person who its claiming to be, then given a checkmark indicating its verified status. This is generally used to verify celebrities, politicians and other public figures, like the Murdochs.Somehow, Wendi Deng fooled Twitter  at least for a day. This even concerned the accounts holder, who says you have to wonder why Twitter verified this account for a full day. I never received any communication from them about this. I was surprised  and even a little alarmed  when I saw the Verified tick appear on the profile. You might ask why didnt I tell them? But surely Twitter should be checking out its Verified status more carefully? No?It is indeed a little worrisome that Wendi Deng slipped through the cracks in Twitters verification process  a process thats always been sort of mysterious, to be quite honest. For celebrities with a web presence, Twitter will often use the stars official home page as a source for the verification  if theres a link to the Twitter account posted there, its legit. But in the case of public personas, it appears that Twitter trusted the numerous media reports claiming the accounts legitimacy instead.Weve reached out to Twitter to confirm if this was the case.Update  Heres Twitters statement:
We dont comment on our verification process but can confirm that the @wendi_deng account was mistakenly verified for a short period of time. We apologize for the confusion this caused.
Obviously, thats not a valid means of verification  the media can be wrong. And they clearly were. Which just goes to show, you cant believe everything you read on the Internet, even if Twitter tells you its true.And you have to wonder even more why Twitter verified this account for a full day. I never received any communication from them about this. Wendi Deng Murdoch (@Wendi_Deng) January 3, 2012Hello Twitter. As News International has finally come to their senses, its time to confirm that yes, this is a fake account. Im not Wendi. Wendi Deng Murdoch (@Wendi_Deng) January 3, 2012(And Im as mystified as all of you as to why Twitter reopened its apparently closed Verified Account program for Wendi and Rupert.) Wendi Deng Murdoch (@Wendi_Deng) January 3, 2012And in case you missed Murdoch joining Twitter entirely, heres the news, NMA-style:
