Facebook has AppData, Twitter has Twitaholic, and now Google+ has its own independent brand page rankings site: ZoomSphere. It shows which brands have the most followers, activity, +1s, shares, and comments, and slice the data by time, page category, and country. Oddly, the site doesnt rank user profiles like SocialStatistics does  just brand pages. Still, by augmenting its existing charts for Facebook and Twitter, ZoomSphere could become a comprehensive resource for brands charting their own performance, assessing competitors, or scoping for potential partners.So whos winning six weeks after Google+ launched brand pages? Mostly news outlets, bands, and technology companies. Considering that Google+ is notorious for Google fanboys, its little surprise that Android tops the international follower charts, and 6 Google properties reside in the top 25. Mashable, The New York Times, Breaking News, and TechCrunch are all in the top 20. The most popular bands reveal a slightly more mature demographic on Google+, with older acts like Coldplay, Train, and Pearl Jam ranking significantly higher than on Facebook or Twitter.No brands have come close to reaching 1 million followers, while only 3 individuals  Britney Spears, Larry Page, and Snoop Dogg  have accomplished the feat. This shows that mainstream users who casually subscribe to lots of their favorite brands and celebrities havent joined Google+s 63 million registered users yet. Instead, avid technologists and news readers courted by the social networks invite-only launch seem to make up its core user base.One myth that could be dispelled by ZoomSpheres charts? That there are no women on Google+. High rankings for country duo Sugarland, Burberry, and H&M which claims the #4 spot seem to suggest otherwise.In terms of features and feel, ZoomSphere offers a solid product. Charts and graphs look polished, its easy to compare different pages, and the option to view by country reveals some interesting demographic distinctions. For example, Dell ranks #17 worldwide, but as #2 in the UK, showing Apples rise might not be so swift in Britain.Some features that could improve ZoomSphere would be Google+ user profile charts, and the ability to view a single brand across its Facebook, Twitter, and Google+ presences. Established market research providers have been slow to launch Google+ brand charts, giving ZoomSphere an opportunity to become the go-to source for this data. Now it just needs Google to improve these pages so more brands actually want them.Heres the complete top 20 chart of Google+ brand pages by follower count as of 12/28/2011: 
