There are lots of third-party guesstimates floating around about Google+ traffic. Are users losing interest like search trends seem to show? Has the service grown to 150 million active users like this research firm thinks? Ive gotten new numbers from comScore, which is arguably the best third-party measurement firm for web traffic in the world.It shows that Google+ grew from 65 million unique visitors in October to nearly 67 million in November. This is purely based on traffic to the plus.google.com subdomain, comScores Andrew Lipsman tells me today. So it doesnt include the many Google+ feature injections that the search company has administered to its other properties over the last months. Some people have suggested that Google+ is as barren as a desert  this is at least an oasis.Heres how the service stacked up against competitors last month.The depressing significance for those people out there wishing for Google+ to either die off or kill their rivals is that neither appears to be happening. Just some slow and steady growth, which is overall good for Google considering the vast resources and focus that its bringing to bear on the effort. Ultimately, Google+ doesnt have to dominate now, it just needs to keep growing and getting better over the coming years in order to be a real alternative to Facebook and everyone else.And now, the usual data caveat: Obviously comScore, like any other third-party, doesnt have the same access to data as Google itself, so dont assume these numbers are 100% right. But still theyre worth paying attention to, since Google doesnt share much about how its doing. The last time the company released anything, it said it had 40 million registered users during its earnings call in October. Thats not directly comparable to this, but could indicate that theres been more significant growth over the fall. Also, for more on worldwide social networking trends, check out our coverage of comScores 2011 social report from yesterday.[Oasis image via Freshpics]
