Dave Morin and Paths secondary standalone app With is winding down, according to a tweet, email, and blog post from Path. Now tweet who youre with directly from Path, the email explains. The encouraged migration signals the end of Paths experiment with a stripped down, single feature experience.Update: A tweet from With confirms that it will cease to function at some point today.W/ app functions are shutting down today. Now, with Path 2, you can tweet who you're with:  bit.ly/tSrO5v With (@withme) December 17, 2011Paths blog posts says After a long and friendly coexistence, two apps have become one. And the pair has settled on a name: Path 2. Withs end just 6 months after its launch resurfaces the standalone vs comprehensive app debate. Companies have to decide whether their apps should provide many functions but bury them in menus, or offer rapid access to one function.Path recently released its more comprehensive 2.0 update, which has led to 30x growth of the apps user base. Rather than force users to waste home screen space and choose what they want to do first, Path 2.0 simply integrates Withs functionality. In addition to tagging who youre with, you can share your sleeping habits, music, and now standard content like photos and location.Morins former employer Facebook is moving in the opposite direction. This summer it released its standalone Messenger app based off of its acquisition Beluga, and we hear its still working on its standalone mobile photos app that leaked in June. I see this as a slippery slope where instead of bloat you get a fractured experience.I like comprehensive apps that let me bounce from once use case to another without having to exit to the homescreen, so Im happy to see With go. Often times the functions split between apps are highly related, and saving one extra click through a menu doesnt seem to warrant downloading and updating an extra app. The With sunset will also keep Paths team focused on building a distinct experience from Facebook and Twitter where you share a lot but to only your closest friends.

