News curation startup Scoop.it has arrived on the iPhone today, allowing you to create your own digital magazine while on the go. The app, which works alongside the Scoop.it web service, essentially lets anyone be a publisher for any topic. Or perhaps, the more correct word is not publisher, its aggregator.Scoop.it publishers arent always writing and producing their own content, although that is an option. But Scoop.its main focus is on its content aggregation tools. Publishers select the best content from around the web and then publish it in a magazine-like format that looks similar to something created by Pressly or OnSwipe. Previously, this curation process was done either through a browser bookmarklet, by accepting content submission from others, or by accepting a post suggested by Scoop.its own recommendation engine. Now, with the new iPhone app, curation can be done from your mobile, too.Using the app, Scoop.it users can select, edit and publish posts, review suggestions and share to their connected Facebook, Twitter and Tumblr accounts.The app is a handy companion for Scoop.it itself, but only for those who already have their magazine up-and-running. You have to first set up your magazines topics via the web  you cant begin the process using the app. Thats a shame since, for many people, the first time theyll ever encounter Scoop.it is via the App Store.News aggregation can be a touchy topic  is it right to re-publish others work and brand it as your own, even if youre sending the sites traffic? Some would say no. But aggregation has proved a successful business model in many cases, and the human-assisted curation that accompanies it, such as whats provided by Techmeme for example, makes curation a form of content creation itself. Whos to say that Scoop.it couldnt form the basis of a thousand tiny, niche Techmemes in the future?Scoop.it is currently a freemium service. Individuals can publish up to 5 topics per account, but have to use Scoop.its own branding. Business accounts offer more topics and features, including domain hosting and analytics for $79/month.The Scoop.it iPhone app is here.
