Its a tender situation, being a startup, isnt it? Here you have what you think is a great product, maybe its even a little disruptive, but youre not naive enough to think that youre the only one whos ever thought of this idea/product. At any moment, some giant or more well-funded startup could make your idea/widget/feature/tool/product their priority and with a little marketing spend, youd be toast. Bootstrapping, you rely on your users feedback to tell you what works and what doesnt, iterate, and hope that your user base grows organically until you have a sustainable business.Thats the hope, right? The same goes for Max Yoder, a 23-year-old designer from Indiana  except that in Yoders case, he launched his startup out of his bedroom in Indianapolis. Yoder recently graduated from college, at which point he went to work at Compendium to learn about startups, media software, and to help pay off his student loans. To help his cause, he was selected as an Orr Entrepreneurship Fellow last year, and has, over the last seven months, been building his startup.Recently, Yoder took off to work on Quipol full-time. Quipol (pronounced kwi-poll) is a web app and embeddable widget in beta, designed using HTML5, CSS3, Ruby on Rails, and Responsive Design, to let content producers create simple, one-question polls that can be embedded in blog posts and web pages to encourage feedback from their audiences and help them reach more readers. Its part polling system, part commenting tool, but the fact of the matter is that theres plenty of competition  and this has been done before.There are awesome sites like GoPollGo (full disclosure: Founder Ben Schaechter used to be a developer at TechCrunch and is a friend), which let users create realtime polls with plenty of Twitter integration. Theres Poll Authority, Poll Everywhere, Precision Polling (scooped up by Survey Monkey), and CMSes like WordPress have their own polling functionality, thanks to startups like PollDaddy.And thats where Quipols real competition comes in: The already-in-place polling widgets owned or offered by content management platforms. But Yoder thinks that Quipol can be a good complement to some of these, as well as to commenting platforms like Disqus and Livefyre. So, Yoder is hoping that both through the simplicity of Quipols design (it looks great) and its universality, the service can offer some differentiation from others already occupying the space.At this point, the Quipol embed code works with WordPress.org, Tumblr, Squarespace, and Blogger, and everything but the social commenting works well in Posterous and Facebook. What does that mean? Users can vote and comment as they normally would on Facebook and Posterous, but if they choose to share their comment to their social network, the social post will link back to the poll on Quipol.com  not its embedded source. Unfortunately, in this case, Posterous and Facebook dont play nicely with Quipols javascript, but Yoder says hes currently plugging away at some workarounds.Interestingly, Quipol currently is without customization options, it only comes in 400 by 600 form, another thing Yoder is currently wrestling with  this is where that user feedback comes in. But, Quipol still does what it does well enough that its a great tool. The commenting uses Twitter and Facebook authentication to keep out the spam, and the linking in Facebook and Twitter offer a simple thumbs up or thumbs down voting mechanism, with the ability to comment if your opinion doesnt fall into one of those two buckets. Votes and comments can then be monitored by Quipol creators from the sites admin layer. Readers, however, cant see the results of the Quipol unless they vote, and the admin layer provides the essential analytics, until users provide enough data on what they want to see, which will enable Yoder to scale the analytics offerings. He also soon plans to add YouTube/Vimeo video embedding in the media portion of Quipols in the near future, which will look like this, for example.Its a really simple tool, and Yoder has designed a great product  the question is whether or not theres a real business here, or whether its best suited as a feature for a larger entity. Quipols work best when they are embedded into contextually relevant blog posts to help bloggers engage with and grow their audiences (the growth part happens via Quipols social commenting functionality, Yoder says). And what better way to test it out than in a blog post?
