Sometimes having better data isnt enough, even in search.  You have to present it in an intuitive way that is easy to grasp. Kevin OConnor, the founder of FindTheBest (and before that, DoubleClick), has been working on a very hard problem: how to help people compare different products and services so that they can quickly figure out which is the best one. How do you communicate what is better? he asks. How do you take a bunch of dry, mind-numbing data and communicate it back?Today, FindTheBest is taking another major step towards that ideal with a revamp of its site design.  Instead of mind-numbing rows of data comparing everything from smartphones to ski resorts, the site is introducing more intuitive color-coded cues and a new Smart Rating system.  The Smart Rating is a single, normalized number between 1 and 100 (replacing the old 5-star system). It is based on a combination of expert ratings from outside sources and FindTheBests own quantitative rating based on factors such screen size and battery life for a smartphone, or skiable acres and vertical feet for a ski resort. They figure out which are the most authoritative sources for a given category and weight them accordingly. So far the site is growing slowly but steadily with more than 2.5 million unique visitors per month. OConnor is taking his time getting this right, and hes raised $6 million from Kleiner Perkins. We want to tell companies what drives decisions, he says. Already, theyve discovered out some interesting correlations. The No. 1 filter used for picking a ski resort is not average snowfall or vertical feet, but whether or not there is a childrens ski school. And FM receivers are a big deciding factor for phones. OConnor wants FindTheBest to become a big funnel for purchase intent. People go to his site to make decisions, which is the most valuable time for advertisers and merchants to try to get in front of them. In order to get more distribution, FindTheBest is also launching badges and syndicated buyers guides to other sites.Below is a screenshot of what the site used to look like, and below that is a clip from a Founder Stories where OConnor explains what he is trying to accomplish with FindTheBest.
