As many of my friends and colleagues will tell you, Im someone whos perpetually running late. As a result, Im constantly sending out text messages that offer some variation on, Running 5 minutes late, sorry!A new startup called Twist promises a smarter, easier approach to sending those messages. When youve got a meeting, you can enter the destination, time, and contact info of the participants. Then, as the meeting time approaches, everyone will get automatic messages about your ETA.Ideally, theyll just get two messages — one when you start heading to the meeting, and one when youre about to arrive. However, if youre running late (say if youre driving and the a traffic is unusually bad), everyone will get a message saying that youre late, and telling them when youre likely to actually make it. So the person running late doesnt have to waste time trying to estimate an accurate ETA and then fumble with their phone to send the message, and everyone else gets an accurate sense of how long theyre going to have to wait.At first, this may sound like a relatively narrow, specific problem. But it turns out that the potential audience is pretty huge. Twist hired Harris Interactive to conduct a national survey about this, and it found that 24 percent of Americans have sent a text or email while driving to tell someone that theyre running late.Co-founder and CEO Bill Lee (previously co-founder of Remarq and Social Concepts) says that previous attempts at these kinds of notifications have focused on location rather than time (telling people where you are, not when youll arrive). He also says the team has spent more than a year working on the app, trying to deliver the most beautiful and simple approach to the problem. His co-founder and CTO Mike Belshe (a former engineer on Google Chrome, creator of Googles SPDY protocol, and co-founder at Lookout) adds that the company has spent a lot of time refining the algorithm behind its time estimates, so that it can deliver the most accurate arrival times, whether youre driving, biking, walking, or taking public transit — among early users and testers, the ETA accuracy is up to 98 percent.Twist will personalize its estimates to each user. For example, if the app sees that it consistently takes you a specific amount of time to get from your home to your office, it will incorporate that information into its estimates.Those algorithms could eventually be used outside the Twist app. Lee says that theres no pressure to monetize anytime soon, but one possibility would be to sell the technology via API to any other business that wanted to incorporate accurate arrival/delivery times into its app.But what about those times when, as Belshe puts it, we tell little white lies about where we are and when were likely to arrive? (Like when you say I left on time, but the bus was late!) Well, he says Twists goal isnt to change human nature. Most of the time, people probably want to be upfront about their lateness, and if you really dont, you can always disable some of the alerts within Twist. Belshe also says that as we all have GPS in our pockets every day and share much of that data socially, its going to become increasingly difficult to maintain those kinds of deceptions.Twist is also announcing that it has raised a $6 million Series A round from Bridgescale Partners, Eric Hahn (Inventures Group and former CTO of Netscape), Jeff Skoll (first employee and first President of eBay, founder of Participant Media), as well as Lee and Belshe.The company didnt provide me with an early version of the app, so I wasnt able to test out its claims of simplicity and accuracy, but Im eager to try it out. You can download the Twist app here.
