Not long after wrapping up their string of Black Friday/Cyber Monday deals, Amazon has pulled back the curtain on yet another way theyll be snagging purchases away from physical retail outlets. Starting this Saturday, users of Amazons Price Check app will be able to score up to $5 off a purchase of any product if they use the app in-store.Heres how it works: after waltzing into a brick-and-mortar retailer, whip out your iPhone or Android device (with location services enabled) and get to scanning those barcodes. After placing a desired item into the apps virtual basket, a 5% discount will be applied to the product within 24 hours. Price Check app users can use the discount on up to three products, so theyll need to choose those items wisely. Its a great idea for a number of reasons, not least of which is that it could help potential buyers get over one of Amazons biggest stumbling blocks: experiencing the product. Reading reviews and looking at pictures online is enough in certain instances, but it can be a poor substitute for actually touching and seeing a product in person. With their Price Check promotion, Amazon can actually help people to make purchasing decisions and at the same time giving them an incentive to buy from them.On top of that, Amazon will be able to stay up to date with their competitors prices, which could help inform future pricing plans. With just weeks until the holiday of your choice kicks off, Amazon clearly wants to be your shopping source, and theyre better equipped to roll-out pricing changes and promotions than any B&M store.As IntoMobile points out, Amazon often has lower prices then their physical retail counterparts, so the additional (minor) savings just sweeten the deal. The big question now is how many users will actually take advantage of Amazons offer. The $5 cap means theres probably a limit to how much play Amazon will get out of the promotion, but I imagine that it could be worth it to them if they manage build up more awareness around their Price Check app. Fortunately for your local stores, the promotion will only run from 9PM PST on December 9 to 11:59 PM PST on December 10   I can already imagine rabid deal-hunters drooling in anticipation.
