iPhone jailbreakers should probably stay away from the latest Siri port, dubbed H1Siri, which brings Apples digital assistant to the iPhone 4. The new hack comes from a group of Chinese hackers calling themselves the CD-Dev Team. According to the teams account on Weibo (a Chinese microblogging service similar to Twitter), the hackers had originally wanted to just run a small test, but the code was leaked. Now their servers cant keep up with the demand.But beyond server unresponsiveness, there are several other good reasons to skip this hack, including the fact that it seems to break peoples phones and involves running illegal code.H1Siri (aka, Hi Siri!), for those of you tracking the Siri-hacking space, is a different hack from the one that emerged in October and the other arriving last month.According to iDownloadBlog, which wisely advises readers to be wary of this new port after its own tests with H1Siri failed, the new port involves the use of copyrighted binaries from the iPhone 4S. Simply put, it works because it uses illegal code. Notable iPhone hacker @chpwn (Grant Paul), confirms this.He also points out another good reason to think carefully before installing H1Siri on your iPhone 4: it gives the softwares creators access to your personal data:Please note: if you use a proxy to access Siri, you may be sending your Email, SMS, Calendar, Contacts, Location, etc though that server. Grant Paul (@chpwn) December 05, 2011(It's up to you if you want to accept that risk. It's also your choice if you want to violate copyright law to obtain the needed files.) Grant Paul (@chpwn) December 05, 2011Those are all very good reasons to avoid H1Siri, but if your Siri lust cant be assuaged, maybe this last bit of info will: the darned thing doesnt really work.Numerous posts from brave (crazy) early adopters report various complaints after installing. For example, it has been said to cause random reboots, break the camera, brick the phone, mess up the Settings app, cause the phone to get stuck at the Apple logo and other such things.Guys, seriouslySiri is cool, but its definitely not worth all this.
