Turns out you dont have to charge an arm and a leg for SMS messages to make money off of texting.One startup thats proven this is Pinger, the company behind the massively popular free texting app Textfree. Today, the company is announcing that its reached a major milestone: since launching in March 2009, Textfree users have sent and received a total of 20 billion text messages. For free. And theyre sending and receiving another 1.5 billion messages every month (they were growing at 1 billion per month in March of this year).Textfree is so popular because it gives users free texting to and from — heres the important bit — their own, unique phone numbers. Fire up the app for the first time and youll be given a new phone number that people can text the same way they would any other mobile number. Textfree is available for both iOS and Android, and its particularly popular on devices like the iPod Touch, which wouldnt otherwise have full texting functionality (the iOS version also offers free and low-cost phone calls, which will be released on the Android version down the line). Pinger makes money via advertising.Because of the huge text volume and number of installs, Pinger also gets some compelling insight into the trends being seen across the smartphone market — particularly among younger users who cant afford a traditional SMS plan. Pinger CEO Greg Woock says that when the services many iPod Touch users do eventually upgrade to a real phone, more often than not theyre choosing an Android device instead of an iPhone. This is likely because Android handsets are generally less expensive (yes, the iPhone 3GS is now free with a contract, but from a performance perspective a free Android device is likely going to be significantly faster).Another key stat: Android use across Textfrees service has now equaled iOS — and the Android version of Textfree has only been out half as long and doesnt include voice functionality yet. In other words, Android is growing fast.Woock also reports an encouraging trend for Textfrees service: after around nine months or so of using Textfree, users become attached to their Textfree number, and are very likely to keep using it in the long-term.
