The Short Version
In the mad rush to push out more and more Android slate products, Amazon and Barnes & Noble are like a calm port in the storm. Their devices are touted as ereaders but, after a bit of digging, you find that they are now considerably more interesting  and compelling  as tablet products for an entry level market. They are not threatening nor are they particularly difficult to grasp. In short, they are the perfect neophytes tablet, a cross between the simplicity of an e-ink ereader and a fully-featured mobile device. Its good enough at both that people buying it for one purpose will be pleased with the devices other strengths; depending on what you want, its either an Android slate in ereaders clothing or vice versa.Amazons new Fire, which well review shortly, takes a certain tack  low-priced, cloud oriented content consumption  while the Nook Tablet takes a decidedly different one. Priced at $249  still cheaper than even the least-outfitted Android tablet  and aimed at a slightly more techie audience, the Nook Tablet is an ereader first and a tablet second.As it stands, the Nook Tablet is an impressive bit of machinery. It is a solid slab of electronics designed to do a few things exceedingly well and  sadly  a few things quite poorly. As a color, touchscreen ereader it is one of the best and, for those with an adventurous bent, I can imagine this becoming a useful media and app device. The Nook Tablet is a tablet for everyone. It is solid, easy to use, and most of Androids rough edges have been burred off. Although there are some odd UI choices and frustrations, everything is in its right place. It is, in short, a perfectly slimmed down Android tablet masquerading as an ereader  something many will prefer over Kindle Fires obviously service-oriented approach.Features:Pros:Cons:  What Is It?
The device has a 7-inch touchscreen that is surprisingly bright and readable. The front panel is grey plastic and the edge of the device is made of silver plastic. There is a small notch taken out of the lower left corner, something that I assume is useful of you wish to attach a lanyard to this thing. The back is the most pleasant aspect of the device. The soft touch plastic feels quite a bit like soft leather or suede.There are exactly four buttons  a central home button, shaped like the Nook N, a power button on the upper left and two volume or control buttons on the right. There is a microUSB port at the bottom and a small flap that pops up near the notch where you can fit a microSD card. There is a speaker grille at the bottom and a small hole for a microphone at the top. Finally, there is a headphone jack at the top.To power it on you simply hold down the power button. It boots in about a minute and starts back up in about 2 seconds. There are small audio cues for the various functions, including plugging into the USB cable and unlocking and locking the device. These can be turned off.There is no camera.The Nook Tablet is a direct descendent of Barnes & Nobles Nook Color. As the name states, its a tablet, but not in the PC sense. The branding and UI points to the more primordial view of tablet, which suggests that this device is more like a cuneiform tablet to an early scribe than anything Bill Gates held up as the future of computing in 2001. However, the use of the word tablet is important in marketing this device. At $249, it can be perceived as being far more expensive than the Kindle Fire (although its not) and by naming the Tablet rather than the Slate or the Runik Booke, B&N is ostensibly saying This is a computing device that we made for readers. When you connect the device to a Mac or PC, the onboard storage appears. If you add a microSD card, this card also appears as a separate drive, something that could be confusing to new users. The device automatically sets up a certain number of folders for B&N use as well as your private use and it scans those folders each time you unplug the device. The device comes with 13GB of space available but there is, as they say, a rub. As you see here, the MyNOOK disk appears to only have 1GB available. The rest of that space is taken up by the Nook software and content. Quoth the website:1GB = 1 billion bytes. Actual formatted capacity may be less. Approximately 13GB available to store content, of which up to 12GB may be reserved for content purchased from the Barnes & Noble NOOK Store.7microSD™ or microSDHC™ memory cards sold separately. microSD and microSDHC are trademarks of SD-3CThis means you simply must install a MicroSD card, a prospect that many might find onerous. However, if youre not planning on dragging MP4 movies onto this thing, you might be able to scrape by. If there is any major flaw in this device it is this odd problem of disk usage.B&N will offer digital video rental and downloads early next year which is why this space has been roped off. The magazines and other rich content are apparently also large files, said a B&N spokesperson, so that space has been dedicated to official content rather than side-loaded ad hoc content.Usability
The Nook Tablet UI is fairly straightforward. After sliding to unlock the main screen, youre presented with a carousel of books and items youve recently used. You can drag these to the main screen much like apps in any Android phone and they remain persistent there. Along the bottom is a row of small icons  Books, Newsstand, Movies, Music, Apps  and there are small icons signifying the microSD card and the book youve just read. Up in the top corner of the home screen is the More menu that supplies possibly interesting items for your consumption.The music player is nearly stock Android and the media player lumps photos and video into one app, a frustrating experience. However, everything else is fairly custom, from the epub/PDF reader to the app store. Searching for apps is slightly frustrating. Because the Nook App Store is limited by B&N, looking for common apps like Rockplayer is almost impossible, returning instead a list of books with those words in the titles. Browsing through the device is quick and clean. There is some of the old Android lag  pages move a bit too slowly, apps take a bit to spin up, but generally all of the reading experiences are more than adequate and the various apps available run as they would on any modern tablet. The browser is just that  an Android browser with Flash Player 10.3.186.6 installed. I was able to browse TechCrunch in its full, Flash-enhanced glory while some sites exhibited some quirks associated with mobile browsers including failing to load backgrounds and defaulting to mobile versions of the site. The browser has a bookmarks feature as well as most visited and history tabs. The device allows you to link your Facebook, Twitter, and Google accounts via the social settings tab. Facebook and Twitter allow for text sharing with the world at large while Google connectivity allows you to add your contacts as Nook friends. You can get recommendations from your friends using a feature called Nook friends, although this feature is somewhat muted in this version of the Nook software.As I said before, this OS takes the edge off of Android but folks familiar with the OS will see most of the similarities. It is, to be clear, eminently usable and anyone  from an Android hacker to my mom  would be able to easily buy, read, and share books and some media. Reading
First and foremost, this is an ereader. The screen is bright and crisp and when reading epub documents the formatting is unimpeachable. It is a backlit screen so outdoor reading is possible but not encouraged.As a reader, the Nook Tablet works quite well. Books are as youd expect and you can control the font size and orientation. Magazines really shine on this device. Issues of National Geographic and Food + Wine looked amazing on the bright, clear screen and the magazine reader was really quite nice  it could replace iOS newsstand for me if enough titles become available. Comics appear just like magazines, with big, bright, and bold colors. If anything, the Nook excels at this sort of content.Another fun feature is the built-in read along features for childrens books. I read a page of The Elephant Child into the devices microphone and my kids can then pick my recording from an onscreen menu. The audio is actually recorded right onto the device and is available in M4A format for later download, which makes it useful for folks who might want to record junior reading a book.				
					
						Download: 1.m4a
					
				
							
			// */
	


/*  */


jQuery(document).ready(function($){ Gravatar.profile_cb = function( h, d ) { WPGroHo.syncProfileData( h, d );	}; Gravatar.my_hash = WPGroHo.my_hash; Gravatar.init( 'body', '#wp-admin-bar-my-account' ); });	
	
	
