Coming up with new gestures that can be performed with one, two, or three fingers is a surprisingly difficult job. Many are proposed; few actually make it into daily use. Heres one from Apple entitled hold and swipe, in a recent-ish patent application. But is it really new?Im leaving out the part where patenting a gesture is an absurdity, because thats an entirely separate issue.The gesture has to do with navigating visual information on a small screen (like the new Nano). Zooming in on a face or object within a picture, or selecting an aspect of it, can be difficult both for the user, who cant see where theyre touching, and the touchscreen, which cant accurately determine where the user intends to touch. The hold and swipe method would rely heavily on image metadata like facial recognition, and allow users to go between points of interest without repeating a single inexact gesture multiple times.The idea is that youd touch down on the display, on or off an object of interest, and after a short delay, move your finger in whatever direction. Contextual actions are done based on a few things: if you put your finger on someones face, then move off to the right, it could either go to other peoples faces in the picture, or switch to other pictures with the same face. The rate could be modified by the distance your finger is from the original point, or by tilting the device itself.Unfortunately, as I said, coming up with new gestures is quite difficult, and this one is likely to end up totally unused. For one thing, it doesnt solve the problem it sets out to solve: not only is the users finger still obscuring much of the display, but they cant remove it while navigating the content. Its also overcomplicated: tilting the display while holding your finger down at a certain distance from the original point? Its all most people can do to master two-finger scrolling. And the UI elements are also nontrivial additions. How do you tell the user its time to move their finger? How do you indicate, on this small screen of theirs, which face or element of the picture theyve landed on?Its also not original. The idea of placing an anchor by holding a finger or stylus down, and then scrolling in the direction indicated by the next movement is quite old. Apples addition of moving between points of interest or photos with the same face or tag is just a veneer on a gesture thats been around in games and apps for years. If this patent were legitimate you could also patent using this gesture to move between cells in a spreadsheet, or brush sizes in photoshop, or tabs in a browser.It just goes to show the amount of chaff thats produced while youre trying to get some wheat. Most of these ideas die early on in focus groups (we produced and killed a dozen in a couple hours at a recent Microsoft event), but this one, perhaps, they felt was on the border line. I wouldnt expect Apple to include something this inelegant in devices like the Nano. Limiting the users UI vocabulary has been a big part of Apples success, and part of that has been binning ideas like this one as quick as possible.Patently Apple has more information, but for some reason I couldnt bring up the patent itself. Ill update with a link as soon as I get it.
