Its not often that youre attacked by a random stranger, but if/when it does happen preparedness is the key. Think back to your karate days, carry pepper spray, use the buddy system, and stay alert. And when all that fails, download the My Witness app on your phone. In the rare case that you actually have the opportunity to snap a picture of your attacker, youll be glad you did. While our 911 service is evolving to allow for text, video and images, the reality of those improvements is still years away. The My Witness app wont act as a full-fledged replacement for that (in fact, it isnt sending information to 911 at all), but it may just save your life. Or at the very least, help the authorities catch the bad guy. Heres how it works: after installing the app, simply enter in your own contact information, as well as the email addresses of three emergency contacts. All you have to do is enter information once and its stored for good. So lets say couple hypothetical weeks later, youre walking home from a hypothetical bar late at night when you start feeling hypothetical eyes on the back of your head. Hypothetically speaking, youre being followed. At that point you have one of two choices: you can call the cops on someone who is possibly 100 percent innocent or you can load up the My Witness app and get ready to snap a pic. If the stalker ends up being a danger, take a pic (you know, since the cameras on our phones are all about the speedy shutter) and the app immediately and automatically sends the picture to the email addresses you provided, along with your location and phone number. At an idea level, this makes a lot of sense. Muggers tend to get away with their crimes, but this could throw a little justice into the mix. However, in practice I dont see this being as useful as wed like. Taking a crisp, quick picture with your phone is hard enough, but taking a picture of a criminal attacking and/or stalking you borders on impossible. Past that, email isnt necessarily the most immediate way to get a hold of someone either. Then again, phone makers have grown increasingly focused on the camera. The iPhone 4S, for example, has an upgraded shooter, along with a camera button on the lock screen to take quick pics. Still, it may not be quick or stealthy enough to capture a criminal in the act, though it may be a great way to witness and document crimes from afar. The My Witness app is available now from the Android Market and Apple App Store for $4.13 and $3.99 respectively. 
