Maybe we need a new website, IsSiriDownForEveryoneOrJustForMe.com, because it looks like Siri is experiencing an extended outage, according to several tipsters, tweets, and our own internal tests. When you try to use Siri on the iPhone 4S right now, the usually perky virtual assistant just responds: Sorry, I am having trouble connecting to the network and does nothing.According to iSmashPhone, who spotted this news first, people are beginning to tweet about the Siri outage, but folks seem to be usure as to whether or not theyre the only ones experiencing the issue. It appears that the service, for some at least, has been down for a good part of the day.Granted, Siri is still a beta product  and this is what happens to beta products  but when Apple promotes Siri as one of the best and OMG-gotta-have-it new features of its latest device through its cloying newTV ads, its worth noticing when the service doesnt quite deliver as promised.Is siri down for every one Verified Account^   (@bigrich0272) November 03, 2011My Siri hasn't been working most of the day anyone else notice her being down? Martin Bowling (@martinbowling) November 03, 2011Siri is down for meinstead of unhelpful error messages, voice transcription is silently failing. Nice. Robert Carlsen (@robertcarlsen) November 03, 2011Siri down. Ok useless now. John Heaton (@Gojohnnyboi) November 03, 2011Wow, is Siri down? I keep getting the message that it cannot connect to the network. Reboot didn't help either. Gerald Bailey (@gbailey) November 03, 2011Siri is not working well for me right now. Can't even process this simple request. Servers must be down for NYC: http://t.co/IFD4g1LO David Fine (@davidfine) November 03, 2011Siri Outage: Is Siri Down?: It seems that Siri is down. Accoridng to some of the tweets we've been reading, peop  bit.ly/rHwik7  (@ismashphone) November 03, 2011Apparemment Siri est down ?   DevilHate (@DevilHate_) November 03, 2011Update: Given that we dont know how long todays outage will last, Im going to remove first from the headline until we have some hard data on the length.  
