The future may be mobile, but trying to shop at an online retailer from your phone is often a surefire way to get a headache.Sure, online stores are now much better about offering mobile-optimized sites than they were a few years ago — but even then, plugging in your credit card information on your phones keyboard is a pain, and quickly buying multiple items from multiple stories is basically out of the question. There are a few good experiences to be had (Ive used Amazons mobile apps plenty of times, and they generally work well). But its the exception, not the rule.Thats why Kima Labs built TapBuy, a new mobile app (and platform) with a focus on making the mobile shopping experience as good as it should be. You enter your credit card information once, and can use it across multiple stores. Theres no shopping cart — you just tap and buy, without having to go through a lengthy purchase/shipping flow. You can download their first app, TapBuy Deals for iOS, right here.Kima Labs was started by a team of ex-Amazon employees, including CEO Blake Scholl, who did Amazons first AdWords purchase way back when and later headed Amazons global search engine marketing. The company has raised $770k from Naval Ravikant, SV Angel, Owen Van Natta and former execs from Amazon, Facebook, Google and Wal-Mart.When you first fire up TapBuy Deals, youll see a stream of discounted items the service has found online (its constantly crawling various retailers and detecting price changes, so itll even catch things that arent advertised). You can filter by the type of deal you want to see, and you can delete retailers you arent interested in. The service will support top brands like Gap, Target, and Old Navy.The first time you buy something youll have to enter your credit card information and shipping address. From then on, the buying flow simply requires you to enter a 4-digit PIN (which is used to protect you in case you lose your phone) — the payment and shipping information is handled by TapBuy automatically, so you can literally purchase something (even from a retailer youve never shopped with) in a few seconds. There are some other niceties included as well — for instance, the app will automatically enter any relevant coupon codes it can find online for the site youre ordering from.The interesting bit about TapBuys technology is that it doesnt have special API access to each of these retailer sites. Instead, the company has essentially built a browser in the cloud — each time you buy something using the app, a computer program on TapBuys servers will actually click through the retailers checkout process, filling in your information as appropriate. This sounds a little goofy, but it has a key benefit: merchants dont have to do any work to become TapBuy-enabled, so the company can onboard them more quickly. Scholl adds that this actually took a lot of work to get working reliably at scale.The one caveat: at launch some of the items seen in the TapBuy Deals app arent actually TapBuy enabled — in other words, youll have to go through the retailers normal website to actually buy them. But Scholl says theyre working hard to make all of them work with the streamlined buying experience.And this is just the start. In the future, the company will also be releasing more apps that include this functionality, and third-party developers will be able to integrate it as well.  Android fans can expect to start seeing TapBuy-enabled apps next year.
