Atlassian, the enterprise software company, has really hit its stride over the last few years. Founded in 2002 in Sydney, the company has today built a solid base of 26,000 customers, which include some big names like Facebook, Zynga, Cisco, and Adobe. In July of last year, the startup raised $60 million from Accel to scale and ramp up M&A. Since then, the company has bought Bitbucket and SourceTree to allow developers to host their source code in Bitbucket (or any other hosting platform) and then manage that source using SourceTree. Since the beginning, Atlassians goal has been to create software development and collaboration tools that enable enterprise teams to quickly and easily plan, build, and launch products. The startups flagship software products, like JIRA and Confluence, let software development teams take advantage of issue and project tracking in an effort to improve speed of development and code quality as well as giving those teams a single place collaborate, share, and discuss files, minutes, specs, mockups, diagrams, etc.According to Atlassian President Jay Simons, the company is currently seeing 40 percent year-over-year growth and $88 million in revenues (up from $56 million last year). Building on this growth, the company is today announcing a series of upgrades and updates that should be a boon to customers worldwide. For starters, the company has moved into new office space at 7th and Harrison in San Francisco, and it is also launching a complete redesign of its website, which goes live this afternoon.But beyond this, the company is today launching a new SaaS offering called Atlassian OnDemand, which will allow software development teams to use the companys products (including JIRA and Confluence) at a lower, discounted rate. Starting at $10 per month for 10 users, the multi-tenant, cloud-based SaaS essentially allows users of its software to take advantage of its development and collaboration products with the benefit of easy configuration.Taking over for Atlassian Hosted (which the company has been running since 2006), OnDemand will enable customers to integrate third-party applications to beef up power, features, and versatility in their project environments.But the real highlight of OnDemand is that it that its a la carte, meaning that users can start with as much or as little in the way of services as they need, adding products as they go. Atlassians apps are integrated into current holdings, so that, as a user adds new products, tabs appear at the top of their screen. Links can also be shared between apps, as well as shared navigation, and sharing between systems. OnDemand includes JIRA, Confluence, GreenHopper, Team Calendars, Bonfire, FishEye, Crucible, and Bamboo, as well as free maintenance and upgrades of all apps, and third-party compatibility with Google Apps, Zendesk, Salesforce, uTest, and more.So, with mix-and-match OnDemand offerings, customers can pick and choose the number of users they want per application, starting at $10/month and scaling from there. You can check out the tiered pricing here. Its pretty cool that now, for Atlassian customers, regardless of what he or she purchases, theyll be able to take advantage of studio-style integration, single sign-on, consolidated user management, linking, common nav, etc.More on the new Atlassian here.
