Even with Ice Cream Sandwich on the way, Android Gingerbread devices are still as hot as ever. That said, there are way too many Android handsets on the market to parse through each and every one, but thats why were here. Weve looked through all the latest Android smartphones to give you our brief thoughts on the pick of the litter. These arent full-length reviews, but rather a way for you to easily compare what we think to be the most full-featured Android handsets released this month. Hopefully, your shopping research just got way less intensive. For the glorious and spooky month of October, were putting the following handsets on the table: Samsung Galaxy S II (AT&T, T-Mobile, Sprint) Motorola Droid RAZR (Verizon, and maybe AT&T), HTC Amaze 4G (T-Mobile), and the Samsung Stratosphere (Verizon). While each of these phones run Android 2.3 Gingerbread, they all have something different they bring to the table, along with varying price tags. Lets take a closer look, yes? The Samsung Galaxy S II is one of the hottest selling handsets in the world, and with good reason. The specs are pretty heavenly along with the design, but its not all rainbows and sunshine with the S II. Since it launched earlier than the rest of our options, it may be a bit more outdated (at least here in the world of smartphones) than the rest. Features:Pros:Cons:If youre nearing the end of your contract, here are some things to consider about the three carrier variants. Sprints big advantage is its unlimited data. Its model basically keeps the same design as the global version, with the exception of four capacitive buttons where there used to be an optical trackpad. T-Mobile, on the other hand, has decided to differentiate on a design level, which is something I usually frown upon. In this case, T-Mo rounded out the back and the corners, which (in my opinion) gives the handset a much less Galaxy S II feel. AT&Ts S II separates itself from the herd with a smaller screen, and thus better pixel density. 
