Short Version: While the idea of a flip-out screen for self-portraits is just a tad gimmicky, the MV800 is one sweet little point-and-shoot. Whether youre straight-up obsessed with yourself, or a narcissist is hidden deep within, this thing just begs you to take pictures of yourself. And if your experience is anything like mine, youll really, really enjoy it. Features:Pros:Cons:Long Version:Point-and-shoots have recently been overrun by stellar phone cameras, but that doesnt mean theres no market left for them. No matter how many cool tricks your phones camera can pull off, the Samsung MV800 can do it better, I assure you. Hardware: The MV800s claim to fame is its flip-out 3-inch LCD screen, connected to the device by a single hinge. In my time with it, the hinged screen seemed sturdy enough. I felt a little looseness at one point when the camera was flipped out, but overall Id say the flip-out screen shouldnt give you any trouble. When its flipped out, the backside of the camera has a textured black finish, which really enhanced my ability to grip the camera when taking self-portraits. On the back, youll also find a secondary shutter button, making it much easier to (again) take self-portraits. But theres more to the flip-out screen then self-portraits. Sometimes you need to hold the camera up high or down low to get the shot you want, even though your face cant necessarily follow suit. The screen lets you see what youre shooting from just about any angle. The MV800 is equipped with a Schneider-Kreuznach 26mm wide-angle lens, with 5x optical zoom. To be honest, image quality isnt necessarily this little guys forte. Of course, thats not to say that MV800 pictures are bad, but it certainly cant compete with what you see from DSLRs, micro four thirds and other more high-performance systems. I took a few test shots with the MV800 and my Olympus E-PL2 micro four thirds camera to show you the difference.Olympus:
Samsung:
Along the left side youll find a microUSB port for charging and HDMI out, which should be welcome news for anyone looking to take advantage of the MV800s 720p video capture capabilities. On top youll find your standard shutter button, zoom toggle, and a power button, while battery, microSD card access, and your tripod slot is located on the bottom of the camera. In terms of build, feel in the hand, and general aesthetics, the MV800 has its bases covered. Software:If the narcissistic nature of the MV800s hinged screen didnt get you, my bet is the software will. Anyone who enjoys taking pictures for fun (rather than as a serious hobby, or career) will enjoy fiddling around with the software features on this camera. To start, the interface is super easy to understand, even if you know absolutely nothing about photography. Along with Smart Auto and Program settings for both video and stills, the MV800 offers different scene options to let you get the best shot based on your environment. Along with your standard filters (my favorites below), Samsung also included the ability to take 3D photos, as well as live panoramic shots. 
