The increasing socialification (as opposed to socialization) of our everyday activities is food for thought. What is it that makes people want to share everything about every activity? Reading especially, to me, has always been more of an escape from the social sphere. Except for on the rare occasions on which I have had to read out loud, books are a way to completely disengage from the constantly and insistently connected online world. Yet I cant deny that the urge to share and be shared with must be as compelling for some regarding books as it is for their lunches, activities, and so on.So when Kobo shows off its e-book reader and touts it as the worlds first social e-reader, I am skeptical. Firstly because Im pretty sure there are plenty of socially-enabled e-readers out there, and secondly because Im not sure social is a basket into which that Kobo should be putting all their eggs.The competition is fierce as hell. Amazons Fire is widely recognized as a potential powerhouse, and the Nook Color has already captured a nice little piece of the LCD e-reader market. Ive had a soft spot for Kobo for a while now, being a fan of their original and updated touch-based e-readers, but I have no confidence in this new venture.The reason Amazon is able to make the Fire a compelling device is because of the vast stores of content they have waiting to serve up. Movies, shows, music, and more in addition to books. The Nook Color was able to carve out a niche because it had an actual identity, and was far cheaper than other Android tablets. What does the Kobo have?Well, to its credit, it has social features that are very desirable among social readers. You know, book clubs and such. If you and your friends have the wherewithal to put together a book club, this is definitely the platform to do it on. The Kobo Pulse integration lets you detect and join discussion of passages and pages as you read them, and the Vox is the first e-reader to get Facebook Ticker integration. Devin turned a page in The Aeneid  12 seconds ago.And who doesnt like stats like these:But outside Kobos unique and potentially interesting social e-reading platform (collectively called Reading Life), its just another slightly out of date Android tablet with a skin on it. The specs arent anything to sneeze at (they were leaked a while back), but theyre also nothing special. Its priced competitively at $200, certainly, but Im not sure I could advise anyone to pick it up over the Fire, based strictly on the potential I see in them. That said, I havent used either, so I dont want to make any real recommendations here. But I dont think theres anything Kobo has that Amazon cant whip together in an update. Thats a dangerous position for them to be in.If youre interested, you can learn more about the Vox over at Kobos site. You can pre-order today and I think theyre shipping soon.
