Backupify, the startup that provides online data backup, archiving and export, is today releasing a new version of its Backupify Snapshot tool with additional features for Google Apps admins. The tool, for those unfamiliar, allows Google Apps administrators to extract and download the complete Google Apps account for a departing company employ and save the data locally.Previously, Snapshot was in public beta  its now being commercially released to all.Traditionally, when an employee left an organization, the I.T. department would backup their files and folders, disable their Exchange mailbox and export their mailbox .PST file. Now, as companies of all sizes are transitioning to the cloud, termination procedures on the I.T. side have also changed. Unfortunately, because theres not a simple process for exporting and archiving a users Google Apps data, companies will often just keep the account open but unused. That, however, can lead to an additional expense, as Google charges by seat.With Backupify Snapshot, the idea is to recreate the same sort of account termination procedures companies are used to, but for cloud-based services. The tool compresses a users Google Apps account data (Gmail, Docs, Calendar, Contacts and Sites) into a Zip file that can then be downloaded to a local machine or server. The Google Apps account can then be safely deleted.The killer feature in todays release is the added support for multi-user and batch downloading  that will be a huge timesaver for I.T. during those times when theres more than one employee account to export. (Layoffs, anyone?)Snapshot also improved support for large organizations via better search, introduced a referral functionality that will dole out free downloads for those who refer their friends and added Google Checkout as a payment option. (Snapshot users get only 5 free downloads, then have to pay $10 per download).Backupify Snapshot is available both as a standalone service and as a part of Backupifys Google Apps Backup service. It has been used by over 500 organizations since its release last month.
