This morning, Motorola dropped a bit of a surprise with the MOTO ACTV, an iPod Nano-esque thimble of a device. Does the world need another tiny, crappy audio player? Probably not. But what about a tiny, Android-powered audio player that focuses on gauging exercise? Still, probably not — but hey, itll be fun to hack!Now, lets be clear: the idea of a device that gauges your athletic ability isnt a new one — nor was it new when Apple introduced the new iPod Nano with Nike+ integration. As they tend to do, Apple just made things suck less, introducing a somewhat-flashy device that just about anyone could comprehend. Motorola wants to go deeper.The ACTV is a bit more focused, diving far deeper into the niche that is hardcore athleticism. If the iPod Nano is 90% media and 10% exercise, the ACTV is split 50/50. Whereas the Nano is mostly a tricked-out pedometer, the ACTV has things like GPS, a heart-rate monitor, and a snazzy cloud-based backend for monitoring all of your stats over time — plus fancy tricks like Bluetooth pairing (allowing you to screen calls while gettin your run on without having to sweatily paw at your handset.) I spent some time with the ACTV this morning, albeit in a tiny office rather than out on the track. Read on for my impressions.First impressions:The key feature here is Motorolas backend, which the device automatically syncs with (via WiFi) to provide reports on your efforts. Have you gotten faster over time? Is your heart in better shape now than it was a month ago? This is the deal maker/breaker; if its not good enough, itll be hard to justify a separate, dedicated $249 device when a $199 iPod Touch (which, in an armband, is hardly more noticeable) has access to apps like Runkeeper. Sadly, this feature seemingly wasnt ready for a preview just yet.To step away from the intended use case here for a second: man, do I hope Motorola didnt go out of their way to lock this thing down. If the trends weve seen with iPod Nano are indication, hackers/modders will have an absolute field day with this thing.What do you think? Any gym/track rats out there already breaking into a sweat over this one?
