Everyme, a startup that plans to disrupt the address book, has announced $1.5 million in funding from an impressive group of backers including Andreessen Horowitz, Greylock, Michael Arringtons CrunchFund, Chinese internet giant Tencent, SV Angel, Dave Morin, Joshua Schachter and Vivi Nevo.A graduate of Y Combinators Summer 20011 class, Everyme wants to reinvent the way you experience your mobile address book. Co-founder Oliver Cameron (fellow co-founder is former MySpace engineer Vibhu Norby) tells me that the address book is incredibly broken, and that there has been little to no innovation taking place that has made a meaningful impact on the user experience. Everyme, which will launch its iPhone app in November, allows you to import your contacts from your phones address book and match this data from Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and LinkedIn. EveryMe will do all the hard work on the back-end, including reconciling duplicates. Once your social networks have been integrated, youll be left with a more intelligent, social address book.So when you view a contact, youll see that persons birthday, any mutual events youve attended in the past year, job status, whether the person is married, with someone or single, their location and more. Soon, the app will also integrate Gmail, and youll be able to see recent emails with the contact.But Everyme is also planning to be a social network on top of the address book. As Cameron explains, the address book is home to your favorite people, so it makes sense to be able to facilitate communications through the app itself. Users will be able to update the app with their status, and other friends on the app can see an activity feed with contacts status updates. Users can also create their own group messaging circles of contacts, where they can have private conversations with certain groups of people. And Everyme will actually segment certain groups together from the social data gathered. For example, the app will create groups by high school friends, work contacts, college friends and more.Currently, Everyme is letting users reserve their usernames here. The service will soon have a web and Android app as well.Plaxo, Xobni and others are also trying their hand at making the address book smarter, but it doesnt appear that any one startup has been able to really crack the code on providing the go-to contact manager. Perhaps Everyme can be that application. Clearly investors seem to think so. Stay tuned.
