Short Version: The Archos 80 G9 tablet isnt necessarily something Id recommend for the hardcore tablet enthusiast, but it certainly gets the job done. Powered by pure Android 3.2 Honeycomb, the tab offers everything youd expect out of Android and a nice variety of ports, albeit with a somewhat rough build-quality. Features:Pros:Cons:Long Version:BodyWhile its not exactly fitting with my tastes, I wouldnt say the Archos G9 is ugly. The slate deviates from your more minimalist designs like the iPad and the Galaxy Tab, and instead adds a little flare. The G9 sports a dark grey bezel, along with a lighter grey plastic casing that has rounded edges. Along the side youll find a microUSB port for charging, HDMI out, and the lock button. Theres also a full-sized USB port thats meant to hold a 3G dongle, but unfortunately thatll only work in Europe. To those of us in the States, itll merely act as a full-sized USB slot.The build of the Archos 80 G9 tablet is probably what I have the most beef with. Granted, it comes with a totally sturdy little kickstand, which is a useful addition, but on the whole you can tell that is isnt a top-quality build. If you press just slightly against the smooth plastic back panel, either on the 3G USB port or the kickstand area, the plastic depresses and makes a bit of a cracking noise. Worse, the plastic depresses enough to affect the display, making it look like youve been pressing way too hard on the touchscreen. In terms of size, the G9 is just right. Ive played around with plenty of 10- and 7-inch tabs, but the 8-inch segment seems to be somewhat untouched. I found that its a great size for gaming, as you arent sacrificing too much screen real estate for a better grip. Processor/BatteryThe processing power on this little guy had me impressed. Android 3.2 Honeycomb ran like a dream powered by the G9s dual-core OMAP 4 SoC chip. Even with a little stress test  me zipping my finger across the interface/web pages as fast as possible  the tab had no trouble keeping up. However, once I had a few things going at once (a few apps, a movie, and the browser), the processor certainly lost pace. I started to feel the lag when I tried to add a few more tasks to the list and the next app I launched abruptly crashed. Battery life, on the other hand, was a pleasant surprise. Archos promises 7 hours of video playback, which the G9 stood up to brilliantly. I spent an entire day conducting work from the G9 last week, and though it wasnt the most efficiently Ive ever worked, the G9 stuck with me throughout the day. Its worth noting, however, that the tablet gets slower and slower as battery life decreases. With a full charge, hitting the lock button wakes the G9 up almost immediately. Once battery life gets low, it takes a few seconds to wake up and perceive gestures. DisplayThe 1024768 LCD display on the G9 was better than expected, showing very minimal differentiation from pixel to pixel. This becomes most clear while watching HD movies, which I did plenty of. Even better, this is the kind of tablet that many people can enjoy viewing content on at once. Even at a 45 degree angle off to the side, the screen still displays great quality and color. Thanks to the kickstand, I guestimate you can have up to five or six people watching a movie at once. However, the screen becomes increasingly difficult to see from lower or higher angles. Taking it outdoors isnt necessarily ideal, but with screen brightness turned all the way up I was still able to use it as an e-reader. Viewing video and pictures was more difficult, though. SoundAudio, on the other hand, may make it difficult for you and your friends to enjoy the movie. Before I turned on my air conditioner, my roommates and I were comfortably watching a few music videos. After the AC went on, we had to turn the volume all the way up to the max just to hear it. In the same vein, audio sounded a bit fuzzy, especially when pushed to the max. As far as tablets go, audio quality was adequate but nothing to get excited about. Camera Unfortunately, the G9s front-facing web cam was not all that pleasurable to use. At first, it didnt work at all until I downloaded a firmware update. Ever since its worked, but been super buggy. At times, the viewfinder simply goes black. If you happen to take a picture during the black periods, the picture is also a large rectangle of black. When it does work its unsurprisingly grainy, but at least gets the job done where it counts: video chat. ConclusionAt just under $300, the Archos G9 is a fine slate. It comes packed with all the essentials, and has a battery life that should last around as long as you do. But if youre looking for a high-quality tablet, this probably isnt it. Id recommend it as a Christmas gift for a tween, or perhaps a mobile computing device for someone older (who does mostly simple tasks like browsing the web and answering email). Size-wise its a great fit for someone who enjoys gaming, and its certainly light enough to travel with you. This is not a tech geeks tablet, and if high-quality is what youre expecting out of it, youll be sorely disappointed.Configuration options:
