Onepager, the startup that allows any user or small business owner to quickly build a website (for free), is announcing today that it has raised $350K in seed financing from a host of New York City-based angel investors, like Daniel Eskapa and Mark Birch to continue development of new features (i.e. embedding feeds and videos) and support its marketing efforts.Onepager was founded by Matt Shampine, the very same entrepreneur behind Simande, a full-service web design agency, We Are NY Tech, a website that profiles entrepreneurs (and was lauded by Fred Wilson), as well as WeWork Labs, the co-working space that plays home to a mixture of creatives, developers, and early stage startups.But what is it that Onepager does, you ask? The concept is very simple indeed, Onepagers design template enables users to build their own website in a jiffy: Users just enter in the text, images, videos and links they want to appear on the site  as one would in a Word doc  and hit publish. As Onepager is a reseller for Opensrs, the startup takes care of setting its users up with domain names, which can be searched for, purchased, and synced all from the platform. And the platform provides hosting as well.Onepager is completely free to use, or visitors can pay $8 a month for their own customized domain with a full suite of analytics to see whos clicking, as well as a newsletter generator. Squarespace and Moonfruit are other startups in the space that provide similar functionality, but in allowing its users to embed their social data, add buttons that connect to Facebook and Twitter pages, add images, a logo, forward your domain right from the page  and Onepager works automatically on mobile, as its all compatible with HTML standards. (Unlike Moonfruit which uses Flash.)Onepager has been designed to be an uncomplicated solution to quickly building a workable website; users dont have to know diddly about HTML coding, which means its great for local restaurants and small businesses that want to create a web presence but cant afford to pay web designers a boatload of cash. The site will also soon be offering embedding from embed.ly to allow site owners to supe up their multimedia offerings and news feeds. So, if you want to convince your friends youre a great web designer without having to read Coding For Dummies, Onepager is the site for you. Its cheap, easy, and you can build a great website in 10 minutes.Check Onepager out at home here and let us know what you think.
