The talk of the town may be Siri these days, but Android fans know full well that voice recognition has been baked deep into the OS for quite a while. Granted, Google hasnt really improved on Voice Actions in over a year now (fingers crossed that Ice Cream Sandwich will include some of the nifty intelligence that makes Siri so impressive), but it does allow third-party developers to hook into the voice API, sometimes with compelling results.Sonalight Text by Voice is one such app thats launching on Android Market today, and its particularly useful. Its exactly what it sounds like: you can both send and receive texts via voice, dictating how you want to respond to each message without ever having to look at your phone. If youre one of those people who insists on texting while driving, please do yourself (and everyone else) a favor and check this out.If youve watched Apples demo videos for Siri, then the app will seem a little familiar. Theres a lot that Siri can do that Sonalight doesnt — you cant ask it to check your calendar, for example, nor can you do any of those nifty Wolfram Alpha data lookups. But for straightforward texting, its taking a similarly intuitive approach.Fire up the app, and youll be told the three magic words: Text by Voice. Say those, and the app will ask you who youd like to text. Say a name (you can just say a first name if youd like), and the app will look for that name in your phones contacts, then read their full name aloud. Confirm that this is the right person, and youll be asked to say your text message. Once youve done that, the app will read it back to you and ask you if youd like to send it (if the transcription messed up, you can also say your message again).And receiving a message works as youd hope. As soon as the message comes in, the app will say text message received and read it out to you, then ask if youd like to repeat it, reply, or ignore it.Once youve open the app, itll keep running in the background until you explicitly exit. Even when the phone is locked, youll still be able to create a new text message by saying Text by Voice, and incoming messages will keep being read aloud — which means you can activate it, toss it on your passenger seat, and not have to fumble with the device for the rest of your drive.Of course, there have been several handless-texting apps available on Android for some time now. So what makes Sonalights product different? Cofounder Spenser Skates says that the competition does fine reading text aloud, but that it tends to be clumsy when it comes time to respond. Sonalight has also put a strong focus on ensuring the initial setup process (or lack thereof) is as straightforward as possible.Ive tested the app and have had good results, even when Im sitting several feet away from the phone (on my two-year old Nexus One, no less – cue grumbling iPhone 4 owners). My only major gripe: I have a tendency to start speaking before the app has given me its beep cue, which it does when its ready to start listening to me. Sometimes, for example, Ill say yes when its only halfway done reading a message to me — and then nothing happens.Skates says this is common, and that its an issue theyre working on. He explains that the application doesnt start listening to user input until its done talking, because it has to do echo cancellation during voice input. Theyre working on a fix.The only other issue I see is the apps monetization plan. Right now the app is a free download — each month you can send twenty texts by voice, and you can receive an unlimited number. If you want to send more voice texts, you have to pay $20 for an unlimited years subscription. I think this is too much upfront (Id rather pay something like $2 a month, or buy a bucket of 100 texts for a few dollars). But Skates says that the service will be experimenting to figure out the best approach, so this setup may change. Update, 11/3/11: The company has now removed the fees — you can send unlimited texts, free of charge. Theres still a $4.99 premium option if youd like to remove the signatures the app appends, and the company is working on additional premium features to offer in the future (the core texting functionality will be free from here on out).Also worth noting: the twenty free texts append a link to the app to the end of your message (if you upgrade, this will be removed, though not til an update goes live later this week).
