Stealthy e-commerce platform Everlane has raised $1.1 million from a number of high-profile investors including Kleiner Perkins, SV Angel, Lerer Ventures, Betaworks and angel investors including Brian Sugar, Keith Rabois, Dave Morin, Ben Ling, Nils Johnson, and Karl Jacob.Everlane is still a month away from its public launch but weve received a few details on what the e-commerce company will offer come November 1. Co-founder Michael Preysman tells me that the site will offer designer-quality goods, always under $100. The plan is to build the next American Apparel or J Crew, but all online through a highly personalized, collaborative experience.How does Everlane promise designer-quality duds at low prices? Similar to fellow e-commerce platform JustFabulous, Everlane bypasses the middlemen in the manufacturing process, which cuts 90% of traditional retail costs, and incorporating consumer feedback in realtime. You have to be a member to join, and each month the site launches a new collection of goods. Members can vote and comments on what new accessories and clothes Everlane offers each month.Preysman tells me that the site will focus on offering American Apparel-style clothing, including high-quality t-shirts, sweatshirts, and more. Each month, Everlane will also launch a new line of accessories, including jewelry, that will expire each month. Preysman also says that Everlane has brought on a number of retail executives and employees from American Apparel, including the companys former brand director and former content director.Everlane will merge the tech and branding world, says Preysman, and create a new platform for finding high-quality basics at low prices. Plus, members get input on design and new products. Similar to American Apparel and J. Crew, Everland has ambitions of being a broader lifestyle brand.Everlane is certainly capitalizing on a new wave of personalized (and well-funded) e-commerce startups that include JustFabulous, ShoeDazzle, BeachMint, BirchBox and many others. The space is still relatively new, but has been gaining traction amongst users as an affordable way to shop online, customize your purchases, and receive high-quality goods.
