It looks like Christmas may come early for T-Mobile customers. Internal documents show four device launches this month and twice as many in November, including the Samsung Galaxy 7.0 Plus tablet. Whats odd is that pieces of this roadmap seem dead-on, while others dont make a whole lot of sense. So well proceed with caution and figure it out together, shall we? First on the list are three October 19 launches: the HTC Ruby (officially known as the HTC Amaze 4G), the Samsung Hercules (the Galaxy S II), and the Huawei Wayne, which you may recognize as the Huawei Sonic 4G Mobile Hotspot. The Hotspot is pretty self-explanatory, so Ill spend my words on the two beastly smartphones supposedly hitting shelves on the 19th. To start, this is the most flawed part of the roadmap, as noted by its original poster TmoNews. Both the Amaze 4G and the Galaxy S II are slated for pre-order on October 10 and in-store releases on October 12. Though its odd, the incorrect dates probably have something to do with the fact that this roadmap is just a bit old, and probably not the most up-to-date version in T-Mobiles system.  Moving along youll find the Samsung Arnold, not nearly a hot enough codename for the Galaxy Tab 10.1, which will launch on October 26. Specs on Apples least favorite copycat include a dual-core 1GHz processor, a 10.1-inch 1280800 WXGA display, and a waist line of just 8.6mm. The November 2 mega-launch day seems pretty legit, since TmoNews found another internal T-Mo document (pictured at right) promising six launches on November 2. Lo and behold, six devices are slated for that date within the roadmap. Devices scheduled for the 2nd include two new myTouch handsets from LG (the Maxx and Maxx Touch), the LG Flip II (a baffling dual-screen Android slider), the HTC Omega (officially known as the Radar 4G), the Huawei Tallsome (which looks a lot like a little 7 or 8-inch tablet), and the Samsung Ancora (likely a mid-range to low-end Galaxy device).  Last but certainly not least, November 9 should bring us face-to-face with the Galaxy Tab 7.0 Plus and the BlackBerry Torch (codenamed Dumoine). Since the roadmap cuts off at November 9, we wouldnt be surprised to see plenty more out of T-Mo in the latter half of November and early December. Especially since the carrier made such a fuss over holiday sales when taking Samsungs side in its infamous battle with Apple.
