Exclusive  Social Q&A site Sharecare.com, created by WebMD founder Jeff Arnold and TVs Dr. Mehmet Oz, is partnering with Healthline Networks, a provider of intelligent health information services. Healthline currently powers the health platforms at Yahoo Health, AARP, Aetna, United Health Group and others. Going forward, it will power Sharecares search services too.One of the more interesting products resulting from the partnership is the integration of Healthlines 3D BodyMaps, a visual search offering that lets users browse the human body to see how diseases and other medical conditions can affect it. The launch is timely, given Googles recent announcement that it would shut down its own Google Body Browser project, which will be closed and the code open-sourced.Sharecare will also roll out additional content, navigation features and applications in over the next few months, including Healthlines SymptomSearch, TreatmentSearch and DrugSearchIn case youre unfamiliar with Sharecare, the site is a social counterpart to the older WebMD, both of which were founded (or co-founded) by Jeff Arnold. Its probably what WebMD would be, if launched today.Instead of simply serving up informational pages containing health information like WebMD does, Sharecare users can ask questions using the sites search interface to get connected to a network of some 3,000 medical professionals.The doctors on the site (including Dr. Oz) arent providing diagnoses, of course, but they do answer more fact-based health related questions, like what does collagen do? or how does laser teeth whitening work? There are also online communities where users can track topics and interests of their own, and connect with others.Healthline Networks has raised $50 million in funding, mainly from strategic investors including Aetna, GE/NBC Peacock Fund, Investor Growth Capital, Kaiser Permanente, Reed Elsevier, U.S. News & World Report and VantagePoint Venture Partners.Sharecare, meanwhile, is partnered with Oprahs Harpo Studios, as well as HSW International, Sony Pictures Television and Discovery Communications. The site benefits from on-air mentions made during the Doctor Oz TV show, which are expected to increase with the new product rollout.
