The companies who enjoy the most success in revolutionizing the book industry (as opposed to simply creating a totally new medium) will be those that disrupt the publishing process, the writing process, the distribution process — but leave the actual reading process the hell alone. Paul CarrApparently my former colleague and fellow Diet Coke fiend Paul Carr is founding a startup post-TechCrunch, instead of heading back to professional blog jockeying like the rest of us pixel-stained wretches. Yay Paul.So what on earth is it already? Well Carr himself told me that the startup is a media-play, traversing the intersection between old media and new media  the third way, as he puts it. Okay.Hitting a brick wall with Paul, I tried other avenues. When I reached them earlier, investor Tony Hsieh told me that he was asked to be vague and investor Mike Arrington told me that he appreciated my reporting skills but that he wasnt going to talk specifics about his investment until Carr did.What gives? Didnt Carr once pour scorn on entrepreneurs who engaged in these kinds of reporter-evading tactics?Oh well, heres what Ive got: Carr says in his announcement blog that the Las Vegas-based startup will directly address an issue [he's] written passionately about and Ive heard hes recently been talking to people with Kindle publishing backgrounds about joining his team. If I had to guess, I would say that whatever it is some sort of attempt at a creating a new ebook/ezine-related publishing experience.Carr tells me that he is indeed hiring, but wouldnt comment on what for. Perhaps this recent tweet entreaty toward the creator of the Kindlegraph provides a clue?Fed up with my constant badgering, Carr gave me a list of 25 things his startup isnt, full email below:Dear Alexia,As promised, here are a list of twenty-five things my new company wont be doing

1. Creating a rival to TechCrunch2. Any other kind of blogging3. Last minute hotel deals4. Creating any kind of social network for xxxx5. Giving a shit about your social graph6. Printing books7. Any other kind of gamification8. A browser plugin that explains to blog readers why something is news9. Anything that helps brands do anything with social media10. ContentFarmville: (social gaming + seo = profit!)11. Building a robot army to kill anonymous commenters12. Developing a better Barbiecam13. Adding soundtracks to crossword puzzles14. Publishing a newspaper15. Creating a crowdsourced database of Julian Assanges hypocrisies16. I, Mac  A gourmet Mac and Cheese franchise for hipsters17. Selling fancy pens18. Selling shitty pens19. Badges20. Airbnb for nap pods21. A microblog platform for public resignations22. Potterless: a virtual community for grown-ups who hate Harry Potter23. Wifi on planes (note: this may already exist)24. Dogs with tiny hats25. Quora

Hope thats helpful.Miss you guys,PaulCarr and Kindle image via: RachelC
