The online storage wars continue! Yesterday, Dropbox announced new pricing plans which doubled the storage space for users at no additional cost, and today, new player Cubby is also making a change that it hopes will incentivize users to make a switch. The company is now offering users 1 GB of additional space every time they refer a friend to the service. Thats double what Dropboxs is offering today (500 MB). And if you invite 5 friends, the referral rates doubles from 5 GB to 10 GB.Cubby, in case the name doesnt ring a bell (dont feel bad, youre not alone) is a recently launched service from LogMeIn, which you probably do remember as the company behind the remote access software that lets you view your work files at home or vice versa. The need for consumer-grade remote access solutions was a big deal in the days before the cloud, but web services have been eating away at this market for years. Besides Dropbox, theres also Microsofts SkyDrive, Box, and SugarSync, to name just of few of the more popular players. (Please dont email me.)In addition the referral offer, which is retroactive for early adopters, Cubby is also rolling out the next phases of its beta today, which includes an updated iOS application that supports opening files from other apps in Cubby and moving files from Cubby to other apps. The company is now allowing unlimited sharing of cubbies (i.e., folders), too  previously, sharing counted against your beta invites. And theres a new Cubby icon for desktop folders which better indicates its Cubby-enabled status.Although the software is still in closed beta, the first 5,000 TechCrunch readers can get in by clicking here.So, how does this news break down in terms of the competition? Here are few examples:But remember, in the cloud storage wars, pricing is not the only concern. Availability of mobile applications, ease-of-use, feature set, sharing functions, file size limits, and more will all contribute to consumers choice here. However, its worth noting that with Google in particular, its recent launch of Google Drive on iOS has forced competitors to step up their game. The move has prompted Dropbox to lower prices, as now, simply having an iOS app is no longer a key advantage. It will be interesting to see where Cubby decides to factor itself in when its pricing is setand also, whether the space has room for yet another player.
