Ive been a fan of Dropbox for a long time. Its convenient, it just works, and 2GB of free storage can go a long way. But it isnt perfect — if youre dealing with very large amounts of data, like movie footage, then youll quickly find yourself in the services most expensive tiers. And some businesses and professionals dealing with sensitive data simply arent permitted to store it on third-party servers for security reasons.If any of these concerns sound familiar to you, youll likely be very interested in a Y Combinator-backed company called AeroFS. The pitch is straightforward: its basically Dropbox, but instead of using servers controlled by a third party to store and sync your data, you transfer the data directly between your own devices.If youve used Dropbox, youll feel right at home with AeroFS. After installing small clients on your computer (the service supports Windows, Mac, and Linux), you drag and drop the files youd like to sync between machines into a special folder, called a Library. Add a file to that folder, and itll automatically sync to your other devices, which send the data to each other through peer-to-peer connections rather than through a third-party server.This setup a few benefits. For one, it means that your data is never stored on AeroFSs servers, which makes it appealing for the aforementioned companies that cant use cloud services like Dropbox. Second, it means you can sync as much data as youd like without having to pay for additional server-side storage, making it appealing to people who deal with large amounts of data.Of course, this peer-to-peer system has one downside. Unlike Dropbox, which lets you access and sync your data any time you have an Internet connection, with AeroFS theres an additional requirement: you can only access a file thats stored on a different machine if that machine is turned on. Say, for example, you edited an important document on your desktop machine at home, then jumped on a flight and attempted to access it a few hours later from your laptop. If you forgot to leave your desktop machine turned on, youd probably be out of luck.AeroFS founder Yuri Sagalov acknowledges this could potentially be an issue, but says that in many cases it isnt really a big deal. One reason why, he explains, is that many offices already have servers and computers running all the time anyway; they can just install AeroFS on these machines and use them as their main datastores.And AeroFS gives you another option for those mission-critical files: you can opt to selectively backup certain folders to AeroFSs servers, which means you can access the files at any time. This feature is essentially a clone of Dropbox, and you lose the security benefits of a purely peer-to-peer sync. But it makes sense — you probably have some files that youre fine storing in the cloud, and others that youd rather keep inside your firewall. AeroFS gives you the flexibility to have it both ways.The company says theres a big market for this, particularly among healthcare providers, lawyers, finance firms, movie professionals (who can use it to securely share content between machines), and other companies who have data that cant leave their internal firewall.AeroFS also has an impressive list of backers. Y Combinator founder Paul Graham says that company is one of the most important from any of the firms batches. Other investors include Ron Conway, Ashton Kutcher, Andreessen-Horowitz, Ash Patel, Jerry Yang, Naval Ravikant, Chris Sacca, Ace & Company, Geoff Ralston, Paul Buchheit, and Maynard Webb.
