zLooks familiar, eh? Logitech clearly drew inspiration from Apple for the Wireless Touchpad, but thats fine in my book. The Wireless Trackpad doesnt have the magic repertoire of the Apple counterpart, but the new Logitech product seemingly has enough parlor tricks to get job done and on a Windows computer no less.Its hard to ignore the similarities of the Logitech Wireless Touchpad and the Apple Magic Trackpad, therefore its equally hard to ignore past posts. You see, per MG, the mouses days are numbered, but apparently, since his infamous posts declaring the traditional mouses death by Apple was published well over a year ago, the venerable mouse must be dying a slow, comfortable death. No, the mouse isnt exactly dead, but MG was right by declaring the Magic Mouse a harbinger foretelling our computing future. I guess the future is here.Much like with the Apple Magic Trackpad, the Logitech Wireless Trackpad allows for  four-finger multitouch for easier navigation, scrolling, jumping tabs, and switching apps. However, unlike with the Apple version, these functions are not built into the OS so the device may not function as well for anything but those everyday tasks.The Logitech Wireless Trackpad works through Logitechs fantastic 2.4GHz Unifying receiver that allows for a total of five wireless Logitech devices including mice and keyboards. Plug in the little USB receiver and let the multitouch fun begin. The Wireless Trackpad features standard Logitech dress. Its plastic, but like all the rest of Logitechs products, it looks and feels great but not as fantastic as the aluminum Apple Magic Trackpad. Logitech states that a single AA battery will provide four months of use and thankfully built-in convenient LED battery indicators. Expect the  Wireless Trackpad later this month in both American and European retailers for $50.The mouse isnt dead yet despite MGs claims. The Apple Magic Trackpad might have singled its decline but not any more than the rise of slate devices. The traditional PC as a whole is dying quicker than these desktop trackpad input devices can overtake mice. That said, the Apple Trackpad was an instant hit with the Apple crowd because Mac notebooks have fantastic (read: the best) trackpads out of any notebook and users wanted that control scheme on their desktop. Windows notebooks arent that lucky and owners often suffer from horrible, horrible trackpad experiences most often caused by poor drivers. Logitech has the right idea with the Wireless Trackpad, but heres hoping that Windows, drivers, or 3rd party software doesnt kill the dream.
