Oh boy. At this point, even the shit-show is becoming a shit-show. According to Dan Primack at Fortune, Mike Arrington has been fired by AOL. My inbox is full of emails from journalists, friends and total strangers  all asking if I can explain whats going on. The vast majority of those correspondents are clearly hoping for a mass walk-out of writers if Mike is really gone. The Atlantic Wire is already predicting what might happen post-walkout.Meantime, Mike has gone to ground  presumably somewhere in his fortified Seattle compound  although with apparently as little idea as any of us what the final outcome will be. Primacks story says its a fait accompli, while others say the situation is still developing. I spoke to a senior staffer at TCHQ yesterday who told me No-one knows anything. Its bizarre. Surreal.Rather than replying to a billion emails, or appearing on Bloomberg, or talking to PBS or Tweeting something threatening-but-ambiguous; heres my position. And its basically unchanged from where I was last week.TechCrunch lives or dies on its editorial independence. Right now, that means TechCrunch  in the person of its founding editor  must be allowed to pick its next Editor In Chief. Arianna Huffington has made clear that she wants Mike gone and TechCrunch to be assimilated into Huffington Post, under her direct control. That means whoever she might pick as editor will be little more than an avatar for her; a cardboard cut-out installed to do her bidding. Thats so ridiculously unacceptable a situation that the idea makes me feel physically sick. It will be the death of TechCrunch and everything weve all worked for these past years.Sure, the brand will live on  and as long as we keep writing about cool apps well probably still get amazing traffic. But traffic and a famous domain name is not why I  or most of the TechCrunch staff and editors Ive spoken to in the past few days  came to work here. As Fred Wilson wrote earlier today: TechCrunch also has a voice, a swagger, a fuck you attitude that comes from Mike They need to keep the remaining team, the voice, and that attitude if they want to remain at the top of the world of tech media. Damn fucking right.Presumably, given how much TechCrunch and AOL both have riding on the success of next weeks Disrupt conference, an announcement as to TechCrunchs future leadership must be imminent. Im not going to speak for the other members of the team, but my own position is clear: unless Mike Arrington appoints his own successor, guaranteeing that TechCrunch retains its editorial independence, Im gone. Done. Out of the door.Ceding control to the Huffington Post will be the death of everything  the voice, the swagger, the fuck you attitude  that makes TechCrunch great; and Im not going to stay around to watch that happen.Ok, glad to have cleared that up. Now Im going for lunch.[Photo credit: woodleywonderworks]
