I got a chance to play with two of Microsoft’s three touch mouse offerings  the Explorer Touch Mouse and the flagship Touch Mouse  and as far as ideas go, they’re absolutely wonderful. But in terms of execution, the whole touch part didnt exactly impress. When compared to your standard desktop mouse, these two offerings from Microsoft could easily go toe-to-toe. But once we start getting into the touch capabilities of each  especially the Touch Mouse  things start getting a little shaky. Lets take a look.Touch MouseFeatures:Pros:Cons:Long Version:As I said earlier, Microsofts Touch Mouse is a wonderful idea. I happen to favor a touchpad over a mouse on whatever machine Im using  most regularly my MacBook Pro  and the notion that those same gestures could be found on a much more comfortable mouse got me excited. Unfortunately, things werent as seamless as Id expected. The Touch Mouse offers a number of different touch-based gestures: a single finger scrolls, pans, and tilts, while a thumb swipe will send you backwards or forwards. Obviously, backwards or forwards can mean different things during different activities, but its basically the ability to push the back button or the forward button in your browser, or quickly scroll through PowerPoint presentations. Microsoft also added a flick to its single-finger gestures to allow for super speedy scrolling. This is where the Touch Mouse lost me. It really doesnt perceive the difference between a slow, smooth scroll and a flick. I got sent to the bottom of the page too many times to count, and even the slow scroll (when recognized) wasnt all that smooth. Plus, the mouse is actually just one large button, with sensors to detect whether youre inputting a right or left click. When I hold a mouse, my middle finger (right clicker) nudges right up against that line, but since the Touch Mouses line doesnt actually separate different buttons, its easy to miss. But the Touch Mouse has its great moments, too. The thumb gesture especially wowed me. Even though it made me feel awful for being too lazy to mouse over to the back button, I still used that gesture as much as possible. Whoever said laziness was a sin? Not Microsoft, thats for sure. When I met with Microsoft to talk about the Touch Mouse, they used the word delight like a zillion times, most often connecting it with the word control. At the time, I didnt fully understand what they were talking about. But after getting hands-on with the Touch Mouse, it really is an entirely new sense of control over your machine that is, in short, delightful. Again, the idea is fantastic. But until they can make those controls more reliable, its hard to recommend it.
