Writer and entrepreneur Penelope Trunk has a new book coming out called The New American Dream, but you wont find it in your local bookstore. Instead, shes publishing it exclusively with startup Hyperink.Thats not how the book started out, says Trunk (who writes a popular blog and also authored a couple of controversial TechCrunch posts about women and startups). Her previous book The Brazen Careerist (also the name of Trunks last startup) was published traditionally, and she had a contract to do the same with The New American Dream.What happened? As Trunk tells it (and to be clear, this is just her side of the story), her publisher was incredibly incompetent on a number of fronts. Here are a few of her big criticisms: For one thing, the publishers idea of online marketing was stuck in the 1990s — in fact, the PR plan started with online newsgroups. The publisher was also opposed to just turning Trunks blog posts into a book, to the extent that it required her to track how many new words she was writing versus reusing from her blog. (Trunk says the idea that big-name nonfiction authors arent turning their blog posts into books is just such bullshit, and she argues that by re-curating her blog posts, shes presenting big ideas in a new way and to a new audience.) And Trunk says she makes less money as an author from each purchase on Amazon than she does as a blogger driving traffic to the same site through affiliate links.Continuing on the subject of Amazon, Trunk marvels at how little information publishers get from the e-commerce site: Its insane how screwed the publishers are.Nonetheless, Trunk says she was willing to stick it out, because she was learning so much about publishing, but eventually, the relationship became combative enough that she was told, We cant do the book. (To be fair to the publisher, I would have a bit weirded out if an author started recording all of our meetings and phone calls.) So Trunk started to look at self-publishing and other options, eventually settling on Hyperink, the digital publishing startup incubated by Y Combinator and backed by Andreessen Horowitz and others.The Hyperink team was on-board with Trunks vision — in fact, one of its specialties is blog-to-book conversions. (For example, it published a collection of MG Sieglers columns called Youre Damn Right Im A Fanboy.) And by working with Hyperink, Trunk didnt have to deal with a lot of the extra tasks/costs of full-on self-publishing publishing, like editing the book and laying it out.And no, Trunk says she wont miss seeing a physical book on the shelves.You dont actually gain influence by having a book in Barnes & Noble anymore, she says, adding that her goal is to steer a conversation — which is what Hyperink helps her do.So whats the book actually about? As the title suggests, the book looks at the current state of the American Dream and argues that its really more about interestingness versus happiness. You can read more about the book and purchase it here.
