Diffbot is a geeky and incredibly interesting technology that uses bots, algorithms, computer vision and artificial intelligence to process the content on the Web the way a human being can. The entire Internet can be broken down into 30 different page types explains Co-founder Mike Tung, also known as Diffbot Mike, and Diffbot can identify them all. Diffbot knows the difference between a social network profile, a blog post, a sites front page, a product page, an event page and dozens more.Today, Diffbot is releasing its first set of APIs, now open to all developers for free. The launch has the potential to dramatically impact the types of applications developers can build, and for consumers, it means a whole host of intelligent applications are about to emerge.The New APIs: On-Demand & FollowWith the two APIs available now, developers can build apps that automatically extract meaning from pages, apps that understand whats trending and whos talking about it, apps that provide RSS feeds where none were available before and apps that read just the relevant parts of webpages aloud, ignoring ads, header and footer copy.And thats just for starters. Future APIs will enable developers to automatically turn event pages into calendar appointments, social network profiles into vCards or automatically extract shipping prices or reviews from product pages, among other things. While Diffbot doesnt have a set roadmap, it expects to launch these additional APIs over the new few months.Today, the first 2 APIs available are:What Can Diffbot Actually Do? These same APIs are already being used by companies like speech recognition system maker Nuance, AOL (disclaimer: TechCrunch is owned by AOL), social media monitoring firm SocMetrics, and others.AOL uses Diffbot to extract the title, author, image, text, videos, topics and other metadata for its new iPad mag, AOL Editions. Nuance uses the technology to improve its natural language processing in a product for doctors, which requires comprehension of complex medical terminology. SocMetrics sends bit.ly shortened links to Diffbot to get the full article text and topics, so it can determine which social media users are talking about which topics the most.These are just a few big-name examples. There are smaller, but just as innovative use cases out there, too. Like Hacker News Radio, for example, which reads Hacker News and comments to you. Or FeedBeater, which makes it easy to turn any URL into an RSS feed automatically (one of Diffbots first creations). Or this Diffbot-generated Twitter feed, which tracks changes to the webpage for the city of São Paulo, Brazil (as it lacks RSS), and tweets the updates.The new self-serve platform for developers is free up to 50,000 API calls per month. The cloud plan provides 100,000 calls for $500, then is $0.002/call afterwards. The Managed plan for Enterprise requires custom pricing.Diffbot was founded by Mike Tung and Leith Abdulla, both Stanford PhD students on a leave of absence to build the company. The idea sprung from Tungs desire to automatically track new assignments on the class website automatically, through the use of technology. Diffbot was also the first startup funded by Stanfords incubator program, now called StartX (formerly SSE Labs).
