Last month, Ustream launched its video streaming service on the iPad. As Jason reported at the time, the app allows users to view live and recorded content streaming through the Web and even to stream their own footage directly from their iPad 2s. The move was a big step forward for live, streaming video on tablet devices, especially in that the latter feature allows users to be couch videographers. Of course, since last year, Ustream has been working on a series of apps that give users the added benefit of video editing features that can turn couch videographers into pro video creators. Today, Ustream is announcing a partnership with Telestream, the maker of digital media tools and workflow solutions, which will bring Telestream Wirecast live video production technology to all Ustream subscribers and add yet another layer to Ustreams video editing solutions. Last year, Ustream launched the first product in its Producer Studio line, which aims to turn a users PC into a live video production studio with video editing tools that add a professional look to a users streams. Since its initial launch in 2010, Ustream Producer products have attracted over 600,000 downloads. Today, Ustream and Telestream are launching a jointly-developed version 2.0 of its family of desktop streaming media applications, which adds a bunch of updates to all Producer products and sees the suite expanding to a total of three flavors.The triage now includes Ustream Producer, which can be used by any users for free, Ustream Producer Pro, a more advanced application available for $199, and the new Producer Studio, an app for pros starting at $549. Each version of Ustream Producer will include a newly remodeled Desktop Presenter, which enables users to screencast desktops of any computer within their local network in broadcasts. Version 2.0 also adds audio capabilities, which allows Desktop Presenter, for example, to serve as a Skype client for web talk shows, which will likely be of particular interest to those participating in the growing gamecasting space.Producer also takes advantage of the new H.264 codec by MainConcept, as well as a built-in bandwidth meter that works to ensure that broadcasts remain in high video quality. In addition, some cool new features of the new Ustream Producer Studio include an audio mixer with sync delay, built-in support for HDV and IP cameras, integrated scoreboards for sports fans that can be viewed during live broadcast, and a new catalog of lower-thirds to help make broadcasts a little more professional looking. The best part is that now both amateur and professional videographers will be able to take advantage of streaming content that incorporates music, image transitions, and picture-in-picture capability with a few clicks. Incorporating Telestreams Wirecast architecture into Ustreams products will now allow users to benefit from scalable, high-quality video production tools on both Mac and PC  and to create custom productions, regardless of ones level of expertise.For more on Ustream Producer, visit the Producer Demo here, or check out the live demo below:
