The Huffington Post has come across this fascinating five-minute interviewof Mark Zuckerberg at Facebooks Palo Alto office in June 2005.The clip is apparently part of a longer 40-minute-interview from a documentary about millennials shot by Ray Hafner and Derek Franzese. That interview has never been shown in full, and if I were Hafner and Franzese Id be figuring out a way to do that stat, especially post-The Social Network.Zuckerbergs initial vision, an online directory for colleges seems remarkably short-sighted in light of the fact that Facebook users comprise now 11% of the worlds population and 35% of the worlds online population. In retrospect Zuckerberg mayhave wanted to put the fratty red beer cup down (Fun fact: He had just turned 21, also thats co-founder Dustin Moskovitz doing a keg stand).But at the time the site, which Zuckerberg modestly described as an online directory for colleges, had onlypenetrated 800schools.The fact that Zuckerberg seems impressed by seeing people using TheFacebook at college parties and by reports of people logging in internationally leads one to wonder just how strategic the social networks meteoric rise was.His goal at the time was to expand to all 2,000 US colleges, and when asked what was next the Facebook founder said,There doesnt necessarily have to be more.A lot of people are focused on taking over the world or doing the biggest thing and getting the most users Theres a level of service that we can provide when were a college network that we wouldnt be able to provide if we went to other types of things.This is a far far cry from Facebooks current motto, Making the worldopen and connected. But sure, hindsight is 20/20. I mean how else do you explain Zuckerberg, and Reed Hastings, making this CNN 10 People Who Dont Matter List in 2006. Hilarious copy, below.In entrepreneurship, timing is everything. So well give Zuckerberg credit for launching his online social directory for college students just as the social-networking craze was getting underway. He also built it right, quickly making Facebook one of the most popular social-networking sites on the Net. But theres also something to be said for knowing when to take the money and run. Last spring, Facebook reportedly turned down a $750 million buyout offer, holding out instead for as much as $2 billion. Bad move. After selling itself to Rupert Murdochs Fox for $580 million last year, MySpace is now the Webs second most popular website. Facebook is growing too  but given that MySpace has quickly grown into the industrys 80-million-user gorilla, its hard to imagine who would pay billions for an also-ran.Five years, eternity in Internet time.
