Stop the presses! Facebook and LinkedIn are about to become archrivals in the recruiting market! At least, thats the implication of a Wall Street Journal article, which reports that Facebook plans to launch a job posting board later this summer.Its a nice scoop if true (the Journal cites people familiar with the matter), but reading the story is a strange experience. Basically, it starts out by explaining why the job board isnt a big deal. Then, having established that it isnt a big deal, the story talks about what a big deal it is.The board will reportedly aggregate job listings from third-party services like BranchOut, Jobvite, and Work4 Labs, making them searchable for Facebook users. One of the quoted sources describes it as lightweight and says, It doesnt feel like a big effort that theyve worked on for a long time. Someone also says Facebook didnt build the site itself, and instead got a third-party developer to do it. The Journal reports that Facebook doesnt plan to monetize the service initially, and says its unclear whether the company will do so in the future.Apparently, the job board might be an extension of the Social Jobs Partnership that Facebook announced with the US Department of Labor last fall. In fact, if you read the program announcement, one of the partnerships plans was to explore and develop systems where new job postings can be delivered virally through the Facebook site at no charge.A Facebook spokesperson, meanwhile, sent me the obligatory statement: We dont comment on rumor or speculation.Add that all up, and what do you get? A cool-sounding feature, possibly part of an existing partnership, but not a major new direction or revenue source for the company. So  why talk about how it could be more of a threat to other professional networking sites such as LinkedIn? Or the stuff about the evolution of recruiting and the size of online recruiting industry? All of this speculation comes with caveat of, If Facebook decides to get serious about this   but the story doesnt offer any real evidence that thats going to happen.Again, Im not trying to take away from the Journals scoop. Its just that parts of the article are  puzzling. And as someone whos had his own moments of pressure (from myself or from my editors) to make news seem like a bigger deal than it is, Im seeing some familiar signs. With all the ifs, shoulds, and coulds it almost feels like the Journal had a dramatic story in their head about Facebook vs. LinkedIn. When it turned out to be less of a page turner than expected, they werent quite willing to let it go. (Im also not opposed to blue-sky speculation  speculation is fun!  but a little dodgier when mixed in with real reporting.)Put another away: Could Facebook become a more serious player in recruiting? Sure, anything is possible. But theres nothing here to make me think its more likely.
