Have you ever read news that sort of makes you want to cry? I have to warn you, thats what this new study from enterprise mobility company Good Technology might inspire. The company polled 1,000 U.S. workers to get a better understanding of their mobile work habits. The results are not surprising: the line between work and free time has become so blurred its practically non-existent.80% of people continue working after leaving the office (a figure which actually sounds low, if you ask me). Half of them do so because they feel they have no choice. Connectedness means customers demand fast replies. Theres no off switch. Half of respondents check their email in bed, starting at around 7:09 AM. 68% check email before 8 AM. And you wonder why people hate email so much? God forbid we get a cup of coffee in us before dealing with the latest work emergency.The average amount of extra work occurring outside normal working hours is seven extra hours per week  nearly another full day, says Good. Thats nearly 30 hours per month or 365 extra hours per year. THANKS INTERNET.Good also found email was seeping into other parts of our daily lives, too. 57% checked email on family outings. 38% at the dinner table. 69% cant go to sleep without checking email. 40% do so after 10 PM. A quarter of respondents said overtime caused occasional disagreements with their partner. Worse, over half said it did not- apparently, work outside of work is so par for the course, we dont even care anymore. Thats truly frightening.Its amazing that no one has seen this level of uber-connectivity as an opportunity to blow up email and start over. For example, why is a vacation message the only system we have to support auto-responses for those moments where we need to be offline? By its name alone, the current system tells us that the only way were allowed to ignore email is when we are officially on vacation. Meanwhile, our societal conventions tell us that ignoring a question is the height of rudeness. At the very least, we need to respond with an Im looking into it.Why cant email in a team environment smartly route inquires based on whos clocked in as on duty? Why cant email support a status message field the way IM does? Why isnt there a button you can click to respond to simple yes/no queries to head off the inevitable (and bothersome) follow-ups? At the very least, if you could send a maybe, the sender would at least know the email had been read. Why cant email systems alert senders when youre behind in your reading, aka this inbox is overloaded, your email may not be read immediately?These ideas are off the top of my head  if someone actually began working on a such a system, the possibilities for radical improvements are un-ending.Sad, sad, sad.Image credit: mikeduran.com
