		
Paul Oakenfold, the world-renowned electronic music producer and DJ, has seen a lot of change in the industry since his career began more than 25 years ago. And perhaps the biggest shifts have come from technology  from the way music is made, to how its distributed, to where and how people listen to it, to how artists become known and signed to labels, to the tools DJs use in clubs to spin records. So it was really amazing to have Oakenfold swing by the TechCrunch TV studios while he was in San Francisco this week. Watch the video above to see him talk all about the intersection of music and technology  where its been, and where it may be going. Here are just a few quick takeaways from our chat:It seems that many people who are programmers also have a thing for electronic music. Oakenfold says that this could be because the trance like state that, well, trance music helps facilitate goes hand-in-hand with hacking. He explained it like this:I think that it has a lot to do with being in the moment, or trying to find the moment, getting into a state of trance, if I can say that. And what I mean by that is, you really need to focus, you really  need to get to a place, whether youre hacking, whether youre writing code, or whatever you do. And its the same with me in the studio or DJing. Im trying to get into this place. And then suddenly you lock yourself in and youre on this journey [Programmers and DJs] totally connect in that way.As much as Oakenfold has really embraced technology in his career  from the tools he uses to make music, to how he interacts with his fans (his Twitter handle is @pauloakenfold, by the way)  he still draws the line when it comes to putting a laptop screen between himself and the crowd at live sets. He said:It just used to be you and your music. I still deliberately focus on, when I am playing to the crowd, I dont want to go the laptop route. I dont want to have something between me and you. So, I run [memory] sticks or CDs. I try to retain the art of what we do. The spontaneity on the live side, people can see that, rather than having a laptop. Thats fine in the recording studio, but i dont want to go that route [on stage].I dont want to be staring at the screen trying to get things sorted out. I want to connect with you. And then the barriers are down, you start to feel where Im trying to take you, and then were on a musical journey together.But while Oakenfold makes a point of not putting a screen between himself and a live crowd, its still increasingly common for the people at his sets to put their own screens up in front of him to record the show on video or take photos. This is not a trend that hes especially keen on  to really experience live music, he says, its best for people to be totally in the moment, not recording it for posterity.People are just standing there with their phones filming you, and its like, this is not what were here for. But its something thats becoming, unfortunately, bigger and bigger. More and more people are doing it.Whats really clear when you meet Oakenfold is that hes still so passionate about what he does, even though hes been doing it for so long. I asked him how he fends off burnout, something that seems like it could impact professional musicians in the same way that it impacts people in tech. He had some really cool insights  balance is key, he said, and so is making sure to continue to embrace new things:  
In terms of burnout, you have people in the music industry that fall away [after] they have their moment its important to embrace new technology, new media, and be a part of it. You may not like certain things but you need to be aware of it.
