After a year or so of stealth preparation, Livestar today launches an iOS app where you can view trusted recommendations. In an effort to become the one-stop-shop for everyones recommendation needs, Livestar lets people search for recommendations from their friends and critics of restaurants, music and movies currently.Eventually founder and former Microsoft M&A exec Fritz Lanman wants to expand the app to cover other verticals like wine, clothing, books, bars, hotels and shows. We can just keep turning on more and more categories, just like Amazon did, using the same infrastructure / architecture, he says.Users log in through Facebook, and define the locale theyre interested in reviews of (if theyre looking for restaurants that is, music and movies dont use location).Users can then refine their searches with keywords like romantic and Italian and tell the app who they want opinions from by clicking on the source slider. The app then quickly loads starred recommendations by source, either by a single source like a friend already on Livestar, or multiple sources like a group of critics from editorial venues like the Village Voice, N.Y. Times, L.A. Times, NY Mag, etc. Users can customize trusted source groups.Essentially functioning also as a Q&A app, Livestar also allows you to ask friends off of Livestar for reviews via SMS, Twitter, Facebook or email (note: Yelp doesnt allow people to write reviews from their phones).Lanman thinks hes solved the problem of getting people to write reviews by making it super easy for them to do so. Users who want their friends input on where to go and what to see can select the Ask Friends option on Livestar and select the friends they want ratings from either from their own phone Address book or through Facebook.But your friends dont have to join Livestar to rate restaurants, and a review can simply be 1-5 stars, with additional notes optional. In fact Livestar pre-computes restaurants your friends are likely to recommend, simplifying the process even further. If a friends recommendation isnt pre-populated, Livestar lets them enter it in.Beyond its core reviews functionality, Livestar also shows users a feed of other users activity, and gives super-active users a Tastemaker score. In addition to these features, the app includes menus for the majority of restaurants online in America, in case users want to read whats on the menu before they visit a recommended restaurant.While in some ways reminiscent of review app Oink, Lanman views his closest competitor as SMS and email, as in those frantic SMSes that read, Hey, whats a good bar in TriBeCa? or Whats the best burrito in San Francisco?. He hopes that Livestar will fill the gap between Foursquare and Yelp, and compensate for Yelps hit or miss quality of sources and Foursquares over-reliance on the check-in as a review signal.All we care about is great recommendations, he says, postulating that the data from Livestar can be used to make augmented reality more useful. Its an ambitious problem, and Lanman has corralled four former AWS distributed systems engineers and two NLP / information retrieval specialists in order to basically create a search engine for reviews. Turns out thats a difficult thing, he says.Hes also corralled $2 million investment from Ray Ozzie, Ari Emanuel, Matt Mullenweg, Peter Chernin, Paul Buchheit, SV Angel, Hadi Partovi, Hank Vigil, Mitch Kapor, Betaworks and others. So yeah, hes gunning for it  Hoping to succeed where Oink failed.
