Mobile app monetization exchange inneractive has closed on $3.5 million in new financing, the company is announcing today. The round was led by Evergreen Ventures Partners, and saw participation from both existing private investors and new investors from the U.S. and Europe. The company, which integrates over 120 ad providers from 200-plus countries into a one-line SDK, now has thousands of developers using its monetization platform on iOS, Android, RIM and Windows Phone. It also offers SDKs for non-smartphone platforms like J2ME, Bada, Symbian and others, but without the one-line implementation.On the ad network side, inneractive works with nearly all the big names, including Amobee, Inmobi, Jumptap, Mojiva, Adfonic, Millennial, Madhouse, and others, with more deals in the works.According to the startups Head of Marketing Hillel Fuld, the biggest markets it serves today are the U.S., Europe and India. And thanks to its worldwide footprint, the ads can be targeted not only by demographic and content, but also language and location.Recently, the startup introduced new technology which allows developers to better manage and control their ad revenue. The Hybrid technology, as its called, lets publishers alternate between two different monetization solutions for their apps. The first optimizes ads from inneractives network partners automatically, while the second option allows publishers to manually opt into and out of ad providers they either want to use or avoid. This is something many big brands have been itching to do for some time, and is a notable development for the company.In addition, inneractive offers a solution that can power the private ad exchanges for developer communities, manufacturers and carriers, allowing them to maintain their own brand and messaging. On the dev community side, it powers the exchanges offered by Corona Labs, StackMob and LiveCode, for example.When TechCrunch spoke to the company a year ago, it was touting numbers like a 95% global fill rate, 99% in the U.S. and click-through rates of 3% or higher. Fuld declined to provide new numbers today, saying that the industry doesnt really talk in those metrics any more. However, he did say that the company now has better targeting, rich media ads, hyperlocal ads, and more global coverage than they did back in 2011, so those metrics have increased.The numbers are attracting some big name publishers, he adds  the startup recently signed Halfbricks Fruit Ninja, and another big name which theyll be able to talk about in about a month, among others. While he couldnt state the new publishers name on the record, its definitely a company youll have heard of.With the additional funding, inneractive is planning to hire and expand, with plans to open offices in NYC, India and Singapore, in addition to its offices in London, Tel Aviv and in Silicon Valley. To date, inneractive has now raised $8.5 million from outside investors.
