Last night, I wrote about Kevin Rose not responding to questions on his AMA on Reddit. Rose was at a birthday party last night but has returned to Reddit today and has posted YouTube responses to five Redditers questions.After all the coverage on Diggs sale and Rose personally a few weeks ago and now on the launch of new Digg, its very interesting to hear Roses thoughts. He does a good job going in-depth in his responses, and seems pretty open.Here are the responses. You can track them, if he posts more, on Roses YouTube channel.In the case of Digg Before, it was really trying to rethink Digg and trying to bring Digg to a more mainstream, traditional newsa lot of this stuff was really going against our core. But the reason why we made these decisions internally was because we were seeing that traffic was declining when, in hindsight, we should have focused on the tools and improving the community we already had.
This is the most interesting segment to me, and I really like that he tackled this one first. Rose talks about product strategies and working to mainstream the site, as well as what hes learned as a founder. A lot of cautionary tales here, especially for social sites.One of the things that Ive always loved to do is brainstorm ideas with friends and get together and talk about what theyre buildingEssentially, my day-to-day is just going around and meeting entrepreneurs, and talking to them about what they plan on launching.
It seems like his new position at Google is really playing to Roses strengths.Weve had too much fun and too many good times over the years to not get together at some point and do something cool again, so stay tuned.
Stay tuned! This would be cool to see, so heres hoping it works out.He promised me he wouldnt use it.
Rose shares the funny backstory behind one of the most overused photos in the Valley. The photo shoot was 3 1/2 hours, including over one hundred pictures of Rose ripping up newspapers, and this one won out.I dont really know about a ton more than what you do. Every once in a while they Ping me to talk about thingsI do like that its a break from the traditional Digg design. I was not a fan of the design the last couple versions.
Rose says he saw some early designs, generally likes it and he mostly warns against over-criticizing the current version of the site, which was built in just six weeks.
