Its WWDC time. Like, tomorrow. And we expect to see plenty of fun announcements, not least of which being a brand new mobile operating system, iOS 6.Its the type of Apple product every iPhone owner can enjoy, and Im more than pumped to bring you a full list of expected, rumored, and wishlist features that well soon enjoy.So how does a silver user interface sound as opposed to blue? What about a departure from Google Maps and a brand new 3D map view brought to you direct from Apple? How about Facebook integration as deep as (if not deeper than) Apples beloved Twitter?All that and more after the break.iMaps?
Rumor:Argument:Objection:Judgment: This ones highly likely. Theres really no other reason for Apples map tech shopping spree last year. Weve seen blurry images, heard it from various corners of the blogosphere for nearly a month, and it makes sense for Apples general trajectory as a company. Google is a major competitor, and piggybacking off of the search giant in an area where Apple can afford to keep in-house doesnt make sense any longer.Plus, most of the top brass one of Apples recent map tech acquisitions, C3 Technologies, has left the company for other endeavors. This is usually the case when Apple builds out new features through acquisitions.Facebook Integration
Rumor:Argument:Objection:Judgment: Likely. As the LA Times points out, all signs point to a Facebook-laden iOS 6. Facebook is usually the most popular social app on the App Store, and Facebook is picking up some serious steam in the mobile realm. Partnering in this way only makes sense, and should only strengthen both companies.Color Scheme Change-Up
Rumor:Argument:Objection:Judgment: This one seems pretty likely, as well. Not only has the WWDC app and iPad UI been silver since their inception, but the newly released iPhoto app has also been dipped in chrome. Everything about Apple is silver, from their hardware on the notebook line to the backside of the iPad to the Apple icon on most of the companys brick-and-mortar stores. Why was iOS ever blue to begin with?Siri for iPad
Rumor:Argument:Objection:Judgment: This ones a maybe, but only because it may not show its face tomorrow, not because it wont happen. Siri for iPad is only a natural progression. My guess is that its unveiled tomorrow and available only to third-generation iPads. Apple is scaling Siri to make sure that quality stays up to snuff with concerns for servers, etc., just like Siri was only available on the iPhone 4S.Siri APIs
Rumor:Argument:Objection:Judgment: Im entirely on the fence about this one. Gruber and Siegler count for something, especially combined, and its a developers conference. It would kind of be like Christmas morning for a developer. At the same time, it goes against scaling Siri, and it feels rushed. Yet still, Tim Cooks hints are ambiguous. The release of a Siri API at WWDC would be a month from his statement, which is discouraging. But amazing Siri-integrated apps would appear in the coming months.iCloud Updates
 Rumor:Argument:Objection:Judgment: It seems like these features only make sense in the new mobile OS. Its all-but-announced that whatevers happening with iCloud — and some new things are undoubtedly happening — will be a part of iOS 6. However, the specific features listed dont have much solid proof to back them up. We could be entirely wrong. Perhaps the Notes and Reminders synchronization shown on the iCloud beta page are on the WWDC menu.Were keeping you up to date on everything you should expect from the all-but-announced features to wishlist items. Check out Matts rumor round-up on Apples Notebook announcements, as well as a forthcoming post on possible OS X features to look forward to. WWDC 2012 is set to be the biggest developers conference yet.
