Y Combinators Paul Graham recently begged entrepreneurs to consider frightening ambitious startup ideas, like building a better search engine or replacing universities. Any one of them could make you a billionaire, said Graham. That might sound like an attractive prospect, and yet when I describe these ideas you may notice you find yourself shrinking away from them, he said. Dont worry, its not a sign of weakness. Arguably its a sign of sanity. The biggest startup ideas are terrifying.Among those terrifying ideas was rethinking the inbox, and in particular, the Gmail inbox. Although there has been much complaining about the sorry state of email, very few companies are addressing the situation. Its just too hard. But there is an interesting startup to watch in this space, which happens to be thinking about the bigger picture. The somewhat stealthy Fluent is not shy about its vision either, offering a tagline that boldly proclaims its offering the future of email. But can it deliver?For starters, if anyone can ever disrupt email, why not three ex-Googlers who spent years working on Google Wave, among other things? Jochen Bekmann, Cameron Adams and Dhanji R. Prasanna have the technical expertise (seriously, check the bios), and unlike the shuttered Wave experiment, Fluent is an entirely more functional and more attractive product. While many scoffed at Waves confusing, engineer-driven design, Fluent is the opposite. Its simple, streamlined, and easy to use.Currently, if you had to compare Fluent to something, then the future of email looks a lot like a web-based version of Sparrow, an email client which has been achieved some popularity among the Mac/iOS crowd. But Fluent brings a lot of new ideas to the table. Plus, its dreaming a bit larger, too. By starting with a web app, the team is building a front-end email client which could address users on any platform, desktop or mobile. Mac, PC or Linux. Phone or tablet. Or refrigeratoror so jokes(?) the company via blog post.Email hasnt been innovated in 20 years, explains Adams. But in the last decade, theres been a lot of change in how people communicate. Communication is now more informal, more social. But while social messaging  like Facebook messages or Twitter direct messages  is good for quick one-on-one conversations, when you want to talk about multiple things, its easy for streams to get cluttered. Gmail helped with this by introducing threaded messages, but as you read, write and reply to email, theres still a lot of context switching involved.Fluent operates differently. Composing, replying, reading, archiving, deleting, searching, starring and to-doing email can all be done within the one stream-like interface, no switching needed.The Mobile ExperienceWhile not there yet in terms of implementation, the company has a decidedly mobile-first mindset when it comes to using Fluent on smaller screens, like smartphones and iPads. The concept video (below), makes using Fluent on mobile seem more akin to navigating through a fun Twitter app than parsing an inbox. Swipes, gestures and touches let you perform tasks quickly, with optimizations for the screen size in question.But lets not get ahead of ourselves with all the drooling.It Is Not An Alternative To Gmail, Just A Better Front-endToday, Fluent is not an alternative to Gmail  its a cloud-based email client. The platform supports Gmail and Google Apps, and more email services will be added in the future. The company doesnt plan to hand out their own email addresses (which could be truly disruptive to Gmail), preferring to operate as a new front-end to whichever inbox you use. Eventually, it will support IMAP and Exchange, too.  There are no plans to innovate in terms of email protocols, however, as Graham suggested, despite the teams Google Wave backgrounds.That being said, Fluent still has major potential. Fluents interface is elegant, presenting conversations as threads which you can step through with clicks or the familiar Google shortcuts (j, k to move forward and backward, e.g.).But unlike most email systems, which require you to click to open a message, type, then hit reply, you can reply from the main inbox view in Fluent. That makes reading through your emails in Fluent more like scrolling through your Facebook News Feed and leaving comments. Want to reply? Just type in the reply box beneath the email thread, then hit send. As with Gmail, you can also star items from the main inbox view.Whats New: To-Dos, Attachment View, Instant Search & More Also unlike Gmail, it only takes one click to turn an email into a to-do item. (In Gmail, you check the email, click More, then Add to Tasks. In Fluent, you click the check mark.) Starred emails, to-dos and your Gmail labels are all available from the left side of the screen (or at the bottom in the current mobile view) for easy access.Theres also an attachment view which lets you visually search through emailed files, filtering for documents, images, zip files, audio, or video. These concepts are not new (remember Xoopit?), but theyre implemented in a way that makes you thump your head, wondering why hasnt someone done this before? (For what its worth, Sparrow is also rethinking attachments in other ways that make sense.) Adams says that the attachment view, as it exists now, is only a taste of whats to come.People use email as a de facto backup system, but accessing those files is quite hard, he says. We want to make it more like a file system. In the future, Fluent will let you cluster files by version, organize them with labels, easily search them and let you filter them by time, person and filetype.Even more impressive than all the above is Fluents instant search. This is potentially the services killer feature. When you start typing in Sparrow or Gmails search box, youre given auto-complete suggestions in a drop-down beneath the search box. Although Sparrows are pretty smart, in Fluent youll see actual emails matching your keywords appear instantly. The drop-down boxs suggestions show matching contacts, allowing you to find either a contact or email from one search interface. Fluents search feature doesnt wait until youve completed a word, its truly instantaneous. Fortunate enough to test the service myself, I can confirm that despite its early, wobbly, private beta: Fluents instant search is crazy, crazy fast. Its like Google Instant for your inbox. Which, of course, then begs the question: why isnt Google doing this? (Apparently, Google+ Circles integration was the priority there.)Other features in the works include a better contacts management experience, showing a timeline, history, and pattern of your communications, an email summarization feature which will aggregate and summarize things like social media updates or mailing list threads, plus other more common additions, like support for email signatures. Eventually, an open API will be available, too.Can Power Users Switch?Could a Gmail power user switch to Fluent today, assuming stability? Of that, Im not sure. Heres why:In other words, despite its good looks, Fluent is still walking a fine line between favoring pretty over powerful. Your mileage, as they say, may vary. And all this is subject to change.That said, the overall workflow, the ease of to-dos, and the clever attachment view are all powerful enough features that Fluent could easily grab early adopters in search of alternative solutions. As the startup shakes out the kinks (and there are kinks  scaling, stability, syncing), its a given that it will at least attract a Sparrow-sized audience, if not larger.WHEN CAN YOU HAVE IT?!!The saddest thing about Fluent, the so-called future of email? Its not ready for you to use yet! When asked when it would be available to a wider launch, co-founder Jochen Bekmann told me, we hope to be able to open wider in a few months, mostly depending on whether we have funding to pay for servers and refined some of our features.Wait, depending on whether we have funding to pay for servers? Hurry up with that funding, investors. (Fluent says seed round talks are pretty far along, thank goodness, and should have some news on that front this summer). A staged rollout will soon follow.Since I cant show off my *actual* inbox, here are some sanitized screenshots. My iTunes folder:Some attachments:Compose screen (it pops up over current window, in this case, my empty to-dos section):
