Charles Schumer and Bob Casey, the two U.S. Senators behind the Ex-PATRIOT act  a proposal to go after early Facebook backer Eduardo Saverin and others like him that have renounced U.S. citizenship and are getting out of paying capital gains tax on stock windfalls  have now revealed the details of their plan. We first wrote about it earlier today when the offices of the two senators first announced their intentions.Its pretty big: any ex-pat with either a net worth of over $2 million, or an average income tax liability of at least $148,000 over the last five years, will be presumed to have renounced their citizenship for tax avoidance purposes. The ex-pat will have to demonstrate to the IRS that this is not the case if it is not. If there is a legitimate reason for that person living outside the U.S. no penalties will apply. But if the IRS finds that someone gave up their passport for tax purposes, they will impose a tax on that individuals investment gains no matter where he or she resides.The rate of that capital gains tax will be 30 percent  the same that non-resident aliens currently pay on dividends and interest earnings.The tax detailed this act, if approved, will backdate for 10 years after its approval.Saverin is expected to make at least $3.84 billion when Facebook goes public tomorrow and would have picked up a tax bill of $67 million on it. He has lived in Singapore since 2009, where there is no capital gains tax. In September 2011 he renounced his U.S. citizenship.“Mr. Saverin has decided to ‘defriend’ the United States of America just to avoid paying his taxes. We aren’t going to let him get away with it so easily,” Schumer said in a statement. “It’s infuriating to see someone sell out the country that welcomed him and kept him safe, educated him and helped him become a billionaire. This is a great American success story gone horribly wrong. We plan to put a stop to this tax avoidance scheme. There should be no financial gain from renouncing your country.”
