Theres a new product that just came out of Disney Interactive Labs  a video portal for clips, movie trailers, and even a collection of curated YouTube videos, all designed to be watched online or on any of your mobile devices. The new Disney Video site, located at video.disney.com, combines the best of Disney past and present, with a whole lot of content that might not be found anywhere else.Its too early for us to know a whole lot about the site  we checked out the portal after it was announced on Twitter by Henry Work, Senior Software Engineer for Disney Interactive Labs. But at first glance, it seems like a pretty cool example of what a major media company can do with a huge library of content that it hopes to bring to multiple platforms and devices.First of all, lets talk about the content. The site is broken down into movies, shows, collections and YouTube, and highlights a wide range of content across Disneys family-oriented media properties. In the movies section, Disney Video features trailers, as well as behind-the-scenes footage and interviews with stars of upcoming and recent feature films like Frankenweenie and The Avengers. Its shows page puts the spotlight on popular clips from the Disney Channel and related cable networks. Collections organizes its video library into themes, like Disney Fairies, for instance, or content available from Disney Theme Parks. But the most interesting section might be the YouTube channel on the site, which provides a curated page full of kid-friendly content. The YouTube page is the result of a deal that Disney struck with the video site late last year, through which the media companies will cross-promote each others content. YouTube will get some original kids programming from Disney, while Disney is making YouTube clips available on its new portal.As for the multiplatform aspect of the site  as far as we can tell, its formatted to work on web browsers, delivered via Flash, as well as on mobile devices like the iPhone, iPad, and Android handsets and tablets. Thats a huge step for Disney, as it seeks to make its content available on whatever device kids are using.Theres no real long-form content on the site  for now its all promotional clips and trailers  but it is designed to keep viewers watching, with an autoplay feature that loops new videos in ten seconds after the last one has been completed.Interestingly, the Disney online video portal is being launched at the same time that some analysts are questioning the effect that Netflix is having on the ratings for cable TV networks like Nickelodeon and Disney Channel. While the portal isnt as kid-friendly as Netflixs Just For Kids implementation online and on some connected devices, Disney no doubt hopes that its large library of content will keep kids coming back.
