Path co-founder and CEO Dave Morin is joining the board of the event ticketing startup Eventbrite, the company is announcing today. The news of the appointment follows what has been, so far, quite a busy year for the startup, which has now sold 60 million tickets, and is expanding globally with websites in eight different languages.Morin, whose background includes time as the former head of the Facebook Platform and several years at Apple, will bring his knowledge of social to the ticketing company, says Eventbrite.Morin joins Barry McCarthy, former CFO of Netflix, Sean Moriarty, former CEO of Ticketmaster, Roelof Botha, former CFO of PayPal and Partner at Sequoia Capital, among others serving on Eventbrites Board of Directors.Eventbrite has long been a believer in the impact of the social graph, and the work that Dave did while at Facebook has had a profound impact on our business, Kevin Hartz, CEO of Eventbrite says. Our integration with Facebook Connect in 2008 predicated an exponential increase in traffic and engagement among event attendees, he added.Eventbrite is heavily benefiting from Facebook integration. In 2011, the company reported that every time an event was shared on Facebook, it generated an additional $2.52 on average in ticket sales for event organizers and 11 clicks back to the Eventbrite page. And this was before the launch of Facebooks Open Graph in early 2012, and the introduction of actions like bought, or want or watch, etc.Notably, Eventbrite was one of the Facebook Open Graph launch partners, but its not yet using actions. According to Tamara Mendelsohn, VP of Marketing at Eventbrite, however, theyre working on something now on that front, and we should see the results of that soon.Facebook is also the number one driver of Eventbrites traffic, says Mendelsohn, but the company wont share how much.As for engagement levels, you can see in the chart below what the impact of Facebook integrations have already had on the companys business. With Morins guidance on deeper integrations, those numbers should jump yet again.Outside of social integrations and global expansion, the company has also been pushing itself forward in the mobile payments space. In March, Eventbrite launched a complimentary credit card reader to go along with its iPad ticketing app Eventbrite at the Door, which attaches to the iPads dock connector, allowing users to swipe credit cards. Just prior to this, the company had announced a product called Endurance, specifically for selling tickets to races and walks, like marathons and fundraising events. And only last week, Eventbrite announced integrations with SponsorHub for connecting event organizers with sponsors.“Eventbrite is fundamentally changing the way people create, promote and find events and gatherings in their local communities,” said Morin in a statement. “I’ve been more than impressed by their level of innovation, their commitment to their users, and by their long term focus. The decision to join the board as they forge into making event discovery more mobile and social was an easy one. At the end of the day, we all live for great events.”Eventbrite has been making a huge push towards reaching $1 billion in gross ticket sales this year, about doubling the number of events on the platform in 2011 (458,207 events in 2011) and tickets sold (20,798,509 tickets in 2011). In 2011, Eventbrite sold $400 million worth of tickets, up from $207 million in 2010.
