Contactually, the lightweight CRM solution for email users which launched into private beta at the beginning of this year, is today announcing its public debut with a number of new features in tow, as well as $500,000 in angel funding from YouTube co-founder Jawed Karim, co-founder of CapLinked Chris Grey, and a re-up from previous investor, 500 Startups.As for the new features, there are quite a few, but the major ones include the launch of Contactually for Teams, Microsoft Exchange support, a Gmail plugin, and additional integrations with other services and CRM systems.Before delving into the details of whats new, a little refresher on how Contactually works. When you sign up for the service, it pulls in information from social networks like Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Klout, Quora, Flickr, Foursquare, Tumblr, Skype, and dozens of others, and integrates those into your new online address book. The address book tracks how often you and your contacts correspond and their priority. Another key part to the service are Actions  which are reminders to follow up with your contacts. These appear on the online dashboard and are sent out via email.Prior to today, Contactually only supported IMAP-connected email accounts like Gmail, Google Apps, Yahoo, and AOL, but with its public launch, the service now adds much-needed support for Microsoft Exchange (2007+). Gmail users get an update, too, with the new Gmail plugin which shows reminders and lets you quickly categorize people. (Oh, and I checked  it works alongside Rapportives plugin, in case you hate to give that up). Team sharing is another new feature that allows users to see who on their team last contacted someone and see their contacts. Its an interesting concept in making email less of a closed box, private to only the one person with access. Instead, users of the Teams product can share contacts and collaborate on follow-ups with each other.Contactually is also rolling out more integrations, including support for messaging and contact import from LinkedIn, integration with SugarCRM, and plans to add CapsuleCRM, Producteev, and MailChimp in the next month. (Highrise and Salesforce are already supported).Company co-founder Tony Cappaert tells us that the service now has 6,000 users, a large chunk of whom are paying, as well as a couple of enterprise deals of a couple thousand seats or so.Interested users can sign up here. The private beta period will end at 12 PM ET, allowing anyone to sign up.Contactually was founded by Zvi Band, Tony Cappaert, and Jeff Carbonella, and is based in Washington, DC. In addition to the $50K in seed funding from 500 Startups, Contactually’s previous angel round of $165K included investors Sean Glass and David Steinberg.
