Over the past six months, the folks at OpenSignalMaps have been keeping tabs on the devices that have been downloading their network monitoring app, and so far theyve recorded downloads onto 681,900 separate Android devices in 195 countries. Now theyve taken all that data and splayed it out for all to see, and it highlights rather nicely how big a headache fragmentation can be for developers.For the most part, the results are as youd expect  runaway hits like Samsungs Galaxy S II was the most represented device among the 3,997 distinct models they spotted, and Samsung Android devices were far and away the most widely used. What really gets me is how many other devices and brands fill up the rest of that list. Seriously, if you havent yet, go look at it. Mouse-over some of the smaller blocks, see if there are any brands or devices that ring a bell.Its pretty crazy to see just how many players are in the field, and nothing against OpenSignalMaps  their app is actually pretty damned useful  but its not an immediate must-download for every user.That there are gobs of Android devices floating around out there isnt exactly a shocker, but data like this really drives home the issue. With so many devices running so many versions of Android with who knows many carrier- and manufacturer-mandated tweaks onboard, how is a developer supposed to make sure that all of their users gets a consistent experience? They cant, unless theyre willing to test like crazy.Google chairman Eric Schmidt famously downplayed the term fragmentation at this years CES, suggesting instead that people call it differentiation. Its hard not to agree with sentiment on some level  after all, one of Androids key strengths is how easily it fits into different niches and price points. But according to him, as long as every Android user is able to use the same apps, theres no problem here.That strikes me as a rather shortsighted way of looking at it. Downloading and installing apps is one thing, but what I think really counts  the user experience  can still vary from hardware configuration to hardware configuration. Not a day goes by without new Android hardware (or rumors of new Android hardware) making the rounds  hell, just an hour or so ago, the Wall Street Journal reported that Google will soon be filling out the new Devices section in the Google Play Store with new, unlocked Nexus hardware thanks to cooperation from up to five hardware manufacturers.Thats why developers like Animoca have invested what I can only imagine is a sizable amount of money and effort testing their apps with something like 400 Android devices before pushing them out into the world. And of course, fragmentation isnt just a hardware issue  the OSM post points out that the two most used versions of Android now only account for 75% of the devices they surveyed, down from 90% last year, yet another issue for developers to grapple with.Does every developer need to go through a process that outlandish? Certainly not  OpenSignalMaps seems to test on a tiny fraction of that, and smaller developers can cover most of their bases with a handful of carefully chosen devices. At the end of the day though, despite the sheer amount of choice and flexibility that Android has provided users, those developers still have a choice to make  do they want to strive for perfection, or do they want to keep their sanity?
