Just yesterday, I finally moved the Google+ iPhone app atrocity to the back screen of my iPhone, and then the company goes out and does this. It makes the darned thing all pretty with a fresh update. And maybe even more usable? (I cant confirm this as the update has somehow not hit my iPhones Updates section, but early reports are saying nice things).If youre at all familiar with Googles previous iOS developments, youll remember how the Google+ iPhone app was a dog to use. I couldnt even scroll through long comment threads with the screen locking up. Plus, it regularly crashed. And it kept pinging me with updates every time someone Circled mealthough, apparently, that last one was by design.Todays update, then, is at least promising. Everything has been overhauled, UI-wise, including fonts, photos, the homescreen, visual elements, gradients  you name it. Perusing the screenshots, Im actually going to give this one a shot, if only to see how well the Google iOS devs and designers have been sharpening their skills.Google even promises a more fast and fluid experience, with specific tweaks that see conversations fall into view as you move forward and backward in time, optical cues (like parallax) help the mind linger on individual posts, and important actions like +1 now float atop the stream, making it easy to endorse all your favorites. Um, neat  but you had me at fast. I mean, really, Id like to see that.More concerning is the Google blog post announcing the update. It seems theyve begun spiking the G+ Kool-Aid over there something fierce. Because who can seriously write lines like this, if not just a wee bit drunk?Sharing is deeply sensory. From cooking a favorite meal to getting together with friends, its the smells and the stories and the smiles that make human connections so essential.Either Im missing the part about the G+s apps new smell-o-vision feature, or Vic Gundotra is just getting a little crazy. (Or hired a sub-par ghost writer, I suppose?).Another gem from the blog post?Full-bleed photos and videos are cool. But you know what’s really cool? Content so immersive it remakes your mobile device into a rich carousel of beloved memories and breaking news.You know whats really cool? Not stealing famous lines from the Facebook movie to promote your wannabe social network. Especially when theres another movie line thats so much more applicable.Something else thats strange: Why wasnt the Android app overhauled, too?
