Ask a VC, the TCTV show where you ask the questions, is back after a long hiatus and were kicking things off with two partners this week from Spark Capital and Andreessen Horowitz!If youve got questions about what its like to shift from being an entrepreneur to being a venture capitalist, both our interviewees can actually tell you.So how does this show work? You ask questions either in the comments or at askaVC(at)TechCrunch(dot)com and well put them forward to our VC guests.So for our first taping, we have Nabeel Hyatt, who just joined Spark Capital in February after serving as a general manager at Zynga (pictured at the right). He sold his company Conduit Labs to the social gaming giant and that deal set the groundwork for Zyngas Boston studio.Before that, he was a vice president of product at the MIT Media Lab spinoff Ambient Devices, which embedded information from the web into everyday objects like light bulbs, mirrors, refrigerators, and umbrellas to make the physical environment an interface to digital media.If youve got questions about what the Zynga mafia will end up being like, hes probably the one to ask.Then later this week we have Peter Levine, a general partner at Andreessen Horowitz, who is extremely seasoned at company building (pictured at the top). Not only does he teach at Stanfords Graduate School of Business and do mountain climbing, he has also served as CEO of XenSource, a provider of open source virtualization solutions that was acquired by Citrix Systems. He then became the senior vice president and general manager of Citrixs data center and cloud division.Hes also actually a two-time venture capitalist. Before XenSource, he was a managing director at Mayfield. And then, before that, he was at Veritas Software where he started as an engineer when the company had just a few people. By the time he left 11 years later, the company was doing $1.5 billion in revenue, had nearly 6,000 people and he was one of three executive vice presidents, responsible for sales to hardware manufacturers, marketing, mergers and acquisitions and the Veritas venture fund. Like his firms other partners, he also writes regularly and has some good advice on how to run board meetings and evaluate sales deals here.Levine has recently gotten the firm into deals like Actifio, the virtualization data management software maker that raised $33.5 million in December. So if you have questions about Andreessens enterprise strategy or the firms unique approach, hes the one to ask.
