When Yahoo hired Scott Thompson as CEO back in January, many at the company were surely hoping that theyd finally found the game-changing leader theyd so sorely needed for years. Now just four months later, Thompson is only serving to highlight the exact deep-rooted corporate sluggishness that he was meant to upend.There have been lots of rumors about the internal progress of Scott Thompsons resume-gate (Kara Swisher at AllThingsD has an especially good handle on these inside scoops.) But in a way, the outwardly confirmed facts of the matter  or really, the lack thereof  increasingly speak for themselves. Each hour that passes without an official decision from Yahoo seems to show that the company is in even worse shape than anyone thought.Today Yahoo issued a press release announcing it has formed a special committee to conduct a thorough review of CEO Scott Thompson’s academic credentials. This is probably supposed to be a sign of progress, but it comes across as just the opposite. The release says that the special committee and the entire Board appreciate the urgency of the situation, but do they really? This issue came to light on May 3. Today is May 8.We all know that Yahoo hasnt been known for lighting-fast innovation for a long time. An 18-year-old publicly traded global corporation will tend to slow down a bit. But its still pretty shocking that the board cant show some hustle for a situation like this. As Mike Arrington has very artfully written, Yahoos rank-and-file employees deserve better.True story: This year, I received my tax refund check from the state of California exactly four days after I filed my taxes. My tax refund, through snail mail, from California, which is a very large and notoriously mismanaged state that everyone keeps saying is basically going bankrupt. Just for reference, here is a short list of some other pretty complicated things that have lasted (or will last) fewer than five days:Anyway, were considering doing a special TechCrunch logo with Scott Thompsons face as our own smoke signal sort of vigil to mark the time until the board figures it all out. Any over/under on how long it would be there?Feature image of Scott Thompson courtesy of Flickr user YodalAnecdotal via Creative Commons license
