Credictive, which just went into invite-only beta, wants to solve the problem of crediting who did what online. Its pitched as an IMDB for creative content where people who create videos or music or other kinds of content or just appear in that media can also be connected. Think LinkedIn for creatives. Given that the Internet is like one big giant photocopier, this is a big problem. They might also be on-trend: Jason Calacanis recently asked where is the Kickstarter meets LinkedIn for talent.So say youre watching a video online and want to know who created it without having to go to their page, then click on the username, find their original web site/blog or Twitter handle etc etc. Thats where Credictive comes in. In a similar manner to the way Pinterest will tell you where an image was re-pinned from, thats what Credictive wants to do. By installing a bookmarklet (a browser extension is coming) Credictive tags up the content youre looking at with who did it.But whereas with Pinterest you can only add stuff via the bookrmarklet, with Creditive you can view an additional layer of information when you click on it. The service plans to help discover people with both niche skills and people with a combination of skills The problem out there is the lack of transparency on who does what online. If you are a company that wants to recruit talent, how do you know someone isnt simply cutting and pasting the work of others? Sure you might find out they are copiers after youve hired them, but you dont want to get to that stage. Most crowd funding sites are built assuming the people putting up the projects are genuine. Looks where thats got us: a startup that pulls in cash and then disappears. It would be better if people and the works they produce were more discoverable. Books have acknowledgements, movies have closing credits. Where is this on the Internet and how can it be verified? Ever emailed someone asking Who did your logo? They should do ours. Yeah, that.I asked them how they are join got stop people gaming the system so they fool Credictive? Right now its a closed community to try and keep quality high but their idea is to build a community-based and community-enforced reputation system employing verification, flagging and blocking users. The founder team is led by Ela Madej who previously co-founded a boutique web and mobile consultancy Applicake (seed investor in Credictive), and Chicago-based Future Simple, a CRM and sales tracking SaaS platform. 
