The startup accelerator scene is booming, and that means there will be days like today, when a bunch of news from the various incubators around the country hits all at the same time. Today, weve got the details from several of the newer programs, some of which are announcing their new spring classes, others which are wrapping up with demo days. The result, in either case, is that there are now dozens upon dozens of new companies making their grand debut today, across a number of verticals that include everything social networking to health care.Below, weve rounded up the new launches and announcements from Hub Ventures, Excelerate Labs, and MuckerLab. In addition, DreamIt Ventures is preparing to start its summer program in NYC next month, and is hosting a kick off party tomorrow night. [Update: DreamIt's lineup has been added].Hub Ventures, the San Francisco-based startup accelerator focused on funding entrepreneurs “building a better world,” (and new member to the Global Accelerator Network championed by TechStars) is announcing its Spring 2012 cohort of startups. Something notable about this group is the gender diversity  there are six female co-founders and key team members, representing five of the startups in the group.This spring, the focus is on transportation and personal safety, infant and maternal health, collaborative consumption (fractional car ownership), information technology for development, financial tools for small businesses in the developing world, and clothing up-cycling to enable insourcing and job creation in the U.S. Startups received $17,500-$20,000 and are eligible for an extra $75,000 if chosen by key investor  Lakeland VenturesDevelopment. One spot is being held for a innovation hackathon prize, also sponsored by Lakeland Ventures.Hub Ventures says it received 209 applications for 10 spots this year  up 200% from 75 applicants last year.Chicago-based Excelerate Labs, led by entrepreneurs Troy Henikoff (SurePayroll) and Sam Yagan (OkCupid, eDonkey, SparkNotes) is announcing its Class of 2012. The selective summer program will wrap up with a demo day in August. This years class, the third for the organization, features companies from India and France, which are moving to Chicago, as well as others from California, Massachusetts, Florida and Texas.Excelerate Labs has also partnered with digital startup center 1871, which offers working space for 400, plus office space for V.C.s, classrooms and partnerships with universities.This year, the incubator said it received 50% more applications than last year. Then ten companies chosen are below.MuckerLab, a new L.A.-based startup accelerator, also a member of the Global Accelerator network, is having its Demo Day today. The program, founded by Erik Rannala, formerly of Harrison Metal, and William Hsu, who most recently served as Chief Product Officer at AT&T Interactive, doesnt always focus on media and entertainment startups, despite its location. Rannala previously told us that ad tech and e-commerce have also thrived in L.A., but theyre not limiting their focus at this time to any particular vertical.Selected startups received $21,000 in seed funding, and the usual benefits like shared office space, various discounts on hosting and software, and legal assistance. This years group of eight fits with accelerators goal of having five to ten startups to kick off its launch.DreamIt Ventures, which operates programs in Philadelphia, N.Y., and now, Israel, is kicking off its 2012 Summer program tomorrow night with a party at Googles NYC office. DreamIt has selected 15 companies, 5 of which are participating in the newly launched DreamIt Israel. This program brings Israeli startups to NY, giving them access to U.S.-based mentors, investors, and up to $25,000 in seed funding. DreamIt Israel is already underway now in Tel Aviv, and the companies will join DreamIt NY in NYC on May 14th.Another 5 are in DreamIt Access, a dedicated effort to launch 15 minority-led startups over the next 12 months. Comcast Ventures, the venture capital affiliate of Comcast Corporation, is an investor in DreamIt Access.The organization also just signed its NY lease for the old Fab.com office space on 8th Ave., which is where the companies will now work.DreamIts Demo Day will be August 8th. Stay tuned.[Update: DreamIt's NYC 2012 lineup is below]
